




















































Hansard: April 30, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 59 

 April 30, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me 

to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly the grade 3 and 4 class from Pilot Butte School, 

seated in your gallery.  There are 55 students there with their 

teachers, Mrs. Gaudry and Mrs. Mayes-Wilson; their chaperon, 

Mrs. Pat Bialowas; and their bus driver, Ruth Betteridge. 

 

I had the privilege of teaching these children, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as teaching in Pilot Butte School for 17 years, and I ask 

you all to join me in welcoming them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the House, 

17 grade 8 students from the Glaslyn School.  They are in 

Regina today to tour and as well to tour the Legislative 

Buildings.  I expect that they will have had an interesting day 

so far and I hope that the remainder of the day will be 

interesting as well. 

 

I'll be meeting with them after the question period for pictures 

and to talk to them and answer the questions if they have any.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the legislature, the grade 6 

class of the Redvers School.  Redvers is a town in my 

community down in the very south-east corner.  And I'd like to 

welcome them here today and I'd appreciate it if everyone else 

would welcome them also.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 

the Assembly, a constituent of mine and a friend and a worker 

of mine that helped me out in my political aspirations, Morris 

Elfenbaum from Tullymet and his father Jack Elfenbaum. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Budget Provisions 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker,  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to direct a short question to the Minister of 

Health.  Will she confirm today, the Leader-Post article of a 

week ago and once more this morning, that there will be a $100 

user fee applied to chiropractic services in Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not make any 

comment on what may or may not be in the budget as a result 

of media speculation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question.  

Mr. Speaker, that minister is doing an admirable job of 

explaining how the budgetary process works in our legislature 

and the importance that an announcement of a line budget item 

to the public before this legislature has a chance to deal with it 

and the real significance of that.  And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to direct a new question to the Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Finance, is it not true, sir, 

that you personally gave the order to provide this line item 

information outside this Assembly in the hope that you could 

avoid an attack by your own MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) on user fees?  Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that this 

specific budget leak was done by your own instructions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

answer to the member from Rosthern's question is no.  He is 

now into the realm of speculation in the same way as some of 

the media stories.  As a matter of fact, my colleagues are saying 

probably fantasy.  The answer to the question is no. 

 

The budget will be presented on May 7. All of the facts in the 

budget for this fiscal year will then be known.  And I ask the 

member opposite to just be patient for a few more days and 

he'll get all that information provided to him and then he won't 

have to speculate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the Minister of Finance again.  Mr. Minister, we know as a 

matter of fact that the instruction to inform chiropractors came 

directly from you.  And the intent was that you would be able 

to avoid an attack from your own members when you are 

imposing these user fees.  We know, Mr. Minister, that you 

personally gave the instruction and that your purpose in leaking 

this budget information was to draw a distinction between user 

fees and premiums.  That was your objective. 

 

And I ask you directly, Mr. Minister, if your budget does in fact 

contain a deductible on chiropractice's services on the May 7 

budget, will you do the honourable thing and resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

should know a great deal about misleading the public and about 

not informing the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When those gentlemen were 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

in office just a few six months ago, they wrote the book on that.  

And it's now reported very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in one of the 

recent publications of the Provincial Auditor, the special report, 

where all kinds of things which I might say might verge on the 

cliff of corruption, were done by the former government.  And 

so they should know about that. 

 

I say to the member again: the budget will come down on May 

7.  All of the information about the budget will be provided.  

He will know then in the same way as the public will know, as 

they have a right to know.  I am not going to at this time get 

involved in speculation to the extent that he does or some other 

people do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm trying to assure you that this is not 

speculation.  Mr. Minister, a source in your department informs 

the opposition that you intend to remove optometrists from the 

medicare system for the majority of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I ask you to confirm that your government will now demand 

that Saskatchewan people not go to the eye doctor even once 

every two years as is now the system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the 

member opposite that I will not speculate on what's going to be 

in the budget until the budget is formally presented.  That 

would be inappropriate on my part.  The member can rumour 

monger all he wants and speculate all he wants.  He will have 

the information a few short days from now, and he's just going 

to have to wait until the budget comes down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  I assure you it is not speculation, and I assure you 

that when this budget comes down on May 7, we are going to 

be asking you the question that I will ask you once more.  That 

when these so-called rumours, what you're calling rumours and 

we are finding out now are actually fact, that when that 

materializes you will now commit to this Assembly that you 

will do the honourable thing and resign, as is a long-standing 

tradition and practice in the Canadian parliamentary system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me assure the 

member opposite, I will do the kind of honourable thing which 

former government . . . Finance ministers in the former 

government never did.  I will present here on behalf of this 

government the true picture of the finances of this province.  

We will present a picture of the mess that the members 

opposite created when they were on this side of the House.  I 

will present a budget that's open and honest and accountable, 

and that will be a fresh, new start -- something which we 

haven't had for the last 10 years in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

direct a new question to the Minister of Health once more.  

Madam Minister, you and your leader knew the financial 

difficulty this province was in while you served in opposition.  

You knew, and the former government implored you . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the nerve that I'm 

hitting is obvious and I would just implore government 

members, just cool it while I ask the Minister of Health this 

question. 

 

You knew, and the former government implored you to restrain 

your demands for even greater spending.  You knew that health 

costs were exceeding our capacity to support them and that the 

deficit situation was extremely serious.  You knew and your 

leader knew.  And in spite of that, you swore in this Assembly 

that you would never, ever allow user fees or premiums. 

 

Madam Minister, I understand.  I understand that you have 

succeeded in convincing the Finance minister to opt for higher 

taxes instead of health premiums, so I ask you now: will you 

keep your word and oppose user fees, no matter who proposes 

them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to this 

question because the member from Rosthern says falsely that 

we knew.  I say to the member from Rosthern that I wrote to 

the former premier, the member from Estevan, and the minister 

of Finance three days after the election campaign was 

launched.  I said on behalf of myself and the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, have an independent audit of the books because 

we don't believe that $265 million projected deficit.  I got a 

four-page letter back from the minister of Finance saying: don't 

worry; it's on track.  It turned out to be a total falsehood.  That 

deficit was over $900 million because of your cover-up and 

your cooking of the books. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you.  Mr. 

Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Finance, and please, 

Mr. Minister, no more opposition speeches. 

 

Mr. Minister, a source inside your own department has 

informed the official opposition that the budget contains a 

provision -- and listen carefully, Mr. Minister -- contains a 

provision for a $1 per package increase in the tax on cigarettes.  

Will the minister confirm this information today and share with 

all the people of this province instead of your friends? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say 

again to the members opposite that this government is 

committed to dealing with the kinds of financial mess that the 

former members had left behind which the Premier just spoke 

of.  There will not be the kind of cover-up that was perpetrated 

on the Saskatchewan legislature and the people for the last 10 

years.  There will be a forthright and honest budget, and the 

member will find out what's in 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

that budget when it's brought down on May 7. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, as usual the answer comes back, and I 

believe it's more smoke and mirrors.  I believe where there is 

smoke there is fire. 
 

Sir, while smokers around this province are running out to 

stock up on cigarettes before May 7, people have inside 

information.  Others in our province are not so fortunate.  Mr. 

Minister, if the information coming from within your own 

department confirms on May 7 that this is true, will you do the 

honourable thing and resign? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 

the member from Thunder Creek that if there is smoke, they are 

the arsonists because they put this province on fire with a 

deficit for the last 10 years. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It is those kinds of irresponsible 

deficits that have created the kind of debt that we have in the 

province today, which is almost $14,000 per individual person, 

young and old. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that can't continue.  The budget that I'm going to 

present on May 7 will steer a new course.  It will bring a new 

direction.  And it will bring responsibility -- something which 

the members opposite never heard of or knew about when they 

were on this side of the House on the treasury benches. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well it seems, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 

is saying that there is no tax increase on tobacco in the May 7 

budget. 

 

New question to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, if in your 

May 7 budget you think you can escape by having that tax at 95 

cents or 85 cents or 80 cents, then I think, sir, you have been 

smoking something other than tobacco. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you telling us today, are you telling us today 

that there will be no increase in the price of tobacco in this 

province on your budget on May 7? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not going to 

indicate to the member or to the House what might be in the 

budget, because that would be quite inappropriate.  The 

member opposite knows that.  He's going to have to wait until 

budget day to get that information. 

 

But I'm going to tell him this.  I'm going to tell him this, as I 

did yesterday.  If there are any tax changes in the budget that 

comes down on May 7 or whatever reductions in spending that 

there are going to be, Mr. Speaker, they are going to be the 

responsibility of those 10 lonely members over there because of 

what they did to the province when they were in office for 

those 10 years.  It will be on their heads that the people of 

Saskatchewan and future 

generations will have to pay the kind of financial mess which 

those members did create in this province when they were here 

for their own selfish and irresponsible reasons. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to 

the same minister.  Mr. Minister, everyone in this province 

knows that these leaks are not a normal budget consultation 

process.  This opposition agrees with an open budget 

consultation, which you haven't done, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- What we do not accept and will not support is 

a Minister of Finance who picks and chooses when to leak 

information, and who will be informed and who will not be 

informed. 

 

Will the minister confirm that on May 7 his budget includes a 

personal income tax increase of approximately 10 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it was those members 

opposite who the auditor reports in their open process, as the 

member says, who paid $5 million to 130 employees who were 

not working for the departments that paid them, 19 of them 

which nobody knows what they did. 

 

It was those members opposite who, in their open budgetary 

process, had free liquor delivered to their offices from the 

Liquor Board.  It was those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, on 

whom the auditor reports all kinds of wrongdoing that was 

done in Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 

 

If that's the open government that he wants us to employ, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure the member opposite it's never going to 

happen as long as we are on this side of the House and on the 

executive benches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say again to the member, the budget will come 

down on May 7 and on May 7 we will announce in this House 

what the provisions of the budgets are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the major elements of your budget are 

now known.  A 10 per cent income tax increase, $1 a pack on 

tobacco, de-insuring of optometry, de-insuring of chiropractic 

services, a freeze on capital projects in health and education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, considering that the details of this budget are now 

known, and considering that the member from Churchill 

Downs, the Associate Minister of Finance, or in the Premier's 

words, the toy minister of Finance, told an April 20 scrum in 

this building that if such details became known, he would have 

no choice but to resign. 

 

Is it your position, Mr. Minister, that you are immune, and 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

that if these details do in fact be confirmed in the budget, that 

the member from Churchill Downs is going to take the fall for 

you leaking information on a selective basis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure what the question was, 

Mr. Speaker, but I want to repeat again to the member opposite 

that the budget will be coming down on May 7.  And on May 7 

we'll provide the information that this legislature has a right to 

have.  We're not going to provide the information in advance.  

I'm not going to comment on speculation that the members 

opposite raise in this House or through the media, because that 

would be inappropriate. 

 

Tax Increases 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct my question 

to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, on a visit to Moose Jaw last fall, 

in the campaign you were quoted as saying that if you and your 

colleagues were elected, you would -- and I quote -- would not 

go back to taxing people. 

 

Now despite your assurances, your government has increased 

rates on telephones, on electricity, on natural gas, and auto 

insurance.  How can you justify a tax grab of these kinds of 

rates when you assured the voters of this province that you 

would not go back to taxing the people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question is very simple.  And I would have thought the Leader 

of the Liberal Party would have understood it, and I'm sure she 

does. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party, as I, was campaigning on a set 

of facts which turned out to be totally false -- books which had 

been totally cooked.  We know that via Gass; we know that via 

Ernst Young, the report on the Crown corporation's board. 

 

If there had been an operating deficit for '91-92 of $265 million 

as these people had projected that there would be, there would 

be no need for tax increases. We could have found that 265 in 

reductions.  The fact of the matter is, it was a total and 

complete fabrication for the last 10 years.  We are in a financial 

crisis and you know that as well as they do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary.  You 

too, sir, know . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I didn't recognize the member 

yet.  Now I recognize the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I remind the Premier that he went 

throughout the province saying that there was a probable billion 

dollar deficit.  And he also said that $4.5 billion should be 

enough.  And I want to remind you as well, sir, that the 

Minister of Finance in his own news release last December 

stated this, and I quote:  Government should lead by example 

and exercise restraint before asking taxpayers to pay more. 

How can you call this leading by example when you announce 

increases before ever attempting to show us, with a plan, any 

restraint that is going to be coming forward in a budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party of course makes a totally false accusation.  She 

says leading by example.  We have the smallest cabinet in 20 

years in the province of Saskatchewan as restraint. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- She asks that we lead by example.  

We've taken a 5 per cent cut in cabinet ministers' salaries -- by 

example. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- She says that we should . . . And she 

wants more, she wants more money of the taxpayers' dollars.  

She says, lead by example.  We have cut $28 million of 

advertising and polling and budgeting expenditures that these 

people are involved in.  We lead by example.  And that is even 

before we have introduced the budget. 

 

I say to the hon. lady, you wait until the budget is introduced.  

Because of the jackpot that these people have placed all people 

in this House and everybody in the province of Saskatchewan 

virtually having bankrupted this province, because of this 

financial fiasco, we're all going to have to have restraint.  We 

have to turn this province around.  And I expect the Leader of 

the Liberal Party to join us in this cause because of that 

mismanagement of 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Agriculture tried to tell the farmers of Saskatchewan that he 

had all the necessary approvals to make his misguided and 

ill-conceived changes to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program.  Will the Minister of Agriculture tell us in 

the legislature and the farmers of the province if he had 

agreements, whether they were verbal or otherwise, of the other 

provinces or the federal government, the agreement to make 

changes to the farmers' contracts without notifying them prior 

to March 15, 1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the department contacted the 

required number of provinces and received approval for the 

agreement after a promise from the federal minister that he 

would support those changes if that condition were met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that he 

contravened the contract.  He knows that.  Because he 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

forced his deputy to make an affidavit before the court 

yesterday.  And he's going to change it in lieu of that.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ask the minister this question: will he table 

any correspondence with the other provinces and the federal 

government on any of the material that he has that he notified 

the farmers and show it to those other participants in the 

agreement that he notified the farmers before March 15, '92? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the 

members opposite, wanting the public to believe that they 

actually are concerned about the time farmers had for 

consideration of this question but voting against the motion to 

extend that time for consideration, stand here in the House 

self-righteously and make comment about consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the minister doesn't have an approval in 

writing and only a verbal agreement, then you need to table that 

information in a written statement equally with the court in 

Melville and provide that information to them indicating that 

you have verbal agreement. 

 

But did you provide them with that same information that you 

provide to this Assembly -- that you're going to force the 

people of this Assembly to legitimize the untruth that you 

perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan.  Are you going to 

tell them that on March 15 they received a letter when they in 

fact didn't?  And as the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) reporters told us today: you legalized lying in this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order!  I will ask the member to 

withdraw that last statement indicating that the minister lied 

and that we are . . . I'll ask the member from Morse to withdraw 

the last statement. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I will withdraw the last statement about 

legalizing lying. 

 

However, I want, Mr. Speaker, the minister to provide . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has withdrawn.  He's rephrasing 

his question.  And I ask the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister provide to this Assembly a 

reasonable assurance that you will not force members of this 

Assembly to legitimize your incapacity to lead the GRIP 

program in the province of Saskatchewan by saying to the 

people of the province that you had a letter that you deemed to 

have sent out when you did not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite by 

now surely know the process by which the GRIP program was 

to be reviewed.  The committee brought its report forward, the 

report was taken to a federal ministers' meeting in February, it 

was taken to the national GRIP 

committee meeting in February, and by the middle of February 

that report was ready to be implemented. 

 

I would like the member opposite to stand here and tell me they 

did not co-operate with the federal government in obstructing 

the progress of those revisions designed by the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, in light of the meeting that we had out here 

regarding the GRIP and the farmers earlier this week, will you 

provide for those farmers, who have the wind blowing at their 

backsides these days with dust flying all over in a GRIP that 

doesn't guarantee anything, will you legitimize the passing of 

this Bill that the Minister of Agriculture is going to do? 

 

Are you going to stand in your place in this Assembly and 

legitimize, as a former attorney general, legitimize the truth that 

isn't the truth?  Are you going to legitimize that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't know what more needs to be said, 

but I want to quote an article that appeared in the paper in the 

last couple of days: There is also a feeling that some of the 

public expressions of displeasure with a new GRIP are being 

orchestrated for partisan political purposes.  Enough said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  People know that the Clerk has 

already read special orders.  Could we please have order.  I'd 

ask the Clerk to please read the special order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to stand in this House and support the government's 

Speech from the Throne.  It's been the first time I've had the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say a few words in this Assembly 

since the election, so I want to take a couple of minutes to 

extend my congratulations to some people who deserve it. 

 

First of all, to all of my colleagues who were elected in the 

New Democratic Party to this Assembly, I wish to express my 

congratulations to them for a job well done.  I look forward to 

working with them over the next four years. 

 

I'd also like to congratulate the mover of the Speech from the 

Throne, the member from Meadow Lake; it's indeed an honour 

to do that.  Those of us who have had the 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

opportunity, including the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden at 

Christmas, who did an excellent job, and the member from 

Meadow Lake who did an excellent job. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Could I ask the government side to 

just tone it down a bit.  I can't even hear the member's speech 

from here. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Both movers and seconders, Mr. Speaker, are 

given the privilege of participating in the address in reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, which is very rare and indeed is well 

deserved.  I would also like to extend my congratulations on a 

job well done, not only to the member for Meadow Lake, but to 

the colleague from Regina, the member from Wascana Plains, 

on her excellent job in seconding the motion. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to congratulate the 

Lieutenant Governor on giving what I would, I think most 

people would, agree with, as the best Speech from the Throne 

that we've heard in this Assembly in at least 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- The Lieutenant Governor is indeed a very 

gracious person and undertakes her position very well and is 

respected by all the members of this Assembly. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the 

Premier on his election of course, and on his selection of a 

cabinet which I believe is second to none in this country.  It's a 

cabinet that will provide the leadership that this province 

requires to get out of the massive financial crisis that the former 

Conservative government put us into.  And I look forward to 

working with them in that objective as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, finally, I want to thank my constituents for 

bestowing upon me the privilege of representing them in this 

Assembly.  The constituency of Regina North West is unique to 

Saskatchewan.  It's unique in many ways, not just the fact that 

my constituents are very hard-working people, but that 80 per 

cent of the voters in my constituency are 44 years of age and 

under.  And that means, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of young 

families, a lot of young children living in this constituency, and 

in my view, the future of our province in my constituency is 

going to be very, very . . . in very good hands I believe, because 

of the fact that there are so many hard-working people there 

and honest people as well. 

 

There are many, I think, individuals that I'd like to single out, 

but I won't do that this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, because of time 

limitations.  But I want to thank all of my constituents for their 

support over the years.  I'm honoured to represent them, I'm 

proud to represent them, and I commit to work hard on their 

behalf in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to get to the Speech from the Throne now.  

I want to talk about three or four matters.  I want to talk about 

the PC (Progressive Conservative) record, which I believe 

people have to be reminded of, in a very brief way.  I want to 

talk about the last election campaign, 

what the New Democratic Party government has done since the 

election campaign, and some comments on the actual speech. 

 

I want to start this afternoon by saying that I've had the 

responsibility to represent the government on the CBC radio 

open-line show last Tuesday.  And it was a traditional call-in 

show which had a participant, the House Leader from the 

Conservative Party -- the member from Rosthern -- and myself.  

And we had a couple of words about some of the issues of the 

day. 

 

The primary purpose of the call-in show, Mr. Speaker, was to 

allow the public of Saskatchewan to call their elected 

representatives, and to answer the question: what issues do you 

want your government to tackle? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think I can summarize the callers concerns 

and the callers focus in that afternoon show in two words.  

They want a government that is accountable and they want a 

government that is responsible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they talked about oh, six or seven items that 

I want to share with my colleagues in this Assembly, which I 

felt were quite important, and actually tie in very well with 

what our program has been during the last campaign, and what 

our accomplishments have been in the last four or five months. 

 

They talked about cleaning up waste and mismanagement.  

And I'll say more about that shortly.  They talked about getting 

our financial house in order.  They asked the government to get 

our deficit under control in many ways, but to be more 

efficient, to be more streamlined, and to institute a fair taxation 

policy. 

 

They're asking Saskatchewan people, and in particular those 

members of the opposition, to lower their expectations of what 

government can do because times are far different than what 

they used to be. 

 

They're asking working people to work together, and all people 

in this province to work together, to ensure that jobs are 

available to the people in this province.  They're asking to 

improve their working conditions for those that are holding 

down jobs at the moment.  And they're asking to improve 

agricultural programs. 

 

The message, Mr. Speaker, was very clear on that open-line 

show as it has been in the last election, as it has been over the 

course of the last four or five months.  It's consistent. 

 

The people of this province want a government that is 

accountable and responsible to the people of this province, and 

will be open with respect to the finances and compassion with 

respect to some of the laws that we implement.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the intention of our government through this throne 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech addresses those concerns plus 

others.  But before I get into that I want to talk to the members 

here and to the people of Saskatchewan about a little history. 

 

Someone once said that those of us who forget the lessons 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

of history, or do not learn the lessons of history, are doomed to 

repeat them.  And what I want to share with the people of this 

province right now is some history as to what's happened in our 

province, how we got to where we are, why we're in the 

situation with respect to our financial condition and with 

respect to our population drain in the tough economic times. 

 

I want to talk about four things the PCs did that got us to this 

point.  The four things I want to talk about are their broken 

promises, their privatization initiatives, the building of their 

debt, and of course their mismanagement techniques. 

 

And I think everyone will concur that the last 10 years under a 

Conservative government there's been a severe lack or a large 

lack of integrity and certainly no accountability or 

responsibility to the taxpayers of this province. 

 

But we heard under the Conservative regime a number of 

promises that were made that were broken.  And I want to talk 

about the broken promises because what this throne speech 

does, Mr. Speaker, is confirm what commitments we made in 

the last election and starts out by giving I think a very 

significant direction to fulfilling the commitments that we 

made in the 1991 campaign. 

 

But the PCs, they talked about in their 10 years of government 

and during the course of election campaigns their interest and 

their commitment to balance the budget.  Of course we know 

that never occurred after 10 consecutive budgets. 

 

They talked about a business-like approach to government, and 

we've seen the Gass Commission and we've seen the Provincial 

Auditor reveal so often over the past four months and in so 

many instances in every financial transaction they undertook 

that that was as far away as you can be with respect to being  

business-like in transactions.  They were far from business-like. 

 

They promised to cut the cost of government.  We've seen the 

cost of government expand by leaps and bounds over the last 

10 years. 

 

And they promised . . . of course everyone remembers the four 

famous promises of free telephones for seniors and the 

elimination of the gas tax and the elimination of the 5 per cent 

sales tax and of course the 10 per cent reduction in income tax.  

We saw, Mr. Speaker, those promises broken in spades. 

 

But more importantly, I think what's happened in the last 10 

years is the privatization programs of the former government 

have driven this province into a very significant debt situation. 

 

In February of 1988 the deputy premier, who was then minister 

in charge of the Crown Management Board, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, said to the Crown Corporations Committee 

meeting -- and it's in Hansard for everyone to read, in response 

to a question as to what his intention was with respect to 

privatizing the corporations -- his response was: our plan as a 

government is to ensure that when you guys get back into 

power you will never, ever be able to retrieve those Crown 

corporations or undertake to exercise economic authority or 

economic decisions with those instruments. That in essence is 

what the premier . . . the deputy premier, the Conservative 

deputy premier committed in Hansard in response to 

questioning that his government intended to do. 

 

And the sad part about that commitment, Mr. Speaker, it's the 

only commitment that they made that they kept.  And what 

resulted in this commitment, as we've seen in the privatization 

of the Potash Corporation which last year alone took the 

taxpayers to task for another $361 million in losses. 

 

During the campaign, the Potash Corporation shares and the 

Cameco shares, which was part of Saskatchewan Mining and 

Development Corporation before it was privatized, both of 

them lost $527 million on the sale of shares that this former 

government, the Conservative former government, sold during 

the election campaign of last fall.  And that tacked on another 

half a billion dollars in debt to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 

which I'm sure is going to be viewed very, very badly by the 

taxpayers. 

 

We've seen, Mr. Speaker, the deficit and the debt increase from 

a balanced budget of 1982 after 10 consecutive balanced 

budgets by the former Blakeney government where we had 

little debts in terms of Crown corporation capital debt -- it was 

self-liquidating, it was like a mortgage; and plus we had a 

billion dollar Heritage Fund of surplus budgets from time to 

time, to a point where we've run, according to the Gass 

Commission, a deficit in the last 10 years of $8.7 billion.  And 

this, Mr. Speaker, is historical fact confirmed by the Gass 

Commission. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, we saw the government through 

their 10 years exercise the best examples of mismanagement 

and waste and greed with respect to taxpayers' money of any 

government in the history of the world, I think.  We saw, you 

know, the former premier, the member from Estevan, we were 

spending a thousand dollars a night for his hotel rooms.  That's 

what taxpayers were paying. 

 

We were spending for the minister responsible for the Crown 

Management Board, the deputy premier who said he was going 

to gut the Crown corporations and leave the debt with the 

taxpayers, he was spending $50,000 on personal out-of-pocket 

expenses that were paid for by the Crown Management Board, 

which was unprecedented by former governments. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Unconscionable. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- It was very unconscionable, as my colleague 

from Wascana Plains says.  We saw the Crown Management 

Board pay the salary and severance of Otto Cutts, the former 

president of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, $322,000 for 13 months work.  When we asked 

the government about this, they never answered because they 

didn't call the Crown Corporations Committee to answer these 

questions for a 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

year and a half.  But when we finally met last February, we 

asked these questions and we were told this amount, $322,000, 

was paid to Mr. Cutts for 13 months work -- $120,000 in 

salary; $120,000 in severance; $51,000 for one year's 

out-of-pocket expenses with no receipts.  He had $35,000 in 

moving expenses.  We're wondering if he moved a couple of 

houses to Ontario when he moved because that's what it would 

have cost to move a couple of houses.  And the taxpayers got 

stuck with the bill. 

 

And you know how that was paid?  It was not paid by an order 

in council or paid by any legitimate means, it was paid on the 

instructions and the order of the former deputy premier -- a 

verbal instruction -- which is amoral, aghast, and illegal at 

worst. 

 

And you think that's bad.  When the privatization crew from 

England came over, we paid them $705,000 out of the Crown 

Management Board -- 531,000 of that was out-of-pocket 

expenses.  Nice job if you can get it, but the taxpayers are stuck 

with $531,000 out-of-pocket expenses, no receipts. 

 

Why was it paid?  Because the minister said: oh yes, pay the 

bill; everything's okay here.  I'm not sure why the minister said 

that.  We can guess.  Maybe he's got a briefcase full of money 

somewhere. 

 

We saw the Crown Management Board pay Wolfgang Wolff 

$401,000, with a severance package of over $236,000.  These 

are unconscionable expenditures by the former government, 

Mr. Speaker.  Unbelievable.  And I have pages and pages, and 

so does the auditor, of other examples of waste and 

mismanagement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, accountability and responsibility is what I 

started out with.  This is what the people of Saskatchewan 

wanted.  But accountability means governments, no less than 

individuals, must stand behind their actions and their decisions.  

Every one learns at an early age when they are a child that we 

must be responsible for our own actions, that there are 

consequences for our actions. 

 

And it's a sad comment on the sorry record of the previous 

government that today people all over Saskatchewan are asking 

the government that we must restore what was once assumed -- 

that governments should be accountable and open.  And our 

message in this throne speech is clear.  We will restore public 

trust by acting responsibly, reasonably, and boldly.  We will be 

an accountable and open and honest government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If I may coin a phrase, we are acting with visionary 

practicalness.  Of course I'm not the only member in this House 

to create new phrases by combining opposites.  The member 

from Saskatoon Greystone is quite good as well.  And I want to 

just raise this.  Remember, Mr. Speaker, she called all MLAs in 

a December 26 Leader-Post story "vindictive sheep".  She 

called all of us in this Assembly "vindictive sheep".  All 

members of course except herself. 

 

Now if you're the self-proclaimed moralist of your profession, 

such characterizations always except the 

accuser.  Fortunately if you are a flock of one, you can speak 

independently, follow your leader slavishly at the same time, 

and then come back and demand more money from the Board 

of Internal Economy for your flock of one. 

 

But once you cast the logic aside, as the member has 

consistently done from Saskatoon Greystone, then you trumpet 

your ethical purity by calling all your colleagues, and I quote in 

a newspaper story, quote, "liars," end of quote.  She's called us 

all that name.  And of course she says our profession is a waste 

of time. 

 

Then after this she goes back to the Board of Internal Economy 

and asks for more money again to help get her self-proclaimed 

but mistakenly labelled ethical message to the public.  That's 

not my idea of accountability or responsibility.  That's not the 

taxpayers' idea of accountability or responsibility.  It's the same 

sort of garbage we've seen from the previous government. 

 

So Liberals have the same ethics as the Conservatives.  That's 

the conclusion of this remark, Mr. Speaker.  Liberal, Tory, 

same old story.  You've heard that phrase before.  People in this 

country have said it from coast to coast.  Liberal, Tory, same 

old story.  And all they want to do is find out what the taxpayer 

can pay next for themselves.  That's their credo.  That's the 

old-line parties' priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have, as a government and a party, been very 

responsible and accountable.  In the last campaign we've heard 

the Liberal Party private member here today say in the House 

that we made some commitments and some promises that we 

aren't keeping.  And of course the Premier told her very directly 

that she is not on the right track and has made false accusations. 

 

But I want to remind the people of this province and the 

members of this Assembly that in October 1991, during the 

campaign, the New Democratic Party issued a 19-point 

program card.  And I have a photocopy of it right here.  It's call 

the Saskatchewan way.  Let's do it the Saskatchewan way.  And 

we talked about renewing the Saskatchewan community.  

Working together, we can turn our economy around in the 

1990s and ignite the spirit of community which built 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We talked about the values of co-operation and compassion and 

fairness and how it can help build the future of hope and 

opportunity and prosperity for all Saskatchewan people.  The 

19 points we talked about opening the books, and what have we 

seen, Mr. Speaker?  We said, when we get elected we're going 

to open the books.  And did we do that?  We struck the 

Financial Management Review Commission and the Gass 

report came down; we opened the books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We talked about a comprehensive review of all PC 

privatizations and business deals to determine if they're in the 

public interest.  And that's an ongoing thing.  We're doing that 

now.  It'll take us some time to do that, but we're working on 

that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We're talking in this platform card, Mr. Speaker, about working 

towards 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

fiscal responsibility and a balanced budget over our first term, 

and we're working towards that, and I would expect that when 

the budget comes down on May 7 that that'll be one of the steps 

we're taking towards that objective. 

 

We talked about eliminating the 7 per cent provincial sales tax 

that was being harmonized, which would save 7,500 jobs over 

the next four years.  We did that, Mr. Speaker, the day we got 

elected. 

 

We talked about working with local manufacturers and 

businesses to increase the value added processing of our 

resource and commodity sectors for manufacturing purposes 

for domestic and export markets.  We are starting to do that, 

Mr. Speaker.  We've undertaken a number of initiatives 

already, and we've seen about 700 different companies from 

across Canada make inquiries to work in a co-operative manner 

to undertake to locate in Saskatchewan or to enhance their 

businesses here already. 

 

We talked about and committed to work towards jobs and 

savings through a comprehensive energy conservation strategy.  

We've already announced one of our first elements of that. 

 

We talked about a better quality of life, working with students 

and families and educators to develop a world class, accessible 

education system.  That is under way.  It's not complete; it'll 

take some time. 

 

We talked about our commitment to a new, community-based 

health care system based on the wellness model.  That is now in 

the process of being implemented. 

 

We've committed to Saskatchewan's aboriginal people to 

honour land entitlements and promote self-government.  We've 

committed to honour land entitlements, Mr. Speaker, and we're 

on the road to self-government. 

 

We introduced an environmental bill of rights, or we promised 

to do that, and submit environmental legislation to guarantee 

public access to information and so on.  That has been done.  

We have . . . or that will be done, I understand, in this session. 

 

We have talked about fair labour laws and our commitment to 

them.  That is in the Speech from the Throne.  We talked about 

fighting Ottawa in terms of agriculture. 

 

And I'd go on to all the 19 points, Mr. Speaker, but I don't have 

the time to pursue it entirely.  What I want to do here is to 

remind the people of this province that the Conservatives and 

their governments made promise after promise that they failed 

to fulfil, except the one about destroying the Crown 

corporations and leaving the bill for the taxpayers. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party 

government has made 19 commitments that in this throne 

speech have either been completed or are commenced or are 

starting to be completed over the term of our government. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- When the budget comes down, Mr. Speaker, 

on May 7, we will see further many of these points in the 

Saskatchewan way program of 1991 be fulfilled, at least being 

on the road to being fulfilled. 

 

The further contrast I want to draw here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

not only do we keep the commitments that we make in writing, 

but that we do it as quickly as we possibly can in the best 

interests of the people. 

 

In my view, Mr. Speaker, that's honourable to go.  And of 

course the Liberal and Conservative parties, they like to talk 

about promises they never keep; whereas our party take action 

to the commitments that we make and fulfil them as soon as we 

can. 

 

The government has undertaken a number of initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, on top of what we made commitments to do.  And I 

want to take a couple of minutes to outline them to the people 

in this Assembly and to the people in this province.  The 

opposition, the Conservative opposition, stand in this House 

and say, where is your plan?  What are you going to be doing?  

Why don't you clean up this waste and mismanagement that 

you keep claiming that's out there?  And the members opposite 

who are not too keen on listening to this, who are in the 

Conservative Party, because it hurts them a great deal to be 

reminded of history . . . 

 

But what we've done, Mr. Speaker, some of the things I've 

mentioned already in our program we've committed to 

undertake and we've completed.  We've opened the books.  

We've rolled back and eliminated the expanded 7 per cent PST 

(provincial sales tax).  We undertook to make this legislature 

and government more democratic by having by-elections every 

six months.  That's now by law.  We've cancelled Fair Share.  

We've saved 15 to $20 million there. 

 

The Premier indicated today in question period we've got the 

smallest cabinet in 20 years which will probably save a couple 

hundred thousand dollars a year.  We have cut government 

travel and advertising as the Premier indicated; that'll save 

about $28 million. 

 

We've closed the trade offices that the Tories set up in Zrich 

and Hong Kong and Minneapolis.  That's saving the taxpayers 

$2 million a year.  We started mailing the SaskPower and the 

SaskEnergy bills together in one envelope.  That's going to 

save about $725,000 this year and more as postage rates go up 

on an annual basis. 

 

We took a 5 per cent cut in our cabinet ministers' salaries.  We 

froze MLAs' salaries for the second year in a row, and probably 

it'll be frozen for the next year as well. 

 

We've eliminated $8,000 a year that the Tories paid their 

legislative secretaries.  They had 12 of them.  There's another 

big saving of $96,000 a year to the taxpayers every single year. 

 

We've cancelled severance packages of $12 million that would 

have been paid to the senior executive officers of this 

government and this Crown sector.  MLAs have taken 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

a 25 per cent cut in their communications allowance.  We've 

closed the Premier's office in Prince Albert, saving $150,000 a 

year. 

 

People forget this, but we reduced the president of SaskPower's 

salary from 455,000 down to 150,000 a year, a saving of 

355,000 each year or $1.2 million over the next four years.  

That's a responsible approach. 

 

We froze out-of-scope government employees' salaries for the 

next year.  And we're in the process of reviewing all these extra 

perks which we commend the president of SaskPower on 

bringing to our attention.  But the other Crown executives will 

be making some initiatives in that area perhaps to reduce them 

as well. 

 

My uncle used to say if you can save the pennies, the dollars 

will look after themselves.  And what this government is doing, 

Mr. Speaker, is making a number of initiatives -- in many cases 

saving millions, but in some cases saving 10 or 90 or $100,000 

here and there.  When it all adds up, when the pennies all add 

up, we'll be saving the taxpayers of this province over $140 

million each year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- That, in my view, Mr. Speaker, is a 

responsible first-step approach to efficient and effective and 

accountable government and one which will in my view make 

the taxpayers less cynical about what happens with the 

Conservative and Liberal governments.  And that's why I 

believe they voted for the NDP (New Democratic Party) in the 

last election, Mr. Speaker, because they're fed up with the type 

of cynical responses and cynical attitude that the old-line 

parties have practised in their undertakings as government. 

 

The Speech from the Throne here, Mr. Speaker, puts forward a 

blueprint, in my view, of the next four years.  It launches us in 

sending off and committing . . . or fulfilling the commitments 

of our election program.  It's a responsible and an accountable 

approach towards government. 

 

I support this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, for four 

reasons.  It's a major step toward: number one, bringing the 

task . . . or beginning the task of deficit reduction; number two, 

it sets a new, refreshing standard of open, honest, and 

accountable government; and thirdly, it provides hope for the 

disadvantaged; and fourthly, it renews the Saskatchewan spirit 

of co-operation and community which has been so sorrowfully 

lacking in the last 10 years. 

 

This is the first major step and it reveals the plan and the 

direction, Mr. Speaker, that our government will take to restore 

common sense and competence to the management of the 

public treasury and to restore public faith in the ability of 

MLAs to serve the public interest and not their own, to provide 

hope for the less fortunate, and to reunite people in the 

challenging rebuilding task of our devastated province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to stand on this side of the House in 

support of this Speech from the Throne and I'm proud 

to be a member of the New Democratic Party government.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It has now been 

six months since I had my first opportunity to speak in this 

Assembly as the member for Saskatoon Greystone.  In my 

reply to the Speech from the Throne that day, I expressed hope 

that the government would prove itself worthy of the enormous 

trust placed in it by the Saskatchewan people.  This government 

was elected because of the people's desire to rid themselves of 

the previous government and because of what they were told by 

the NDP. 

 

Saskatchewan voters were told by the now-Premier and by his 

65 NDP candidates: first, that $4.5 billion has got to be enough; 

second, the deficit could be as much as $1 billion; third, no new 

taxes - the PST ends at midnight, he said.  Four, an NDP 

government would proceed with the recommendations of the 

Billinton inquiry.  Five, that the NDP were the protectors of 

medicare.  Six, there would be no patronage, no massive 

firings.  Seven, that they have the experience, after years in 

opposition, to run the province. 

 

Valuable time has passed, Mr. Speaker, since the election and 

that opening Speech from the Throne.  Unfortunately, I'm far 

less hopeful about our new government than I was that day.  In 

November they were beginning a new job, a very tough job, 

and I was willing to convey my support and the support of the 

people as they laid to work a course of action for the future of 

our province. 

 

But now after six months of secretive decisions, after six 

months of dithering about the budget and GRIP, and the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd) agreement, I see a pattern 

beginning to emerge and I am much less optimistic.  I see 

evidence that the NDP really has little of a plan.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it was just as I suspected. The NDP was so interested 

in victory that they did not care what they said during the 

election.  And I'm concerned that what people thought they 

were voting for was truly quite different from what they're 

actually getting. 

 

The government members all campaigned, all of them 

campaigned, against what the Conservatives did while in 

power.  In fact the NDP MLAs are still campaigning, if one is 

to listen to the paid advertising on the radio over the last two 

days that tells us that really it isn't their fault the mess that the 

province is in. 

 

The NDP MLAs all talked about the terrible things the 

Conservatives had done -- refusing to bring in a budget on 

time, using special warrants to cover their spending.  Terrible, 

they said; would never happen under the NDP.  Patronage, they 

cried, it's despicable -- hiring your friends and party faithful at 

the expense of competent people.  The NDP will clean up this 

situation, they claimed, to restore merit and competence to our 

civil service, they said. 

 

Well, well.  Not six months into this new government and 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

we have hundreds of people who've been hired to make room 

for whom?  The NDP party faithful.  And just how much did 

the taxpayers pay for the executive search, Mr. Speaker, that 

justified hiring the new president of SaskPower who we all 

knew had the job the day after the election? 

 

How do they explain the pages and pages of members of 

government boards and agencies who were replaced because 

they did not have an identifiable affiliation with the NDP -- the 

new criterion, it appears, for selection. 

 

This is a government that bemoaned the lack of compassion 

shown for employees of the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union) during the Fair Share debate. 

 

Well let's really talk about compassion for a moment.  I've 

received countless calls from government employees, many of 

whom have worked for various administrations, worked for 

many, many years long prior to the last 10 years, who have lost 

their jobs, received callous treatment from this government. 

 

How much time do these members opposite spend worrying 

about the people?  They have shown total lack of respect for 

the legislative staff of this very building who get virtually no 

notice of the opening of this session.  This is a government, Mr. 

Speaker, that wants the people to give them six months to get 

together a budget, six months for them to get their plan 

together, but they can find it in their hearts to give the people in 

this very building 12 working days notice for an event that 

takes three weeks to organize.  And that, sir, was over the 

Easter break. 

 

Is this a government that really cares about people?  If this is 

how they treat the people on the front lines, how much do they 

really care about the people that they don't see every day? 

 

I'm fearful that this new administration has thrown 

Saskatchewan back into the hands of old-style politics once 

again.  Now they can say that they're something different.  

They can actually say it so often they really begin to believe 

that they're something different.  In the field of clinical 

psychology, what they do is called cognitive dissonance. Any 

information that comes their way with which they don't agree, 

they simply expel. 

 

But hear this, Mr. Speaker, and the ladies and gentlemen of this 

Assembly, the evidence is already mounting.  And no matter 

what you say and no matter what you believe, as Lincoln 

stated, you can fool some of the people some of the time; you 

can fool some of the people all of the time; but you can't fool 

all of the people all of the time.  No matter what you say, no 

matter what you believe, the people will know the truth.  They 

can see that you are beginning to be no different from those 

people you tried to replace. 

 

Now what causes me greatest concern with the Speech from the 

Throne is the opening statement that the people have given the 

Premier's ministers "a mandate for fundamental change."  Well 

any time a government receives a mandate, Mr. Speaker, it has 

really received orders from the people to do what it promised to 

do.  I 

think it is becoming crystal clear that the NDP misled the 

electorate of Saskatchewan during the fall campaign. 

 

I represent thousands of voters who are not only wanting this 

government to succeed, they're counting on this government to 

preserve our province and to protect our institutions.  And I 

was looking to this Speech from the Throne for a plan for the 

future of Saskatchewan, and like many people, I'm not seeing 

the part that tells us how to get from prosperity from here.  The 

fact is that much of what is being proposed is really the 

opposite of what this province needs right now. 

 

Although I am favourably impressed and indeed flattered by 

the NDP move to implement many of the suggestions of the 

Liberal Party platform, I'm also deeply concerned that taking 

part of our plan and strangling it with NDP Party policy is not 

going to produce the results our platform was designed to 

produce.  And I'm fearful because we have no more time to 

waste in Saskatchewan.  We have no more opportunities to 

squander, no more second chances at starting over. 

 

Saskatchewan is a unique province.  We all talk about its 

uniqueness, and it's because of the spirit of the people who live 

here.  We are a people of courage, of optimism, of trust.  We 

have opened new horizons, pioneered new technologies, and 

explored new approaches because of our willingness to take 

risks. 

 

It must be remembered that an important catalyst for 

risk-taking is trust in government, trust in its sense of direction.  

If ever it were important for a government to know the value of 

the people's trust, it is now after so many years of abuse.  And 

anyone can see the evidence of the abuse that we're left with in 

1992 of the previous administration. 

 

As this new government deceives people when it breaks 

promises, when it makes misleading statements or attempts to 

hide from the media or the people, the level of cynicism will 

absolutely soar in this province and the jobs of all governments 

everywhere become more difficult. 

 

That's why it is critical not to just talk about open and honest 

and accountable government.  It is crucial to be open and 

honest and accountable.  That means opening up the Board of 

Internal Economy, improving upon the freedom of information 

legislation, allowing citizens' groups to appear before 

legislative committees, three-party committees in this very 

House, to express their opinions. 

 

Open, accountable government -- don't tell us, show us.  And 

for those who don't want to listen to me, listen to the words of a 

woman who is a lawyer in Saskatoon, an officer of the New 

Democratic Party of Canada, one Sandra Mitchell.  Quote: 

 

 What can we do to get the Saskatchewan economy moving 

again?  I tried to contact the minister of economic 

development to see what he would suggest but got no 

answers.  In fact, it took 10 days to get my phone call 

returned and then a promised fax never arrived.  So much for 

open, accountable, accessible government. 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, it is a time that we realize that the people of the 

province are the owners, the landlords who permit us to be the 

tenants of this building.  And it is not the other way around. 

 

Government reform can put a stop to farmers having to rent the 

Agridome to get a point across to the ministers in this 

government and to the members of opposition.  Government 

reform is the tool that will demolish the barriers between the 

government and the people so that we can invite them into this 

building through the front door and make them feel welcome 

and important to the process. 

 

If this administration truly wants openness, truly wants 

accountability and ethical behaviour, then it's going to require 

real courage, real leadership, and real reform. 

 

And it is time, Mr. Speaker, that this government stopped 

blaming the previous government and present a clear course of 

action in which people can participate in a positive way.  It 

takes courage to do what is best for society as a whole with no 

regard to one's own political future. 

 

If this government is truly committed to doing what is best, 

then it will allow its members to participate fully.  It will allow 

me to participate fully.  It will allow the people to participate 

more fully in the process.  It will hold up its code of ethics to 

full scrutiny, bring in anti-corruption legislation, and 

politician-proof the system. 

 

I applaud the government's commitment to the concept of 

all-party committees and democratic reform and to the rights of 

minorities, Mr. Speaker.  The previous government completely 

ignored all three of these areas, and the time for action on these 

fronts is long overdue. 

 

At the same time I see evidence that this government may also 

believe that it is above public scrutiny, simply by the manner in 

which crucial decisions affecting this province have been made 

with little or no discussion in this Assembly. 

 

There's evidence that now that they are in power the old way of 

doing things seems to be more acceptable because of the beliefs 

of many seasoned veterans.  And there is considerable evidence 

that many of the new faces we see on the government side will 

indeed remain voiceless in this House, regardless of the 

opposition they may have to some of the decisions that are 

made in their caucus. 

 

I want to concentrate my remarks on what I and the Liberal 

Party believe must be the focus during this session if we are to 

have a stronger, more productive Saskatchewan.  I'm under no 

illusions, Mr. Speaker, that I will not be able to bring forward 

the kinds of things that I would like to have happen in the next 

four years.  But my colleagues opposite are indeed in the 

position to do so, and I would like to share some of these ideas 

with them. 

 

There are many issues facing government -- health care, 

education, agriculture, the environment, social services -- but 

the one which is of greatest concern to my constituents and to 

the people that I've talked with all over our province is the issue 

of jobs and economic 

activity in our province. 

 

The government faces an admittedly difficult task in dealing 

with a deficit which appears to be approaching the $1 billion 

mark that the hon. member from Riversdale predicted during 

the campaign.  It should therefore come as no surprise to him 

that this must be dealt with.  And the way in which we must 

tackle this problem is far different from the approach being 

used by the New Democratic government in the information 

they've brought forward to date. 

 

(1515) 

 

If we are to have wealth, the tax base and the tools necessary to 

repair the damage done to the financial foundation of our 

province, we cannot simply turn to the taxpayer and say: more, 

please.  The new Premier openly stated time and again that we 

would face a billion dollar deficit.  He should have been 

preparing for at least a few months of the last nine and a half 

years in opposition and his total of 25 years government to 

come up with some solid fiscal ideas. 

 

The new Premier, throughout the campaign, also repeatedly 

stated that $4.5 billion simply had to be enough revenue on 

which to run the province of Saskatchewan.  It baffles me to 

see the NDP now acting like the Premier never made those 

statements at all -- talking about how large the deficit is, how 

we simply must have more money.  It appears that even the 

NDP didn't believe their own campaign rhetoric. 

 

So here we are, just months after they have taken power, and 

we're facing increased power rates, increased telephone rates, 

increased car insurance rates, and I'm certain a round of tax 

increases and increases in the cost of doing business in 

Saskatchewan on May 7 as soon as that budget comes down. 

 

So what signal do you think this is sending to the 700 

businesses who may be considering locating here with their 

potential 16,000 jobs as cited in the Speech from the Throne?  

What this will mean in the long run is less money for the 

Saskatchewan treasury.  What it will mean is less jobs for 

Saskatchewan people, less profit for Saskatchewan business on 

which to pay taxes. 

 

The Speech from the Throne gives no indication that the 

government understands how to create wealth or stimulate 

economic activity whatsoever.  Whatever may be gained in 

revenue, Mr. Speaker, through the imposition of tax increases 

or increases in utility rates or minimum wage increases will 

simply stall the economic recovery, paralyse consumer 

spending by reducing disposable income and throw cold water 

on any lukewarm investors who may be considering 

Saskatchewan as a place to relocate. 

 

The Gass Commission, which reviewed the financial state of 

our province, clearly indicated that any move to increase 

taxation levels would be counter-productive in that it would 

stall the economy and would not produce the necessary revenue 

anyway, making it absolutely the wrong approach. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

Deficit reduction is a priority and I support the commitment of 

this government to consolidate departments and agencies which 

may be duplicating services.  I also believe however that we 

need to create money with which to pay the deficit, because we 

cannot get blood from a stone.  We cannot get another dime 

from the taxpayers of this province. 

 

And the NDP have given no indications in this speech how 

they will create an environment which will encourage growth 

and wealth creation.  There is talk about the concept of creating 

jobs through the Crown corporations -- the old NDP stand by -- 

government job creation through government jobs.  All this 

does is to re-route some of the profits from the Crowns, which 

would normally come to the treasury as tax revenues or 

dividends to government, in order to put a few people to work. 

 

In order to pay for this, power rates have already been 

increased.  The net result is not wealth creation, but more 

government jobs and less profits on which the Crowns can pay 

taxes.  There really is no new money, no new wealth.  This is 

simply recycled government spending and more evidence that 

the NDP does not understand wealth creation. 

 

The most disappointing and crucial evidence of this is the 

completely ill-advised decision to cancel the memorandum of 

understanding with AECL.  Twenty-five million dollars in 

federal money which would have been spent largely on jobs for 

the next five years has virtually evaporated before our eyes. 

 

Countless opportunities for research and development have 

gone down the drain.  And I cannot tell you the frustration 

many of my constituents are feeling over this, particularly 

students who are looking for one reason not to leave this 

province.  And I'm going to quote from a gentleman in my 

constituency. 

 

 Dear Mrs. Haverstock, I am a fourth year engineering physics 

student at the University of Saskatchewan, and a greatly 

disenchanted citizen of your riding.  On March 11 of this 

year, it was announced by our no-mind government that a 

study into the possible development of a CANDU 3 . . . 

reactor would be rejected. 

 

 Thirteen students, (Mrs. Haverstock, are) in (the) 

engineering-physics (class that) will be graduating this year.  

ONE student found permanent employment out of province.  

Ten of the students are intending to eventually attend 

graduate studies at universities outside of Saskatchewan.  

Many other engineering students will also be graduating this 

year, all looking either for employment or continuing their 

studies in their respective fields.  I am sure that it is no 

surprise to you that a vast, vast majority of these students 

have NO employment realities upon graduation.  What is this 

saying to you??  Well let me tell you what this is saying to 

me.  Firstly, this says to me that Saskatchewan is afraid to 

modernize itself by remaining in the dark ages.  While the 

rest of the world is fighting to be competitive, i.e. research 

and development, we 

decide that it is O.K. to sink into oblivion.  Secondly, I am 

sure that you are aware of how much the government funds a 

university student's tuition.  If there are no opportunities in 

the province, how does anybody in their right minds expect 

the graduating student to remain in the province?  Ideally, a 

good government wishes to maximize its rate of return on the 

dollars that it dishes out.  How does a zero rate of return 

sound to you (Mrs. Haverstock)?  With the AECL proposal, 

we had an opportunity to invoke economic and . . . (research 

and development) interest into this province that it 

desperately needs.  Don't you think that the government is the 

largest hypocrite of them all?  It was the NDP government 

that brought uranium mining to this province . . . Now, the 

opportunity to build . . . (to have research and development) 

presents itself.  From a practical point of view, the best place 

to build . . . would be in our own province.  The fuel is here, 

the technology is here -- lets do it.  (But) "No" says the voice 

from above.  As far as I am concerned, by not even carrying 

out a study shows that we in Saskatchewan do NOT have a 

democracy, we DO have a dictatorship.  In my opinion, and 

in the opinion of many other students in this college, this road 

block on our highway of technology is going to lead to a 

poorer standard of education due to the huge lack in funding 

for research and development. (And he goes on) . . . 

 

As well, we can talk about business people, business people 

who had hoped for some outside stimulus . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, with apologies to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, some students from Saskatoon have 

arrived and I'd like leave of the Assembly to introduce them to 

you. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, with us today are 28 

grade 7 and 8 students from Henry Kelsey School in Saskatoon, 

along with their teacher, Ms. Kathleen Pryor-Hildebrandt, and 

their chaperons, Michael Kohle, Jim Finnigan, and Karaas 

Tayler.  And these are students at Henry Kelsey, which is a 

French language school in Saskatoon.  They've had a tour of 

some of the sites in Regina and of the legislature. 

 

I'm going to be meeting with them, and I know that all the 

members of the Assembly would like to join with me in 

welcoming them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I began to talk about business 

people and how much that the proposed memorandum of 

understanding had meant to them as well.  Disappointments, of 

course, arose because there was no attempt to even revise this 

memorandum of understanding.  And some of the concerns that 

I've had, Mr. Speaker, are primarily because this had little to do 

with simply building a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan; that's 

something that would have given me some pause. 

 

This was about sending a message to our country and to the 

world that we wanted to be the world leaders in technology, in 

developing safe technology for the use of uranium in energy 

production everywhere.  And it said although we in 

Saskatchewan may need only a portion of the energy that we 

might decide to produce, we're willing to sell the knowledge.  

We're willing to sell the technology.  We're willing to sell the 

equipment to the world so that other countries with fewer 

energy options than ourselves can benefit from what we've 

learned. 

 

And it's a very arrogant thought when we go into our homes 

every night, Mr. Speaker, and turn on our lights or use 

microwave ovens or use stoves that there are people all 

throughout the world who had that same opportunity for 

energy.  And that is not the case.  And there are many, many 

places that have unsafe nuclear reactors.  We should take a lead 

role, truly a lead role in making sure that this has changed. 

 

The memorandum of understanding said, and now the people 

of Canada and the world are hearing us say, no to opportunity.  

You cannot imagine the negative impact that this kind of 

decision is going to have on our future. 

 

During this session thousands of young people are going to be 

graduating from our high schools, from our universities, and 

from our technical institutes.  They need jobs, Mr. Speaker, 

opportunities to put their knowledge and their skills to work.  

This government has provided nothing in the way of quality 

jobs for most of our mobile, least renewable resource -- our 

young people.  And as a result of the impending budget, 

hundreds more people in Saskatchewan are sure to lose their 

jobs as the result of cut-backs and down-sizing. 

 

While this may be the quickest way to save in the short term, 

the true savings could only be achieved if each department had 

been subjected to efficiency and productivity audits, as was 

suggested in the Liberal Party platform, to ensure that we're 

cutting in all the right places. 

 

With every budget cut, jobs will disappear.  And much of that 

cutting will be necessary, I agree.  All of it will be painful, 

particularly if there is no hope on the horizon.  Hope is the 

anesthetic which allows us to bear the short-term pain of 

dealing with our deficit. Destroying hope, as this government 

has done so many times in the 1970s and continues to appear to 

do in the 1990s, will eventually kill the spirit of Saskatchewan's 

people. 

 

Now there are rumours that the government is considering 

increases to the minimum wage as a solution to the problems of 

many of our poorly paid. 

Talk as I have, and I request that they talk as I have, with 

members of the restaurant association.  Talk to the people that 

so many government members were so concerned with when 

they spoke last session about the devastating effect of the PST 

on that particular sector of the small-business community. 

 

Talk as I have to the rural hotel owners who are desperate for 

revenue to keep their businesses alive and their employees 

employed.  Ask them first what impact raising the minimum 

wage will have on their staff levels. 

 

In extremely difficult economic times for Saskatchewan 

business, it really appears as though this government has spent 

little time or no time consulting with the business community 

as to whether it can withstand the shock of this legislation. 

 

The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan proposed during the 

election that a joint business/labour council be created to 

explore the minimum wage question, to make 

recommendations on the government as to the timing and to the 

amount of increase that would do two things: stimulate the 

economy and protect our competitive position in the 

market-place while protecting jobs. 

 

The government has now wasted six months.  If only it had 

been able to propose, based on solid plans, this consultation 

strategy on minimum wage could have been implemented by 

now. 

 

I am disappointed that the government, while borrowing ideas 

from the Liberal platform, didn't choose this one of a 

business/labour council as soon as it took office.  But I hope 

that it will work to consult with both sectors before making any 

changes to the minimum wage. 

 

I understand what they're trying to do for those individuals who 

have to try to live on a meagre income, but they must be 

extremely cautious of the effect this will have on the very 

people that they are trying to help. 

 

(1530) 

 

Large chains have ravaged Saskatchewan's retail base and 

independent small businesses are struggling every day to keep 

their doors open in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 

One more tilt to the balance between risk and profit could tip 

the entire small-business community over the edge.  And 

always remember that the only option for a small business 

facing an increase in its fixed costs of wages is to end up laying 

off staff to keep within its budget.  That hurts everyone.  It 

really doesn't matter what the minimum wage is for people if 

they don't have a job any more. 

 

This is a very delicate matter which requires timing, and it 

requires a long-term strategy before any implementation can 

take place. 

 

In the area of economic development, we clearly have a defined 

statement in our Liberal Party document about an economic 

advisory council that would include business, labour, 

agriculture leaders, academics, to develop 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

strategies for economic development for the province.  And I 

am truly pleased to see that this government has followed and 

put forward in their Speech from the Throne that they will have 

a council.  I hope that the government will listen, however, to 

its economic council's advice and work to implement its 

strategies. 

 

I'm suspicious, however, of the government's willingness to act 

on the recommendations of such a group if the suggestions are 

not in favour with the NDP party policy.  This was clearly the 

case when the Premier blatantly broke a promise made to the 

Saskatoon business community and ignored the wishes of 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 

the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 

others, by rejecting the AECL memorandum of understanding.  

And although he admitted that the NDP party had problems 

with the nuclear research issue, he gave his word that the NDP 

government, if elected, would implement the recommendations 

of what he called, and I quote: the blue chip Billinton panel. 

 

Without consulting with the business community, without 

discussing the issue in this Assembly, the Premier bowed to 

party political pressure and forced the unilateral decision to 

cancel the AECL memorandum of understanding, which would 

have brought $25 million to the Saskatchewan economy in 

federal research monies.  The swiftness with which the 

government moved to cancel that deal, despite the 

recommendations of the Billinton panel, the swiftness with 

which the Premier bowed to pressure from the NDP Party was 

quite frightening for everyone.  Without ever bringing this 

crucial issue to debate in this Assembly, the government 

showed its lack of respect for the democratic process far earlier 

in its term of office than any one of us would have suspected. 

 

To me this does not bode well for the panel of experts and 

advisors that will be asked to participate in other processes, 

particularly if they recommend something that contradicts the 

grass root policies of the NDP. 

 

There is a great deal of fear in Saskatchewan, a great deal of 

fear about taxes and unemployment and poverty.  People in 

Saskatchewan need work if they are to pay taxes.  People need 

work if they are to escape the poverty cycle.  Students in 

Saskatchewan need quality jobs when they graduate if the 

money we invest in their education is to be worthwhile.  The 

government itself cannot create jobs.  The government itself 

cannot create wealth.  They can only establish an environment 

in which private capital wants to take the risk in order to profit.  

This is called free enterprise.  And free enterprise will 

disappear in Saskatchewan if this government does not send a 

different signal to the people of this province and to potential 

investors across the nation and around the world. 

 

Wealth, Mr. Speaker, is not just measured in dollars and cents.  

It is a measure of the skill, the initiative, and the spirit to 

succeed, in a people.  Our people have the instincts to create 

wealth in Saskatchewan.  Our province has the resources.  The 

problem with the last government 

and this one again, it seems, is that neither understands its role 

in the creation of wealth and in the generation of economic 

activity. 

 

I believe that the Tories went too far in their attempts to pick 

the winners by propping up bad investments like Trinitel in 

Melville with government money.  I believe that they took an 

excellent concept like community bonds, proposed by the 

Liberal Party and Ralph Goodale in 1986 in the election 

platform, and ruined it.  And I applaud the efforts of this new 

government to salvage this concept, not because Liberals 

proposed it, but because it is a good and workable idea. 

 

I want to point out that when I refer to ideas that have been put 

forward by my party, it is because of the visionary and 

committed people who put countless hours of thought and 

discussion and process into the development of our platform 

document and our strategy.  These people were not just 

Liberals -- and we're proud of that -- they were Saskatchewan 

people who care about our province and care about its future. 

 

And I acknowledge and want the government and the people of 

Saskatchewan to acknowledge, that it is invaluable for all 

political parties to put their good ideas on the table, not just 

during a campaign but after a campaign.  And it's one of the 

reasons why I meet with ministers in this government to share 

what I believe are valuable ideas. 

 

What concerns me in seeing parts of the Liberal platform 

implemented with the code of ethics, the business advisory 

council, the wellness model in health care, is that they are 

crucial elements of the strategy that Liberals would have 

implemented.  The NDP are showing us once again that they 

have no sense of what the role of government should be in 

creating wealth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP did not save appropriately during 

the most prosperous times in our history, and they could not 

create wealth either.  They simply rode the commodity 

roller-coaster when oil and grain and potash prices were high -- 

at an all-time high -- never sensing that there was a steep drop 

ahead, never caring to put the majority of profit into long-term 

programs that would sustain this province through tough times.  

This government, unlike the last administration, does not 

appear to have any economic policy.  And the Tories poisoned 

a reasonably sound economic approach with patronage and 

corruption.  The NDP have no approach whatsoever, and I 

believe our province is truly in the worst danger that it has ever 

faced because of that in these difficult times. 

 

Whatever we may choose to do in education, in health care, in 

social services, in agriculture, depends on a sound and 

productive economy to generate the incomes which pay the 

taxes and the bills. 

 

Education absolutely has to be a priority for this government.  

There has been a great deal of rhetoric turned out about the 

value of education, but the bottom line is that education is our 

only weapon against poverty and unemployment.  Access to 

quality education, tailored to prepare our children for the 

challenges of the world, is 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

something which cannot be negotiable. 

 

And we must offer that access to people no matter where they 

live in this province.  Our rural families must have an education 

model with which they are comfortable.  If changes are made, 

they must be changes which do not compromise the access of 

rural children to quality education equal to that offered our city 

children. 

 

And first nation peoples must have a fast track to educational 

opportunities and improvements that they have been denied for 

so long.  Our future in this province depends largely on how 

successful the aboriginal population becomes, and believe me, 

we have a tremendous amount of lost ground to make up in 

education and health care with first peoples. 

 

The costs of not educating aboriginal children, of not offering 

equality of opportunity in the work place, will become 

unaffordable.  If we do not strive to eliminate the problems 

aboriginal peoples are struggling with through increased 

education and improved quality of life, we will suffer the 

consequences for ever. 

 

Everyone is searching for leadership that will steady the course 

and give people the long-range plan so that they can understand 

how they fit in and what effect it will have on their ability to 

pay their bills, whether they are municipal governments trying 

to budget, or home owners and parents grappling with taxes 

and the costs of their children's post-secondary education. 

 

I had hoped to see far more of a concise approach to health care 

in this throne speech as well, Mr. Speaker.  Talking about a 

wellness model and hinting at health care premiums and 

increased drug plan deductibles is hardly what I would call 

strong leadership toward a new medicare. 

 

This is a life and death issue for Saskatchewan people.  Many 

seniors are extremely worried about the rumours that they hear.  

They felt that electing an NDP government would guarantee 

that they would not have to worry about such things as 

premiums.  People with chronic conditions are calling my 

office pleading to have this government reconsider plans to 

implement perhaps chiropractic charges and warning of the 

dangers of increasing the deductible for the drug plan. 

 

During the campaign I was accused of scaring people about 

health care, Mr. Speaker, because I frankly discussed the 

possibility of health care premiums if all efforts to eliminate 

waste and duplication of services were still not enough to 

protect universal medicare. 

 

I believe that it was my responsibility to be open.  I believe that 

it is the responsibility of politicians always to be honest about 

what it is they believe may have to happen even if it is the 

slightest possibility. 

 

Well I got it in both ears, Mr. Speaker, the night of the debate, 

both from the now Premier and from the previous premier.  

What is happening here with all the behind-closed-door 

discussion and the NDP Party fractionalism over premiums is 

creating a real scare in people because they have no 

information one way or the 

other. 

 

And I want to go on record as disapproving of this approach, 

disapproving of the approach that the NDP are using in not 

making people less concerned and quelling their fears.  It's an 

abominable way to discuss such an important issue and this 

government, if it were really committed to openness and 

honesty, would have cleared the air on their health care strategy 

by revealing its complete plan in the throne speech to put 

people's mind at ease. 

 

No matter how or when the wellness model eventually 

emerges, quality health care and preventative medicine only 

work if you have the income with which to buy the balanced 

diet which can help you avoid the cost of prescriptions and 

other treatments.  And one will not get far promoting wellness 

with people on fixed incomes if you make it impossible for 

them to choose between the food they need to stay healthy and 

the medications they need to stay out of hospital.  The bottom 

line is that this government cannot create all of these stabilities 

for people if it does not encourage and reward members of 

society for producing wealth. 

 

This government, the NDP party, has always been driven by 

what I've understood to be, take from the rich and give to the 

poor mentality.  And I believe that is admirable.  But they have 

come up short in realizing that there aren't that many rich left in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that their government is far 

more adept at creating the poor than at creating the wealthy. 

 

If there is no wealth, there is no basis for taxation in revenue.  

That is what is wrong with leaving out major chunks of what 

they have borrowed from other places.  When you examine the 

pool of taxpayers in Saskatchewan, you will find that there are 

very few rich to tax.  You will find that 11 of the top 13 

corporations in Saskatchewan are Crowns or co-operatives 

which we must assume are already paying their fair share of 

taxes. 

 

This government should be particularly careful, in reforming 

the tax system, not to lead people to believe that there is an 

enormous pool of wealthy people who are forced to stay here 

and pay whatever taxes this government decides to impose.  

The resource companies, the profitable businesses, the people 

with upper-level incomes, will be the first to leave if this 

administration goes on a seek-and-destroy mission through its 

tax policy.  And they will go out, Mr. Speaker, and tell the rest 

of the 700 businesses with their potential 16,000 potential jobs 

to avoid Saskatchewan like the plague.  It happened in the 

1970s when the times were good.  These businesses will not 

hesitate to leave this sad state of affairs now. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne I had hoped to see evidence of 

legislation that would bring more accountability to our system.  

But I fear the government has chosen not to include such 

measures as free-standing votes in our legislature, set budget 

dates, set commencement dates, and many other necessary 

reforms.  I fear that they have done only the minimum, the least 

threatening to their stranglehold of power over their caucuses. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

(1545) 

 

The government has alluded to some reforms being introduced, 

but I believe that they have carefully chosen those which do not 

threaten an autocratic style of governing.  In fact I sit on the 

Rules and Procedures Committee, as you well know, Mr. 

Speaker, charged with making recommendations on many of 

these issues such as the sitting hours of the legislature, the days 

allocated to private members' Bills, and so on. 

 

I've been a strong advocate for all-party committees, and the 

most encouraging thing about my legislative experience to date 

has been to see what can emerge as the result of parties putting 

politics aside and working to improve the system.  The work of 

the Rules and Procedures Committee has produced 

recommendations for some very positive changes to the system.  

It has been a pleasure to come together with my colleagues 

from the NDP and the Conservatives to create a more workable 

legislature. 

 

What has been most unfortunate for us all, I think, is to see 

recommendations developed after hours of intense discussion, 

paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, to see those 

recommendations overturned by the NDP caucus.  It gives one 

some idea of how the blue-chip experts on the Billinton panel 

or the Murray Commission or the Gass Commission must feel 

when their proposals are overthrown in favour of, quote, party 

consensus developed in the caucus chambers. 

 

All-party committees would be the best thing that could happen 

in this legislature in terms of de-politicizing the process.  But 

they will only be of real value if the results of their work are 

not re-politicized by giving the NDP caucus the ability to 

overturn committee recommendations in favour of party 

politics.  That, I'm sorry to say, is the present reality.  And it 

doesn't create great optimism for those of us like myself who 

want fundamental reform. 

 

Why should people care about political reform?  Why am I still 

here talking about it months after the campaign has ended?  

Well I'll tell you why.  Because people want to see the 

individuals they elect to this Assembly do something besides 

nod their heads in unison to every party policy trotted out by 

the government.  That's why.  The citizens of Saskatchewan 

want a system in which people vote for things that make good 

sense for this province and against those things which are not in 

the best interests of people. 

 

For example, how can 55 MLAs possibly all agree to cancel the 

AECL deal or to implement health care premiums or to 

increase drug plan deductibles?  They don't agree.  And that's 

the truth.  So why in the world shouldn't they be allowed to 

stand up in this House and say so? 

 

Well I'll tell you why that is, too.  Because our system presently 

allows for a handful of power brokers -- the cabinet and the 

inner circle -- to carry out whatever it invents under the name 

of democracy, Mr. Speaker, simply by hiding behind the mask 

of consensus worn by back-benchers given skewed information 

to bring them on side.  This is a sickness that must be cured if 

you're ever 

to proudly say to Saskatchewan that we are governed by a true 

democracy. 

 

With a massive majority, they have the power to implement 

reforms that will ensure that the information handled by this 

government is made available to all.  They have promised that 

they will approach things more fairly.  They have the power to 

entrench that promise in legislation, and in this session I will be 

looking forward to -- I will be counting on -- these reforms to 

become reality. 

 

If they will honour their commitment to reform this system, to 

make it more responsive, more effective, then we will have a 

government that is better equipped to deal with the concerns of 

its people.  And isn't that what this is really all about? 

 

I remind the government that the wishes of its own party, the 

policies and the resolutions, reflect the wishes of only a 

particular percentage of the electorate.  I remind all of them on 

the government side that half the people of Saskatchewan did 

not support their party and that of those who did, many did so 

simply to rid themselves of the previous government. 

 

And I remind them therefore that when they meet with their 

party organizations, when they close the doors of their caucus 

chambers, they are closing the doors on the majority of 

Saskatchewan people, closing the doors on democracy in this 

province.  And I hope that they will not make this a customary 

practice for the rest of their term. 

 

And they did make a considerable number of promises.  They 

promised to open the books and they did -- the Conservative's 

books.  The Gass Commission did an excellent job in showing 

us where our money went for the last 10 years.  But now the 

onus is, guess where, Mr. Speaker?  It's on them to complete 

their promise, not only by leaving the books open, but 

legislating that they will remain open from here on.  There can 

be no accountability without information and access to 

financial information is crucial to ensuring that this government 

remains answerable to the electorate. 

 

The Premier spent 25 years waiting for the opportunity to take 

charge of this province and I hope he gets on with it.  Many of 

the members opposite have spent between nine and a half years 

and 25 years getting ready for this.  Surely they have something 

in mind for our province now. 

 

People want to see the jobs, they want to see political reform, 

Mr. Speaker, and they want to see no more taxes.  They want to 

see the new, de-politicized public service, the end to patronage 

hirings; the energy institute, which has been kept so much 

under wraps.  Almost half the people voted for prescription 

drug plan improvements, Mr. Speaker, and school-based dental 

care and more resources for local municipalities. 

 

I didn't promise those things.  The Liberal Party didn't promise 

those things because we didn't believe they were feasible. And 

I wasn't in this legislature -- they were.  And so I say to them:  

deliver. 

 

No one in Saskatchewan wants to hear any more from the 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

government about what the last government did wrong.  We'll 

read the book or we'll watch the movie when it comes out.  

What everyone wants is the government to stop pointing its 

finger into the past and start leading the way into the future; 

save the money its spending on radio advertising, cancel the 

half-hour television announcement. 

 

The NDP are wearing out their credibility by whining about the 

problems not being their fault and the people decided it was 

already the fault of the Conservatives and threw them out.  It's 

over, so let's get on. 

 

We are tired of marking time, waiting for the budget, waiting 

for the health care plan, waiting for the energy institute, waiting 

for this commission and that commission.  The waiting is over 

and it is time to get down to the business of leadership and 

governing.  And that is the job of the Premier, not the Leader of 

the Opposition, not mine, and not the taxpayers and the 

business community of this province. 

 

He wanted it and he's got it, so he should quit ducking the press 

and the people and the legislature and make some decisions and 

explain the plan and put it into action before one more person 

leaves this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How much more? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm going to cut some out, you'll be pleased 

to know. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Thank you, but we've got all day. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well I thought, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

give all these people some pleasure, and I would not continue 

to point out all of the enormous deficiencies in the Speech from 

the Throne.  I will get on here. 

 

Agriculture is a major component of our future, Mr. Speaker.  

For the past 10 years or so we have had a government and a 

premier who believed that they alone had the answers for 

agriculture.  And we've all seen the folly in that; at least I think 

we have. 

 

I truly regret not having the power to implement the Liberal 

plan for agriculture because I think Saskatchewan farmers 

would have been further ahead, and they would have had . . . 

we would have had a chance to do so.  I will restate the Liberal 

Party vision for a national agriculture plan which brings all 

producing provinces together to develop a long-term strategy 

for farm debt, subsidies, addressing the international trade 

wars, marketing boards, as well as transportation. 

 

And Saskatchewan is not just an agricultural province.  It's a 

community of families joined together by ties to farming and a 

dependency on the productivity of our rural communities.  And 

that is more than an industry; it is a society.  And this 

government, by its lack of leadership in agriculture, is 

threatening the continued existence of our society as we want 

to see it preserved. 

 

Canada needs Saskatchewan farmers to be a healthy, 

productive resource.  The world needs not only our food 

production, they need our knowledge and our 

technology in agriculture.  And it is the government's 

responsibility to see that we market not just what we grow, but 

what we know.  Farmers don't need help with farming; they 

need help in managing their industry on a national and 

international scale. 

 

It is the Premier's job to be the first at the national and 

international bargaining tables to speak for our farmers.  We 

can't solve the agriculture problems in Saskatchewan in the 

NDP caucus.  We will not solve them around a table . . . We 

will solve them, pardon me, around a table with Manitoba and 

Alberta and putting pressure on the federal government.  And I 

suggest that this government hurry up and get back to that 

table. 

 

I know how very, very pleased, Mr. Speaker, all the members 

of this Assembly will be when I add these two words: in 

conclusion.  Let me say that every person in Saskatchewan is 

waiting for this government to perform up to the expectations it 

created.  They may think they kept people's expectations low, 

but they did not.  They set themselves up for a very difficult 

job.  They made many promises and they've already broken 

some of them.  The people did not expect miracles, but they 

were promised, and expect, certain fundamental changes. 

 

This NDP government has a debt to the people of 

Saskatchewan that must be repaid.  In exchange for the people's 

trust and their endorsement, they owe them honesty and 

dedication to implement the changes they promised.  They owe 

them access to information; they owe them a compassionate 

approach to people and their problems.  They owe the people of 

this province a detailed explanation of what it is they are doing 

to preserve health care and education. 

 

They must be committed to creating wealth because they said 

they could do it, Mr. Speaker.  They are obligated to 

government reform and deficit reduction.  They owe the people 

open, honest, accountable government, because they promised 

that they could deliver. 

 

I don't expect miracles, nor do the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We do expect action and we do expect results.  

We expect to see a concise plan and we expect to see it on May 

7.  I hope that we will not be disappointed. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to join 

this throne speech debate.  I want to point out that in the 

Legislative Assembly we welcome divergent points of view.  

And before I get into my comments as I had intended, there's a 

couple of things I want to deal with for the member that has no 

problem maintaining caucus solidarity, being one person, one 

vote -- the only vote. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Greystone indicated in the speech 

moments ago, that the government, the now government, broke 

a campaign promise in cancelling the SaskPower AECL deal.  

Mr. Speaker, that just has no element of reality.  It is a 

fabrication, a figment of the imagination, the fertile 

imagination of the member for Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

The now Premier in press conferences said, what we are 

committed to is energy conservation. We're committed to 

alternate energy, we're committed to co-generation, 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

wind generation, solar or photovoltaic.  Even the now Premier 

went so far, Mr. Speaker, as to speak of potentially fuelling 

government vehicles with alternate fuel such as propane, liquid 

natural gas, and even hydrogen, as quickly as it can be 

developed on an economical basis.  We're not there yet in the 

world, but we will be on the forefront of that as opposed to 

dealing with an obsolete technology, that obsolete technology 

being nuclear power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I am proud of my Premier.  I am proud of the fact 

that my Premier kept that campaign commitment -- that 

commitment to look at other alternatives.  That's why we now 

have the conservation and alternate energy office announced 

for the city of Saskatoon to do work on these other areas of 

energy, as I've outlined. 

 

In terms of keeping the commitment of the government and of 

the party, I am very intensely proud of the fact that we have 

done just that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal a little bit with that AECL 

SaskPower deal.  I want to point out that nuclear waste is 

around not just for a few years, not just for a few generations, 

but a hundred thousand years some of the nuclear isotopes still 

are radioactive -- a hundred thousand years.  Put in a different 

context, that's 50 times the length of time it's been since we 

could have shaken hands with Christ in the flesh 2,000 years 

ago. 

 

But let's leave the nuclear waste question and the fact that after 

well over 45 years the nuclear energy industry has not been 

able to come up with a safe disposal of nuclear waste. 

 

Let's deal with weapons proliferation.  We've just witnessed in 

the past year one of the most fundamental changes in our world 

in our lifetime.  Of course I'm referring to the breakup of the 

USSR.  And I'm referring to the ongoing questions now about 

who has control of what used to be the second largest single 

source of nuclear weapons, but now is controlled by a 

multitude of countries, some of them as I speak involved in 

civil riots and war and some question as to who is going to 

ultimately be in control -- there's some question whether there's 

going to be a democracy, whether it's going to be a dictatorship 

-- who has control of the button to send those nuclear weapons 

anywhere that they happen to be aimed. 

 

But leave that aside.  Let's assume that we can deal with the 

nuclear weapons proliferation.  What about the safety of 

nuclear power plants, Mr. Speaker?  They have, to put it 

mildly, a very checkered record, not even counting Three Mile 

Island and Chernobyl.  Leave those aside.  Look at the many 

nuclear power plants in existence, and there's hardly a handful 

in the world that aren't experiencing radioactive leaks, that 

aren't having problems with the ongoing operation of those 

nuclear power plants.  And there's not a nuclear power plant in 

the world that hasn't required emergency repairs at an 

accelerated rate to what the designers said it would be. 

But leave that aside.  Let's assume that we can develop a 

perfectly safe nuclear power plant.  Let's assume we have the 

technology -- somehow between yesterday and today we 

developed the technology.  It took 45 years and we weren't able 

to develop it, but overnight somebody got a smart pill and we 

can now develop a totally safe nuclear power plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, focus on the economics of nuclear power, and I 

just refer people and invite them to check out the situation with 

the Darlington Nuclear Power Plant in Ontario.  Here we have 

a power plant initially projected to cost three and a half billion 

dollars.  By this summer they will have spent $15 billion 

building the Darlington Nuclear Power Plant in Ontario.  That's 

only multiplied by a factor of roughly four -- crazy Tory math. 

 

And worse yet, the chief engineer was on national television on 

a documentary saying, well this summer after we spent $15 

billion we think we can make that Darlington Nuclear Power 

Plant work.  We think we can make it work after $15 billion 

spent -- outrageous! 

 

And here we have a situation, the New Democratic Party is on 

record, has a long-time policy of no nuclear power plants.  

Why?  Because of the reasons I'm outlining.  The economics of 

nuclear power are atrocious.  CANDU, the AECL, Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd., have not to my knowledge been able to 

build a nuclear power plant for less than at least a minimum 

three times their original projection -- three times. 

 

AECL told the people of Saskatchewan that for $1 billion they 

could build a nuclear power plant.  But what is it?  Is it 1 

billion or is it 3 billion? 

 

Mr. Speaker, just look at the economics of nuclear power -- 

that's why.  Leave everything aside.  The economics of this 

obsolete technology are so atrocious, that's why the New 

Democratic government cancelled the SaskPower AECL deal 

that would have seen us squandering and sinking untold 

billions of dollars into yet another Tory megaproject. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to address the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone's piousness in saying we should be 

leading by example.  Publicly the member talks about 

government cabinet ministers should take a cut in salary; the 

Premier should take a cut in salary.  Privately the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone says, ah but I need more money to run my 

office.  You guys do with less, but I need more to run my 

office. 

 

In the media the member for Saskatoon Greystone says, oh 

we're in troubled times; oh dear, we must cut back.  Oh dear we 

must spend the taxpayers' money very cautiously, very 

carefully.  It's a public trust.  Privately the member says exactly 

the opposite thing.  She's asking and has consistently asked in 

private and in committee meetings has consistently asked for 

more money to run her office.  My question to the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone is, why the double standard?  Why the 

public call for cuts, the media call for cuts, and the private call 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

for more money.  Lead by example, yes.  I think that the 

member for Saskatoon Greystone could heed those words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with my view of the throne speech 

now. And I want to express my gratitude to the people of 

Regina Albert North, people in north end of Regina that have 

graciously re-elected me to this legislature so that for the first 

time I've been able to sit on the government side and effect 

some changes.  And many changes are needed. And the people 

of my constituency and in fact the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve the changes. 

 

The good ship Saskatchewan was heading just like the Titanic, 

heading straight for an iceberg, and we've got to steer around 

that iceberg and prevent us from sinking and the tragic loss, the 

economic loss that would result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is one that I am very proud to 

stand up and speak to.  I had a former constituent call me 

yesterday and he had nothing but praise for this throne speech.  

He said to me, he said the press have been telling us there are 

problems.  They've been leaving the impression that this 

government, the New Democratic government, has been doing 

little or nothing.  And in fact they leave the impression at times 

that this government has been hiding. 

 

In praise of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, my caller said, and 

I quote: this is a document to be proud of, and it shows the plan 

in a number of areas.  This throne speech commits our 

government to create a Saskatchewan education council, to 

advise on improvements to our education system, a soon to be 

appointed inquiry into university education, and a complete 

evaluation of the structure and the programs of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 

 

And that is already under way, Mr. Speaker, as we are here 

today.  That review is already under way. 

 

The throne speech includes directions for our natural gas 

utility.  We're going to be introducing legislation to mandate 

them and allow them to get on with doing the job that 

SaskEnergy has through the introduction of the SaskEnergy 

Act.  That's to give the statutory power for SaskEnergy to carry 

out its mandate more effectively. 

 

This throne speech is all about putting people first.  We have in 

this throne speech hunger and nutrition programs that have 

been enhanced.  We have in this throne speech a blueprint for 

employment and a training program that will employ a 

thousand people in the local government, in non-government 

organization sector, for the betterment of all of Saskatchewan.  

Certainly for the betterment of those thousand people that will 

be employed, but for the betterment of us all. 

 

This throne speech, Mr. Speaker, deals with the Metis Justice 

Review Committee.  It deals with an Indian justice review 

committee and says the recommendations will result in changes 

that are an important step in the achievement of self 

_determination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech deals with settling, and a 

commitment of this government to settling outstanding treaty 

land entitlements.  It deals with northern works program and it 

deals with housing, particularly in northern Saskatchewan.  My 

colleagues, the members from Cumberland and Athabasca, 

have done their work and they have been heard, Mr. Speaker.  I 

take my hat off to them for their work on behalf of their 

constituents, and I am proud that this government is responding 

in real and meaningful ways to some of the concerns of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, this throne speech deals with 

environmental issues.  There is an environmental charter of 

rights and responsibilities Act.  This Act is to give greater 

public access to environmental information.  There's also 

included whistle blower protection for people who report 

environmental accidents or -- and this is significant -- 

environmentally hazardous practices. 

 

The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, deals with Parks Act 

amendments that are going to add over 215,000 hectares of 

land to our provincial park system.  This is a move that we 

have advocated for a number of years when we were in 

opposition, and it's now coming into reality with this throne 

speech and subsequent legislation.  I want to commend the 

Minister of Parks and the Premier and all of my colleagues for 

this major initiative towards meeting the Saskatchewan parks 

system objectives. 

 

I also want to, while I'm at it, congratulate mainly the same 

people.  The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

amendments dealt with in the throne speech are going to add 

607,000 hectares of Crown land under protection of this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech and what the New Democratic 

government is all about is about faith, about compassion, and 

about working together.  Working together for our collective 

co-operative future.  Mr. Speaker, the thrust of what we have 

been doing is getting the financial house in order.  And that's 

going to continue for quite some time.  Not because it gives any 

joy to members on this side, on the government side of the 

House, to point fingers or to say, well it's your fault.  But 

because like a family that is very near to bankruptcy, you don't 

turn that around in one pay cheque; you don't turn it around in 

one month; you don't likely turn it around in one year.  It is a 

prolonged period of time until you can turn around a near 

bankruptcy into a situation where that family is again solvent 

financially and can again control its own economic destiny and 

can make some major financial decisions. 

 

But that's where we're at right now.  The province is like a 

family that is just teetering on the verge of bankruptcy.  And 

we're at the fork in the road.  If we take the wrong turn, we're 

over the edge.  Nothing would make me happier, Mr. Speaker, 

than to be absolutely wrong when I way that.  Nothing in the 

world would make me happier than to be wrong about the 

seriousness of Saskatchewan's fiscal and financial situation.  

But I don't believe that I'm wrong.  I don't believe it at all. 

 

(1615) 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech and what this government is all 

about is also open and honest government.  In the throne 

speech we talk about jobs and economic opportunities, we talk 

about streamlining 27 different government departments and 

agencies that offer over 200 separate programs for businesses.  

We want to reduce the duplication and the frustration and the 

lost productivity that results from 27 different operations 

delivering 200 programs.  We want to have some money for 

actual program delivery as opposed to simply managing the 

program. 

 

In this throne speech for the first time we see co-ops are going 

to be eligible for community bond support.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think it's a great signal to the co-operative movement in 

Saskatchewan that we have focused in this way on co 

_ops, enhancing their ability to raise funds for the worthwhile 

things that co-operatives can do.  And I'm not going to start 

listing it because co-operatives can do literally anything, from 

community health clinics to housing to farming to literally 

anything -- job co-ops, literally anything.  I'm very pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, that the throne speech includes this . . . allowing 

co-ops to be eligible for community bond support. 

 

I'm also pleased that we are rather strengthening the review and 

approval process for the community bonds program.  Much has 

been made of the Trinitel situation in Melville, and frankly it is 

with some regret that I've seen that -- with a lot of regret -- that 

I've seen that operation drop out of existence.  But it comes, 

frankly, as no surprise.  The former member for Melville 

dragged the business in, in his desperate, last minute attempt 

only at getting re-elected.  Grant Schmidt did it simply for his 

own re-election, and it didn't work.  His re-election didn't work 

and Trinitel certainly didn't work, and we knew, Mr. Speaker, 

we then in opposition knew it was not going to work, but there 

it is. 

 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, according to the throne 

speech, Crown corporations are going to be used to stimulate 

economic development.  That is one tool we have some limited 

control over and ability to use now, and I'm delighted that we 

will be doing it. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, some positive initiatives that we've 

embarked on in this throne speech, and there are initiatives that 

have not been started yet.  Why?  Because the government's 

attention has been focused on finding out the truth about 

Saskatchewan's fiscal position.  We have to know where we're 

at before we can chart the economic course to where we are 

going. 

 

In recent months I have, on one hand, have been really 

intensely proud of this government, the cabinet, some of the 

moves that have been made.  But I confess, Mr. Speaker, that 

all too often I've been frustrated.  I've been depressed, and I've 

been angry.  I became angry when the Gass Commission report 

was released and some of the problems were released to the 

public. 

 

I've been depressed, and I've been angry as the Ernst & Young 

report on Saskatchewan's Crown corporations was released to 

the public, and we find a mess at every turn. 

I have been angered, Mr. Speaker, at the report the Provincial 

Auditor tabled two days ago here for the year ended March 31, 

1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that distresses me, 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  If it ever got more 

than three paragraphs mentioned in a provincial auditor's report 

in previous years, if it ever got more than three paragraphs, we 

knew it was in really serious trouble -- things had really gone 

askew.  In this document there's not three paragraphs; there's 31 

pages of documented report of wrongdoing at Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company -- 31 pages. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the anger that I've been feeling about our 

Saskatchewan situation, I want to point out, it's not directed at 

my friend and colleague, the Minister of Finance.  It's certainly 

not directed at my friend and colleague, the Premier.  It's not 

directed at any of the now government members. 

 

My anger, Mr. Speaker, is directed at the former government, 

the people that brought us into this mess, the people that 

created such a massive millstone, such a massive debt, and 

hung not only us but our children are going to still, if not be 

paying for that deficit directly, they will be paying for that 

deficit because of the things we could have done had the money 

been available now. 

 

Not one bit of remorse have I seen from the government 

members opposite.  The only thing I saw was on last night's 

news one of the members saying, well gee, it's hard to believe 

that somebody could eat $17,000 worth of meals on an expense 

account, but that's in this auditor's report I referred to.  That 

same member, the member for Thunder Creek, earlier today 

said in question period, and I quote: where there's smoke, 

there's fire. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where there's smoke, there's fire, and we 

have an auditor's report well in excess of 200 pages.  We have a 

Gass Commission report that has a lot of smoke and a lot of fire 

-- all of it directed at the former government.  All of it came 

from their compliance, their see no evil, speak no evil, hear no 

evil attitude, their ostrich-like stand that said, put your head in 

the sand at every opportunity.  If you think something isn't 

going right, just duck and hide and run. 

 

And you can do that for a while.  But the time ran out.  The 

time ran out and there's nothing more for anybody to grab.  The 

time ran out, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately it is time for us to 

pay the price.  The former government added nine and a half 

billion dollars debt in their nine and a half years in operation -- 

nine and a half billion dollars.  That's a billion dollars a year 

they added to the provincial debt.  Worked out another way, it's 

$2.8 million a day -- $2.8 million a day new debt every day 

they were in office, or $2.80 for every person in Saskatchewan 

-- $2.80 a day additional debt every single day for nine and a 

half years. 

 

Now that should give us all a bit of an idea about just how 

severe this situation is.  And we're paying interest on the debt, 

and that interest is going to go on and on and on until we can 

achieve a balanced budget, until we can achieve a one-year 

balanced budget and start paying 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

back those former deficits and start paying back all of that debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is a major force in our lives 

because it's not possible for man to live separated from others.  

We are involved in each other's lives not by choice, but by 

necessity.  This government, through the throne speech and our 

actions previously and in the future, prove that our lives are 

intertwined.  We are in this life together. 

 

We Saskatchewan people are a hardy group; we have overcome 

difficulties in the past.  We overcame difficulties in 1944 when 

Tommy Douglas was called upon and the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) was called upon to drag 

Saskatchewan out of an economic morass.  We were called 

upon in 1971 when Allan Blakeney and the NDP were called 

upon to lead this province out of an economic mess, and we did 

it both times.  The people of Saskatchewan have called upon 

the New Democratic Party for a third time, 1991, to yet again 

straighten up the mess.  Yet again we've been called upon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am delighted that we are going to be proven 

historically to be up to the challenge.  I am confident of that.  

There is a light at the end of the tunnel.  We will be working 

diligently to cut the frills and pay the bills; that's part of this 

government's mandate, and that's what we intend to do. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech offers us a 

blueprint for the future, some immediate action and some much 

longer-term direction. 

 

I am pleased to support this throne speech, and I want to 

conclude by saying what my view of this government is, how 

we will be viewed. 

 

The measure of this government or the measure of any 

government, after all, is not the duration of that government but 

its donation to our society.  Mr. Speaker, it has been my 

distinct pleasure and my honour once again to participate in 

debate.  I am fully in support of what is the best throne speech 

in a decade to be introduced in this House, perhaps in more 

than a decade to be introduced in this House.  Mr. Speaker, 

thank you for this opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to enter into this debate on the Speech from the 

Throne delivered by Her Honour on Monday of this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure first of all to offer my 

congratulations to the mover and the seconder of the motion to 

adopt the Speech from the Throne, the fine members from 

Meadow Lake and Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for any member to ever be able to 

be the mover and seconder of the Speech from the Throne.  It is 

one that those of the rest of us in this Assembly envy.  And I 

simply want to congratulate those two fine members and at the 

same time predict, Mr. 

Speaker, that not only did they make excellent addresses here 

but that they will have long and distinguished careers in service 

of their constituents and the people of Saskatchewan in this the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously I rise to support 

the Speech from the Throne that's before us.  It seems to me 

that is a speech which reflects the political will of the people of 

Saskatchewan today.  And I believe as well that it is presented 

by a government that strives to be as good as the people who 

sent us here. 

 

And as I rise to support the Speech from the Throne, there are 

six sections specifically in this speech about which I'd like to 

comment.  And let me begin with one of the early sections of 

the Speech from the Throne and appropriately so: "Open, 

Honest and Accountable Government." 

 

And let me say right off the bat, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the 

sentiment and the cynicism that exists around the province of 

Saskatchewan, I stand in my place in this Assembly today 

proud to be a politician, proud to be an MLA.  There is a 

cynicism after nine and a half long, lean years of Tory 

government in Saskatchewan and seven long, lean, troublesome 

years of Tory government in Ottawa.  There's an 

understandable cynicism about politicians and politics in 

government that exists in the land today. 

 

And we've all heard the stories.  I think one of the kindest ones 

. . . I walked into a meeting, Mr. Speaker, a couple of months 

ago.  Someone said to me, Hagel, what's the difference between 

a politician and God?  And I said, I don't know, what is the 

difference between a politician and God?  And they said, God 

doesn't think he's a politician. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, sad to admit, but there is a cynicism that's 

reflected in the stories that people tell.  But I stand in this 

Assembly in response to the Speech from the Throne, in 

defence of the Speech from the Throne, in support, proud to be 

a politician, proud to be a New Democrat, proud to be 

associated with the government which puts first and foremost 

its dedication to return open, honest, and accountable 

government to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, the great-grandmother 

of my children, who grew up in the province of Saskatchewan 

over in Webb, west part of the province . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hey, that's my seat. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- The member from Morse has the good fortune of 

representing the good people of Webb. 

 

When she was a young woman, Mr. Speaker, she had the 

opportunity to baby-sit Woodrow Lloyd.  And I remember 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

as a young lad, even long before I became twigged about my 

interests in politics, her talking about Woody and the kinds of 

things that she said Woody stood for, for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And she's one of those people who are few and 

far between these days who truly believes that to be an elected 

member is a noble calling. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are 55 members in this House today 

who are of the view that the public treasury deserves to be the 

public trust and not the public trough; who are dedicated to 

renewing the faith of the people of Saskatchewan that to be an 

elected member, to represent them, is a noble calling because 

you come here to serve your province and to serve the people 

who sent you, and to serve them openly, honestly, and with 

accountability, with the trust that they sent to us on election 

day. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech 

from the Throne, when I look at the Speech from the Throne 

and I summarize what this Speech from the Throne says, I can 

boil it down to four words -- four words, Mr. Speaker.  What 

this Speech from the Throne represents is a plan, a plan from a 

government that is dedicated to working today for tomorrow 

together.  Today for tomorrow together, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

what this speech is all about. 

 

It means that we have in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, a 

New Democrat government that's dedicated to doing the right 

things for the right reasons.  And dedicated I would add, Mr. 

Speaker, in the spirit of the roots of the history of our party, of 

those CCF and New Democrat members, both elected as well 

as volunteer, who were part of building this great province.  

Consistent with that spirit, Mr. Speaker, dedicated to preserve 

that spirit with the commitment to work today to build a new 

tomorrow for our children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have at home a couple of children who 

have over the years become a little older and with whom, Mr. 

Speaker, we're no longer in the habit of sitting down before 

bedtime to read a bedtime story.  But you know, Mr. Speaker, 

I'd just like to share with the Assembly just an excerpt from the 

story that we used to read in our household when bedtime story 

was apropos. 

 

It's a story called "The Mouseland Fable," which was told by 

one of the greatest people, one of the greatest politicians this 

province has ever known, in fact that this country has ever 

known -- by Tommy Douglas. 

 

Many people in Saskatchewan will remember through the 

1950s hearing the story of "The Mouseland Fable" as an 

explanation of what politics should be about, and will recall the 

story, and I'll just summarize, Mr. Speaker; I won't read it 

verbatim.  I've got the story before me; I'll come to the 

conclusion in a moment. 

 

The story essentially went like this.  In this land called 

mouseland the mice had a habit of electing themselves a 

government, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, a government 

always made up of cats.  Oh there were white cats and 

occasionally there'd be black cats.  Now and then we'd have 

white cats and black cats together.  That 

 was a coalition.  Sometimes we had white cats with black spots 

and black cats with white spots and cats that tried to look like 

mice.  But you know, Mr. Speaker, there was a problem in 

mouseland. 

 

And if I can conclude this story as Tommy did in the 1950s, 

Mr. Speaker, he said it this way.  Ah the member from Morse 

understands the story well.  He understands, he has understood.  

He understands why he is a member of a small rump because 

he knows that the cats got caught in the trap on October 21. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- The cats got caught.  The people of 

Saskatchewan belled the cat on October 21, Mr. Speaker.  They 

belled the cat.  Them cats they were eating like cats.  That's 

what the rules were all about. 

 

But as Tommy finished this story, Mr. Speaker, let me put it in 

his words because he says them so much better than I.  You see 

my friends the trouble wasn't with the colour of the cats, the 

trouble was that they were cats.  And because they were cats 

they naturally looked after cats instead of mice. 

 

Presently there came along one little mouse who had an idea.  

My friends, watch out for the little fellow with an idea.  And he 

said to the other mice, look fellows, why do we keep on 

electing a government made up of cats?  Why don't we elect a 

government made up of mice?  Oh, they said, he's a Bolshevik; 

lock him up.  And so they put him in jail.  But I want to remind 

you that you can lock up a mouse or a man or a woman or a 

little girl but you can't lock up an idea.  The words of Tommy 

Douglas in the 1950s in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have in the Government of 

Saskatchewan today is a government made up of members of a 

party that has an idea.  It's not a complicated idea, and the idea 

is simply this:  that the government elected by the people and 

for the people has a responsibility to be the equalizer, to ensure 

that it can intervene in the natural forces of the economy which 

are made for the rich and the powerful, to ensure that the 

people of our province have equal opportunity and equal 

security.  It's the equalizer. 

 

Government as a noble, ethical vehicle for the people of 

Saskatchewan to realize their aspirations, to have equality of 

opportunity and equality of security -- a government, Mr. 

Speaker, with an idea. 

 

We all understand, Mr. Speaker, what happens when we have 

government that refuses to intervene, to allow unfettered 

market-place to have its course.  What happens, Mr. Speaker, is 

what has taken place in Saskatchewan and is taking place in 

Canada these days.  The rich get richer, and the poor get 

poorer, and the middle class shrinks away. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, it's an interesting coincidence.  In fact, 

it's not a coincidence; it is an interesting characteristic of social 

democratic government in our land that when you have social 

democratic government operating with conscience for the will 

of the people, what 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

you also have is a growing middle class as part of that 

government dedicated to equalizing opportunity and security 

for the people of the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly it can be said that that 

objective is only achieved when you have a government that is 

dedicated to working today for tomorrow, together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, about two years ago we had an important family 

chat in our house.  We sat down to decide whether I was going 

to offer my name for nomination to run again in the 1991 

provincial election.  And true to form, as we started our 

conversation . . . and those who know my wife will understand 

-- perhaps it comes as a consequence of living with the member 

for Moose Jaw Palliser, Mr. Speaker, but she's a woman who 

comes to the point. 

 

As we sat down to discuss our family's future involvement in 

politics, she started with a question, with this one-word 

question: Why?  Why? she said.  Why do you even want to be 

there?  You know what it's going to be like.  After nine years of 

Tory government, you're going to have the treasury that has 

been plundered, you're going to have people in this province 

who have been suffering for nine years.  And people are going 

to want to have every bona fide injustice that they have 

experienced under the Tories remedied in the first six months.  

And the cupboards are going to be bare.  You know that.  Why 

do you even want to be there? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's nothing profound about the answer.  

It's the same answer in our household as it is in 54 other 

households, I know for sure, of members who serve in this 

Assembly.  The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that it's for our 

children.  Not to make life easy for me, but to provide some 

imitation miracle cure today, but based on the reality, Mr. 

Speaker, to come -- to serve for the welfare of our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no hiding the fact that we have a harsh 

reality to deal with.  It's referred to in the first section of the 

Speech from the Throne, entitled: "Putting Our Financial 

House in Order", which is a pretty kind way, Mr. Speaker, of 

saying this place is in a mess. 

 

And how did we get here, how did we get here?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, let me refer you to some information provided to the 

people of Saskatchewan as recently as just last week, Mr. 

Speaker, in Public Accounts, when the Public Accounts 

Committee of the Legislative Assembly which received a 

special report from the Provincial Auditor. 

 

And what did the Provincial Auditor tell the Public Accounts 

Committee of the Legislative Assembly?  When he looked at 

the 1989-90 and 1990-91, the final two fiscal years of the PC 

government, what did he say?  He said there's a few problems, 

Mr. Speaker, and he pointed them out. 

 

He said well, the PC government in those years, their 

departments and Crown corporations, paid $439,000 for 

advertising to agencies, to advertising agencies, for goods or 

services that they never received.  Wonder where the money 

went.  I wonder if there ever was any advertising delivered to 

somebody other than those departments, Mr. Speaker. 

The Special Report by the Provincial Auditor said as well . . . 

you know sometimes I remember a former colleague, Gordon 

Snyder, former member of Moose Jaw South.  I ran together 

with him shoulder to shoulder in 1982, and I can remember 

standing on the platform when he'd refer to the ideas of the PC 

Party at that time and their plans to spend like drunken sailors.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor said he's right.  He 

said he's right.  The Provincial Auditor said the Saskatchewan 

Liquor Board paid expenses totalling $16,162 for PC ministers 

to attend the Big Valley Jamboree -- expenses for passes, for 

food, for trailer rentals, and for booze.  Spending like drunken 

sailors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he went on to say, well bet it wasn't just at 

the Big Valley Jamboree that they had a party at the expense of 

the people of Saskatchewan.  No.  No, they didn't have to leave 

home.  It came right to their offices in this building, Mr. 

Speaker -- $19,285 of liquor to ministers' offices from the 

Liquor Board. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he said, well there were 130 people who 

were working for the Government of Saskatchewan in a 

department or a Crown corporation who didn't even show up 

where the pay cheque was coming from -- 130 of them.  In fact 

when he looked for them he found that over half of them were 

working for the premier -- were working for the former PC 

premier, the member from Estevan.  Over half of them.  Oh, the 

pay cheque was coming out of departments and Crown 

corporations but the work wasn't being done there.  It was 

political work in the office of the premier. 

 

But the ultimate indignity, Mr. Speaker, the ultimate indignity 

from the special report, the Provincial Auditor says -- you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? -- he says 19 of them, 19 of them 

they couldn't even find them anywhere.  Not only were they not 

working where the cheque was coming from, they didn't know 

where they were.  Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says 

they had ghosts on the payroll -- ghosts.  Ghosts.  Ghosts. 

 

And so what that has meant, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 

Legislative Assembly and the Public Accounts Committee, it 

has been turned into the ghost busters.  That's what they are 

these days, Mr. Speaker.  Ghost busters. 

 

Nineteen people being paid for by the PC government who they 

couldn't even find. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, it's kind of interesting.  The 

former minister of Social Services, Grant Schmidt, he had this 

notion.  I remember him standing in his place in this Assembly 

and saying what a wonderful idea he thought it was that the 

poor of our province should have to show up at the welfare 

offices every month to collect their cheque.  It never dawned on 

him, Mr. Speaker, that people who were collecting those PC 

contracts should ought not to have to show up every month to 

collect their cheque.  They never showed up at all and they 

collected their cheque.  Over $600,000 they collected their 

cheques. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

Mr. Speaker, Grant Schmidt and those members opposite were 

paying ghosts, and I say that they are sitting where they deserve 

to sit, having been determined by the people of Saskatchewan 

just what kind of responsible government they provided for us 

back in October 21, 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Ghosts.  Ghosts on the payroll, on the PC 

payroll.  Well, Mr. Speaker, what's the reality?  The reality is 

that in 1991, on October 21, the people of Saskatchewan for the 

third time in our history turned over the mess to the NDP. 

 

Tommy Douglas in 1944 inherited a deficit, Mr. Speaker, $185 

million.  It took him 21 years; in 1965 the last dollar and that 

debt was paid.  In 1944 the people of Saskatchewan turned over 

the mess to the NDP. 

 

In 1971, following the month in which the people of 

Saskatchewan, sad to say, Mr. Speaker, were the butt of jokes 

across the nation, we all remember the stories that people 

would say, will the last one out of Saskatchewan turn out the 

lights, at the end of the Liberal Ross Thatcher years.  In 1971 

premier Allan Blakeney inherited a deficit of over $700 

million. 

 

And in 1991 the Premier of Saskatchewan, the member for 

Riversdale, came into this building, Mr. Speaker, being turned 

over a deficit of 14 billion -- 14,000 million dollars.  For the 

third time, Mr. Speaker, in the history of the province the 

people have decided to turn the mess over to the NDP. 

 

And so where do we start?  As it says in this Speech from the 

Throne on page 1, Mr. Speaker, by "putting our financial house 

in order."  And why is that?  Why is that, Mr. Speaker?  The 

answer is one word.  Simply put, the answer is freedom -- 

political freedom, financial freedom, to make the decisions that 

you want to make.  Government serving its noble purposes, the 

equalizer of opportunity and security for the people who sent it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, objective number one: to put the financial 

house in order.  Will it be easy?  The answer is no.  Will it be 

quick?  The answer is also no.  Will it involve sacrifice?  The 

answer unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, is yes.  We all understand 

that.  Will the budget that will follow this debate on the Speech 

from the Throne be without sacrifice for the citizens of the 

province?  The answer is no. 

 

Will we succeed?  Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes.  We will 

succeed because we will do the same things that the New 

Democrat governments did in 1944 and in 1971.  We will go to 

work; we will roll up our sleeves.  We will make our plan to 

resolve the financial errors of the government before us; 

dedicated to achieving the objectives of a society in which 

there is equal opportunity and security, Mr. Speaker, with the 

hard decisions being made by ethical people on this side of the 

House.  We will go to work.  We will succeed like we did in 

the governments that came to office in 1944 and 1971 before us 

by working, I say, Mr. Speaker, today for tomorrow together. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, on July 1 of this year, 

Saskatchewan is going to celebrate a very important 

anniversary, the 30th anniversary of the introduction of 

Saskatchewan's finest gift to the people of Canada -- medicare. 

 

There will be people in this Assembly and there will be people 

around the province of Saskatchewan who will remember what 

went on in 1962 prior to the introduction of medicare on July 1.  

They will remember the work of the CCF and the NDP, of 

people like Woodrow Lloyd, Allan Blakeney, Bill Davies, the 

member from Riversdale who looks back to that time, Mr. 

Speaker, as one of the motivating forces that brought him to 

politics, and thank God for that. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan will remember the rallies 

against medicare, and they'll remember who inspired and who 

led those rallies against medicare.  Was it the black cats or was 

it the white cats, Mr. Speaker?  It was both of them.  This was a 

coalition.  This was a coalition  They will remember the leader 

of the Liberals of the day, Ross Thatcher, coming up to this 

building and kicking the door in his opposition to medicare.  

They will remember the keep-our-doctors committee organized 

by the Tories in opposition to medicare. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in those days there was only one party with 

the courage and with the vision and with the will to bring 

medicare to the people of Saskatchewan as part of the will of 

the people of Saskatchewan; that was the CCF, the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. And that commitment remains just as strong today as 

it did on July 1, 1962. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- But did Tommy Douglas at the time, Mr. 

Speaker, look at the introduction of medicare and say, there it 

is; the vision has been achieved.  We've done what we set out 

to do.  No, Mr. Speaker, he didn't.  Even in those days, Tommy 

said there's three steps.  There's hospitalization for the people 

of Saskatchewan in 1947.  There's medicare for the people of 

Saskatchewan in 1962. 

 

But Tommy told us all there's one more step.  The third step in 

the vision of health care for the people of Saskatchewan is what 

Tommy called preventive health care.  The word in the '90s, 

Mr. Speaker, is the wellness model -- wellness.  A belief, Mr. 

Speaker, that a healthy society, healthy people, and a healthy 

society are even stronger than people who see their health care 

system as purely a sickness remedy system. 

 

And it was under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, that things like public 

health were allowed to grow and to flourish with a belief that 

an illness prevented is worth even more than an illness cured.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the difficulty of the financial 

situation that has been roped around the necks of this 

government and the people of Saskatchewan by those 

irresponsible members opposite, this government, Mr. Speaker, 

is prepared to move. 

 

It's prepared to move forward in health care for our 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

people, and we have announced our commitment to the 

wellness model, to preventive health care, Mr. Speaker, which 

is community based in both its planning and its delivery, which 

is co-operative in its structure.  It involves people and 

communities working together with the incentive to prevent 

illness. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  Let me point even further 

to this political commitment of the government, this New 

Democrat government, to the wellness model.  Because you 

see, Mr. Speaker, when you're dedicated to the wellness model 

that doesn't involve just health care -- certainly that it does.  

But it involves as well a commitment to dealing with things 

like poverty, with the environment, and to occupational health 

and safety. 

 

And so I point out, Mr. Speaker, that in addition to, and I quote 

from page 7 from of the Speech from our Throne: 

 

 Our view of health care must become much broader.  The 

wellness approach stresses the need to improve our collective 

well-being by enhancing our social and physical 

environment, adopting healthier lifestyles, working to prevent 

disease and disability, helping the elderly to live more 

independently, and encouraging people to be more 

responsible for their own state of health. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from page 6 of the 

Speech from the Throne: 

 

 The Environmental Charter of Rights and Responsibilities 

Act will be introduced to guarantee public access to 

environmental information, and protection for people who 

report environmental accidents or environmentally hazardous 

practices. 

 

And I point out as well, Mr. Speaker, on page 8, the Speech 

from the Throne says, and I quote: 

 

 Ten years ago Saskatchewan had one of the lowest child 

poverty rates in Canada.  Today we have one of the highest.  

One child in five (in Saskatchewan) grows up poor. 

 

 (The) government is committed to tackling poverty.  The cost 

of children growing up on the outskirts of hope is too high, 

both in terms of human potential and increased demands on 

taxpayers.  Hunger and nutrition programs will be enhanced 

in co-operation with local communities. 

 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 (The) government is also reviewing all income support 

programs. 

 

And man, has that been long overdue.  And it says on page 9: 

 

 Breaking the poverty cycle also means creating opportunities 

for training and employment. 

 

And I compliment the Minister of Social Services for her 

announcement of that very program last week, which will 

provide some hope for employment for the poorest of the poor 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And on page 10 of the Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

 Amendments will be made to The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act to better protect working people on the job site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I can be permitted to go about three or four 

more minutes, I'll just wrap up my comments, if that's 

acceptable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I say that this government is 

committed to wellness, I say that proud to be an MLA, proud to 

be a New Democrat committed to wellness in our health system 

but in the care of the nurturing of the environment on the work 

place and for the poor of our province as well. 

 

And so I remind the members of this Assembly of the words of 

the former premier, Tommy Douglas.  As we wrestle with the 

ability to implement this vision in these times for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Tommy said: Courage, my friends.  It's never 

too late to build a better world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I conclude 

by stating my support for this Speech from the Throne, drawing 

from page 11 the conclusion of the speech itself, and state my 

personal and political commitment along with my colleagues in 

government to begin the task of deficit reduction, to set new 

standards of open, honest, and accountable government, to 

provide hope for the disadvantaged, and to renew the 

Saskatchewan spirit of co-operation and community. 

 

And along with my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I ask my 

constituents and the people of Saskatchewan to judge our 

government, as it says in the Speech from the Throne, by the 

success over the term of office as to whether we have restored 

common sense and competence to the management of the 

public treasury, whether we have restored public faith in the 

ability of politicians to serve the public interest, whether we've 

given new hope to the less fortunate, and whether we have 

brought people together. 

 

It's with a commitment to those objectives, Mr. Speaker, that I 

stand proud to support this Speech from the Throne.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


