




















































Hansard: August 12, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2341 

 August 12, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

number of pages of petitions dealing with the chiropractic 

concerns of the citizens of Saskatchewan.  And I would like to 

read the prayer for the members assembled here: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are from . . . again, from all over the 

province, from Saskatoon, mostly from Saskatoon; from North 

Battleford, Edenwold, Regina, Regina, lots of Regina's here; 

Balgonie, Grenfell, Lumsden, Craven, Regina.  The rest of 

them, Ruddell; I notice some Saskatoon, a whole bunch again, 

and from La Ronge.  Virtually from every part of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions today dealing with the issue of chiropractic care in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I'll only read the last sentence: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners from the city of 

Saskatoon, Regina, Blaine Lake, Saskatoon, Fort Qu'Appelle, 

Qu'Appelle.  Basically people, Mr. Speaker, from all over the 

province of Saskatchewan, I do present. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

from people from across the province.  I'll just read the last 

sentence: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from places like Estevan, 

Carnduff, Alida, Benson, Bienfait, Midale, North Portal.  

Several here from Edenwold.  A large number from Regina.  

And we see several here from places like Pilot Butte as well.  I 

table these now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

dealing with chiropractic care in the province.  Mr. Speaker, 

these petitions are from Regina primarily, and the last two are 

from the Weyburn area.  Mr. Speaker, I present these now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

have petitions regarding chiropractic care from across the 

province: Weyburn, Radville . . . (inaudible) . . . Yellow Grass, 

different places from across the province.  And I want to 

present them as a part of the petition to the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure as well to present 

petitions to the Assembly signed by people from Swift Current, 

Estevan, Cadillac, Ponteix, Morse, Kyle, Glen Ewen, Carnduff, 

Regina, and many other points in the province. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

today that concern the chiropractic problem that other petitions 

have been presented on here this morning.  I believe there's 

over a hundred names on these eight sheets of paper coming 

from such places as P.A. (Prince Albert), Big River, 

Shellbrook.  We have Unity, Saskatoon, Wilkie, Scott, and 

Moose Jaw is in here, quite a few now from Meath Park in 

Moose Jaw and Birch Hills and all of those places up along that 

northern area. 

 

The list goes on and on here, and we have many, many from 

Saskatoon as well in there, some more from Moose Jaw in the 

middle.  And even Regina again, we find some here from 

Regina as well.  And I'll just present these at this time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

some petitions to present from the citizens of the province 

concerned about chiropractic fees that may be charged to them.  

These people come from Langham, Dalmeny, Saskatoon, and 

Swift Current areas. 

 

I hereby present these petitions. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the FeedGAP program. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

may be pleased to cause the government to restore the livestock 

cash advance program. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I have the distinct pleasure of introducing 

four young lads from the . . . three young lads from the 

province of Saskatchewan and one from the country of Ireland.  

I met three of these people only today and one I have known 

for approximately 28 years. 

 

But the two people from Regina that I do want to introduce are 

Roger and Robert Petry.  I wish they would stand.  These two 

gentlemen are Rhodes scholars from the city of Regina and 

who've spent one year . . . or two years at Oxford. 

 

And the third person, sitting in the middle, is from Ireland, Joe 

McCarney.  He is at Oxford and he's visiting here -- got here 

yesterday -- and he's visiting in Saskatchewan and he's going 

out to B.C. (British Columbia), Alberta and B.C., and then he's 

heading back to Oxford again. 

 

And the last person that is seated is also an Oxford graduate, 

my son Brian, who arrived last night from Ottawa.  And he is 

going to be working at the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, 

doing his articling there for the next eight months. 

 

I ask all members to give a warm welcome to these four young 

gentlemen in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How did you get such a good-looking 

kid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- Married to a good-looking wife. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Rural Development 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP government opposite in these few short months has 

brought havoc and despair to the residents of rural 

Saskatchewan.  They have threatened to close rural hospitals 

and they've threatened to tear up highways and they've ruined 

the programs of farm support, and the list goes on and on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Rural Development today.  

Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly if you have any 

further plans to reduce the level of funding for your 

department?  Can you tell us if RMs (rural municipality) have 

anything further to fear from your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should 

be aware that in standard governmental processes budgets are 

struck and plans are made and then followed. 

I know that's a very rare process for the members opposite, but 

it is the process this government intends to follow. 

 

The budget has been struck for the year and there are no other 

plans other than the budget plan which is hopefully going to be 

passed by this Assembly soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

your ship is sinking faster and faster today because there is one 

more leak in your ship of state. 

 

We have been contacted by a reliable source through your 

government who has disclosed the fact that your government 

has ordered -- ordered, mind you -- the Department of Rural 

Development to find an additional 30 per cent cut in funding 

for either a minibudget to be presented this fall or to be brought 

in in next spring's budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is this.  This would be absolutely 

devastating, Mr. Minister.  Will you now confirm that this 

information is correct, and will you confirm that to this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the budgeting processes of 

government are established.  And there are, as I said 

previously, no immediate plans in this budget to have a 

different budget plan than the one that's before the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that is truly a strange 

answer coming from a government who has now ordered 

further reductions to be taking place in future budgets.  How 

can you sit there and tell us those kinds of facts when you 

know full well what is going on? 

 

The same source tells us that $6 million of those cuts are to 

come out of revenue sharing to rural municipalities; $6 million 

in addition to the millions that you've already milked from rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: Mr. Minister, can 

you confirm that this piece of disastrous information is in fact 

true? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know if the alleged 

leak that the member opposite is talking about is the two-year 

budget plan we announced when we announced the budget that 

all the municipalities know about.  That may be the leak about 

which the member speaks.  Maybe he could clarify himself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, it's truly amazing how you can 

feign being confused when you know full well that this was a 

secret plan that you had no intentions of 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

springing on anyone until later this fall. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you also confirm for this Assembly, and the 

thousands of rural residents that are so adversely affected by 

your government's bungling policies, can you confirm that you 

have issued a memo to the employees of Rural Development, 

instructing them to feel out the reeves and employees of rural 

municipalities to uncover the easiest way to facilitate the 

amalgamation of rural municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is simply this: will 

you confirm this, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, in the dream world of the 

members opposite, there are secret plans popping out all over.  

It's absolutely a delightful life they must lead.  Yesterday it was 

a secret plan in Crop Insurance which I hope to be able to 

enlighten the members about soon, as soon as I have a chance 

to answer the question I took notice on yesterday.  Now there 

are secret plans here. 

 

The fact is this government engages in regular, legitimate 

budget planning exercises.  As the members opposite know, 

even though they were very unconscious of the state of the 

finances of their own government when they ran it, we found 

ourselves facing a $1.3 billion current deficit this year.  We 

have dealt with about 800 million of that in the first year, and 

we have $517 million left to go. 

 

Now the people in Saskatchewan know this is tough to deal 

with. I feel very much for all the people across Saskatchewan 

who are very courageously facing the difficulties that that kind 

of exercise requires.  But at the same time I feel sympathy for 

the people of Saskatchewan, I can only feel anger and disgust 

for the mess the members opposite have created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you seem surprised that there would be yet some more leaks in 

your government and that these kind of things are happening.  

And you suggest that they couldn't possibly happen.  I suggest 

you talk to the Minister of Labour, who also had his Bill 

presented in this very Assembly and tabled for him by this 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Minister, your revenge on rural Saskatchewan seems to 

have no end.  This information clearly points to the fact that 

you are planning to eliminate all funding to Rural Development 

such that you can close the department down and absorb it 

somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: can you tell 

us, Mr. Minister, in your usual articulate manner, how these 

further cut-backs will affect rural residents, the very people that 

you have promised to protect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, our government has a 

commitment to work with communities to design their own 

futures in a positive way.  I am appalled by the 

negative fearmongering that emerges from the members 

opposite, whether it's about plans to improve the health care 

system or plans to work co-operatively with municipalities to 

plan for a future; whether it's for plans to work with economic 

development groups to look for a more positive future, whether 

it's for plans to work with individual businesses to plan their 

own future, whether it's with consultations with the livestock 

industry or farmers.  The members opposite can simply find a 

whole array of strange plots and secret plans in their strange 

and distorted minds.  And I can't help you in that matter, I'm 

sorry. 

 

Ties Between Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Government 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question 

for the same member in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture.  

Mr. Speaker, many Wheat Pool delegates in my area that I've 

talked to over the last number of months have expressed some 

concern about the political agenda of this Minister of 

Agriculture.  Many people in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool are 

quite disturbed at the partisan support also shown by their 

president, Mr. Garf Stevenson, at times for this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the real concern out there from past 

experiences of some people in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

that their elected representative and your government are tied a 

little too closely, would you tell the Assembly today if there are 

any direct links between Sask Pool and your government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely appalling 

that a member of a once-upon-a-time government and a 

member of a supposedly loyal opposition in a respectable 

legislature would attack one of the most significant economic 

and social institutions in the province and would make 

disparaging remarks about leadership of that organization -- 

elected leadership -- which has shown exemplary leadership in 

providing stability for Saskatchewan communities, in providing 

leadership in economic development, in providing leadership in 

business and business measures.  I do not understand the will 

of the members opposite other than to create more division.  

The future of Saskatchewan is not in that kind of division.  It is 

in the co-operation which Sask Wheat Pool itself exemplifies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, no one in the opposition made 

Garf Stevenson contribute money to the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party.  No one in the opposition made Garf 

Stevenson sit on the Gass Commission as one of your 

hand-picked people along with other NDP partisans.  No one 

over here forced him to do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, many Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegates 

have been concerned with the taking away of farmers' rights 

which you are doing with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) Bill.  They've done it in writing by the hundreds.  Mr. 

Minister, you also know full well that these close ties cause 

concern.  Would you today, Mr. Minister, confirm that Mr. 

Stevenson's 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

personal assistant, a Mr. Nial Kuyek, has been seconded into 

your department as your senior planning advisor.  Would you 

confirm that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Please let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it continues to astound me 

that the members opposite would take a run at a venerable 

institution and a respected Saskatchewan and Canadian citizen, 

a person who has served the farm community well, who has 

been elected to his office, and whose political contributions 

have never been an interest of mine.  But surely in a democracy 

people have the right to make a political contribution to those 

to whom they please.  That's hopefully the basic understanding.  

I suspect there are people who work for our government who 

made political contributions to your party, and that's fine with 

me. 

 

The fact is that Mr. Nial Kuyek is becoming a member of our 

senior staff in the Department of Agriculture.  But you should 

be aware of the fact that Mr. Kuyek has not only worked for 

the Sask Wheat Pool, he has also worked for the federal 

government.  He is an honourable professional who will be 

helping work in our Department of Agriculture.  And I would 

hope the members opposite would see that as a positive thing 

and not a negative thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, you're absolutely right that Mr. 

Stevenson has the right to make political contributions to 

whoever he feels like.  But in the case of Saskatchewan, he 

makes them to the NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, don't you think in your duty as Agriculture 

minister, that there would not be literally dozens of farm 

organizations in this province that are wondering why Mr. 

Stevenson's personal aide gets to help you run your 

department? 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, you can ignore the stock growers.  You 

can hold a briefing here in this building and say that there isn't 

room in 218 for the western wheat growers.  I mean, what a 

joke, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell us today why Garf Stevenson 

has direct access to the decision-making process of the 

Department of Agriculture when no other agricultural group in 

this province has that access?  Can you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The questions and the factual base of the 

comments of the members opposite have reached an all-time 

low.  The fact is that if you want to refer to the western wheat 

growers, we have had an excellent relationship with the 

western wheat growers since we came to office.  They've 

accompanied us to Ottawa when you would not.  They have 

participated in every consultative exercise that we have 

engaged in on agricultural discussions since we formed 

government. 

The member opposite obviously has only partial information.  

When we met with farm organizations to report back from the 

Agriculture ministers' meeting in Halifax, we met with 15 to 20 

farm leaders on one day and we met with the other 15 or 20 

farm leaders that have a critical interest in Saskatchewan 

agriculture on another day, several days hence.  And the 

western wheat growers were very pleased to be there, as were 

many other farm organizations. 

 

With respect to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, if the members 

opposite are accusing the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool structure 

of being driven by only a president . . . they are a democratic 

organization.  And I'm sure that the secondment of Mr. Kuyek 

to our department was approved by the organization, as I'm 

sure was his secondment to the federal Conservative 

government for two years before he returned to Sask Wheat 

Pool. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  It's obvious that the members of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  There is so much noise that I can't 

hear the member asking his question.  I ask the members, 

please give the member his right to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's very difficult 

some days to ask tough questions in here.  Mr. Minister, there 

are dozens of organizations in this province that would like the 

same invitation, the same courtesy.  Now, Mr. Minister, how 

was Mr. Kuyek's employment arranged?  Is it a secondment?  

Is it a contract? 

 

And I wonder if you could tell me who is paying his salary.  Is 

it Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, or is it the government? Or is it 

both?  I want to know what his job description is.  And will you 

table his contract or his OC (order in council)?  Will you do 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the insinuation that there is 

something strange about the Government of Saskatchewan 

seconding a very professional civil servant -- a professional 

civil servant who first served the federal Conservative 

government for two years before returning to the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool -- that there is something strange about that, that 

we should go find a professional civil servant and bring him in 

to serve Saskatchewan through the Department of Agriculture 

is a strange inference. 

 

I do not have the detail on the exact arrangements, but 

Saskatchewan Agriculture is obviously paying him because 

he's going to be working for Saskatchewan Agriculture and he 

is seconded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that information is very 

interesting to a lot of people in this province because as 

recently as two weeks ago the Minister of Economic 

Development flew off to the Democratic convention in New 

York and took along some cover people with him, 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

 one of whom was a representative of Sask Pool supposedly 

looking at the pasta business. 

 

Now your government has done everything in its power to sink 

Saska Pasta in Swift Current.  And no one can really figure out 

why you're doing this.  Now, Mr. Minister, the fact that Mr. 

Stevenson's top EA (executive assistant) is now your employee, 

has direct access to the information of government, does that 

mean that for the support that Mr. Stevenson has shown you in 

the past, that you're now somehow bungling up the pasta 

business to give Sask Pool an opening? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the only bungling that's 

going on is the members opposite trying to ask a question about 

professional civil servants who ought to have some respect by 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We make a perfectly legitimate contract with a very 

professional servant of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool who has 

been previously a very professional civil servant of the federal 

government, of the same political stripe as the members 

opposite, and the members opposite challenge it. 

 

Imagine it.  Imagine challenging that kind of a legitimate 

contract with a good civil servant, when the members opposite 

hired 130 people who worked not at all in their government and 

paid them salaries.  I do not understand the logic of the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Obviously, Mr. Minister, you don't see the 

potential for conflict of interest that many people in the 

agriculture sector in this province are going to see.  And I 

guess, Mr. Minister, it's too bad that your government is so 

blind that you can't see how sensitive this could be with other 

farm organizations. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think given the light that this has been 

handled secretively, behind closed doors, don't you think it 

would be appropriate that perhaps some of the other farm 

organizations in Saskatchewan should have the ability to give 

some input into the fact that when you are hiring people on 

your senior executive positions, that they also be given the 

same opportunities as Sask Pool?  Don't you think so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the exercise of creating a 

strong civil service in the province is one of getting the best 

advice from everyone and getting the best people from 

everywhere.  Within the departments within which I function, 

we look broadly for qualified civil servants, and we will 

continue to do that. 

 

The question of whether it's sensitive to other farm 

organizations when someone is hired from one farm 

organization ought to have no more significance than is it 

sensitive to the federal government or to other provincial 

governments if we were to hire somebody from the 

federal government.  I don't understand the dilemma of the 

members opposite in this regard. 

 

We followed perfectly legitimate hiring practices to hire very 

professional civil servants from an organization that is broadly 

representative of Saskatchewan people, whose board of 

directors I'm sure includes people of all political stripes.  And 

the members opposite try to create the public vision of 

attacking one of Saskatchewan's most venerable businesses and 

one of Canada's major businesses.  I don't . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Yield Adjustment Deadline 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to ask the 

Minister of Agriculture a question, as I started yesterday.  I 

want to ask you, sir, whether you have any more information as 

regards to the July 31 deadline.  And my question to you, sir, is 

this: why didn't you notify the farmers of this deadline that was 

secretly imposed on them on July 31? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a marvellous example 

of co-operation and clear joint-thinking here.  That was just 

exactly what I was intending to rise and explain, since I took 

notice yesterday of that question. 

 

I want to read to you the explanation of where things are at 

now in the light of the over-dramatic, inaccurate kind of 

description . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just ask the minister to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The members opposite have yesterday 

described as a secret plan the question of the deadline for 

corrections.  The deadline for customers to request an 

amendment to their 1991 production was July 31, 1992.  This 

deadline was established to coincide with the final delivery 

date for the 1991-92 crop year. 

 

However, deliveries on the '91-92 permit book were extended 

in some areas up to August 10, 1992.  As well there was 

concern that customers may not be aware of the July 31 

deadline for requesting amendments.  Therefore, as I said 

yesterday, the minister in charge, who has made a host of very 

sensitive and good decisions in the past and will continue to, 

much different than the previous administration did . . . 

therefore this deadline has been extended to the time when the 

customer begins harvest.  That is, there is no fixed deadline 

date. 

 

A deadline is required for requesting amendments to 1991 

production.  Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation cannot 

discern between old and new grain.  Therefore, once new grain 

is in the bin, we are unable to determine 1991 production; 

hence the harvest deadline.  It is felt that this deadline will give 

customers ample opportunity to determine if their 1991 

production has been determined to their satisfaction.  The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation will deal with each 

customer's concerns on an individual basis. 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to ask you to 

table that document as well.  And I want to ask you this 

question.  Why does it take us bringing these issues before you 

before you legitimize the actions that you take so that the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan who are farmers can 

decide and determine what you're going to do?  Nobody knew 

about it until we told you.  You didn't know about it until we 

told you.  And now, would you provide an opportunity for each 

of the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to know for 

sure that they have this option available to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I presume that farmers who 

have concerns about their production records from last year 

would have contacted the Crop Insurance Corporation.  All the 

farmers I know are extremely competent business managers 

and would make those kinds of decisions if they thought there 

was a misrepresentation on their crop records.  The fact is, as I 

said yesterday, it did not require a question of the members 

opposite.  The minister in charge of Crop Insurance along with 

the competent administration of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation had already sensed the dilemma that had arisen 

because of the extension to August 10, and they have made 

provision for extensions for farmers to receive that kind of 

clarification.  And I'm sure that the Crop Insurance Corporation 

will do the necessary job in making sure farmers' records are 

accurate to their satisfaction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Attorney General.  Yesterday, Mr. Attorney General, the 

Minister of Agriculture said twice the following: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought to be aware that the 

courts will continue to deal with these matters. 

 

And he's referring to the GRIP Bill.  And then he went on to 

say later in a question I asked him: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, as I've already once indicated to the member 

opposite, this matter will continue to be dealt with by the 

courts. 

 

My question to the Attorney General is this: do you agree, Mr. 

Attorney General, with the Minister of Agriculture here in this 

Assembly that the GRIP Bill will continue to be dealt with by 

the courts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have no idea, Mr. Speaker, what 

disposition the courts will make of those actions as time goes 

on and as events occur.  And I wouldn't attempt to 

second-guess that.  So my answer to the Leader of the 

Opposition is simply, I don't know what will happen to those 

actions. 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I didn't hear 

ministerial statements called. 

 

The Speaker: -- I didn't . . . Would the member say that again?  

I couldn't hear you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I didn't hear ministerial statements 

called. 

 

The Speaker: -- I definitely called ministerial statements, but 

the noise level was rather high.  But we have done this before.  

By leave of the Assembly, we can certainly go back to 

ministerial statements, and I ask that the member have leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Economic Development Initiatives 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the offer 

of the members of the opposition to allow for a ministerial 

statement.  I will just send this copy across. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today to rise today to inform the 

Assembly of two important economic development initiatives 

taking place and announced in the province today.  Mr. 

Speaker, earlier today I was accompanied by the Premier and 

Minister of Finance to a sod-turning ceremony for a new pipe 

mill at IPSCO plant here in Regina.  Mr. Speaker, this will 

mean jobs for Regina and Saskatchewan people -- good, stable, 

well-paying jobs, the kind we need in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what is very important about this announcement, Mr. 

Speaker, is this expansion is being done without the aid of 

taxpayers' money.  We did not have to invest any taxpayers' 

money in order to get this expansion at IPSCO.  All we had to 

do, Mr. Speaker, was to listen and to co-operate.  We were able 

to assist the corporation by some degree by tax changes they 

required to make this venture work.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the 

attitude we have to return to in this province, with the 

government and business community working together to 

create wealth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also draw the House's attention to an 

event this day, that is, the official opening of the Norquay 

Alfalfa plant.  This plant will create 10 permanent and 35 

part-time jobs in the Norquay area and will have spin-off 

benefits for local farmers, giving them a stable market for 

alfalfa in the province.  Like the IPSCO expansion, this is new, 

advanced technology which will assure the plant a long life. 

 

Again the government was able to work in co-operation with 

local business people to ensure that this operation would come 

about.  In this case, a loan of $1.5 million was made by 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). 

 

Mr. Speaker, slowly but surely the Saskatchewan economy is 

regaining its strength and confidence it once 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

had.  It is doing so not because of massive injections of capital 

from government or from taxpayers, as everyone knows we 

just don't have that kind of money in the province as a result of 

10 years of mismanagement.  It is doing so because of renewed 

confidence in our province and our people in a renewed sense 

of co-operation between government and business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the creation of new jobs is the number one 

priority of this government and of the people of the province.  

On behalf of the Saskatchewan people, I ask the Assembly to 

join with me in extending congratulations to IPSCO and to the 

Norquay Alfalfa plant on the good news they bring to our 

province today.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, well, well, the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade standing up in 

the House and taking credit, taking credit once again, for two 

more Conservative initiatives, Mr. Speaker -- two more 

initiatives that were started by this, the previous administration.  

Two more initiatives. 

 

Pretty soon, pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, we'll witness a few 

more.  They'll be standing . . . they'll be having a big grand 

opening downtown here before very long for Crown Life, and I 

can see the minister standing in front of the cameras and 

saying, we're very pleased to have this initiative coming . . . 

started by the new government, the NDP government that 

brought this thing into Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what will happen.  The minister will be standing up and 

speaking in all of the glowing tones that he's always capable of 

giving; wax eloquently about the great initiatives that his 

government is putting forward. 

 

And we'll see the same thing, I predict, Mr. Speaker, at the 

FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) relocation once they arrive 

here in Saskatchewan.  Same thing, Mr. Speaker, stand up and 

the minister will say, we take full credit, we take full credit for 

the relocation of FCC. 

 

Pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are going 

to wonder about, where are your 700 job-creating companies 

that are coming into Saskatchewan?  In the throne speech, 700 

-- 700, he said, with a straight face, the Minister of Finance -- 

700 companies are going to be relocating to Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, not a single one, not a single one have 

you been able to bring into this province that is new, that wasn't 

started by the previous administration.  Not a single one.  Piper 

Aircraft back in the spring, Mr. Speaker, the minister stood up 

and said, they'll be building planes in Saskatchewan before 

very long.  And what did we see?  Absolutely nothing. 

 

The jobs are important in this province, and we're happy to see 

that they're proceeding -- happy to see that they're proceeding 

with Tory initiatives.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Devine and the proposed 

subamendment moved by Mr. Muirhead. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In addressing this 

question this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I guess having examined 

why we're doing it, I have to admit that it appears that we are 

into this part of the debate as a result of a bit of a slip-up in our 

original amendment.  Consequently we had to come up with a 

subamendment to the amendment in order to get the thing 

straightened out so that in fact it could work the way it should. 

 

Now you would think, Mr. Speaker, that that should be a 

simple enough process, to change a little bit of an amendment 

with a subamendment so that in fact you could get the whole 

intention of the opposition properly into perspective.  

Unfortunately we had some indications that government 

members won't assist us by helping to vote this subamendment 

into the amendment so that we can have it clarified. 

 

With view to that, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon us to take 

some time to explain to the government members why in fact 

we want to have this change made in an attempt to gain their 

support.  Because obviously they do outnumber us, and without 

their support we won't be able to get this amendment into the 

record as we would like to have had it to begin with. 

 

So we're asking for their support on the subamendment.  It's not 

committing the government to supporting the entire notion that 

we have about the GRIP Bill at all.  It's helping us to improve 

the approach that we take in making sure that the amendment is 

worded the way we wanted it. 

 

Quite simply stated, Mr. Speaker -- for those who may not have 

been listening earlier -- we want different people to do the 

negotiating and the consultation between our two groups than 

the ones that we'd originally set out to imply should do that. 

 

We're not saying that our House leaders are not capable.  In 

fact, they are so very capable that that was our first intention, 

was to pick the best negotiators that we had.  These are 

gentlemen who negotiate on a daily basis on all of the issues 

that concern this very Assembly and the ability of the 

Assembly to work in any fashion whatsoever.  There has to be 

some spirit of co-operation between these gentlemen.  And if 

there weren't that, this Assembly would accomplish nothing 

ever. 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we naturally presumed that 

these would be the two gentlemen that would best negotiate.  

We discovered, after reflection though, that these two 

gentlemen are not necessarily the two people that have the best 

insight into the particular problem, that being a discussion on 

the GRIP Bill. 

 

For example, our House Leader is not, admittedly, into pulse 

crop growing, and he's not into the kind of farming that is most 

affected by the GRIP Bill.  He certainly has an interest in 

agriculture with his very successful hog operation, but he's not 

as close to it as our other agricultural experts are. 

 

(1445) 

 

I think the same, probably in reflection, holds true for the 

Government House Leader.  Although he's had a background in 

farming, his extensive work in government circles in the past 

few years has probably lent to keep him away from the actual 

hands-on effect of farming that the Minister of Agriculture 

must certainly have. 

 

And so we have suggested in our discussions, Mr. Speaker, that 

instead of the House leaders carrying on meaningful 

negotiations in this area, that perhaps we ought to change 

horses in mid-stream in this case, and ask our ministers of 

Agriculture and our past minister of Agriculture to . . . and the 

associate ministers of Agriculture to be the ones that will 

discuss this very important Bill and the kinds of amendments 

that should go into it. 

 

It's unfortunate that we can't include all of the speakers in the 

House at one time, Mr. Speaker, because I know that they have 

a lot to contribute, and I'm sure that they will be anxious to get 

up after I've finished speaking to let us know just exactly what 

they feel about this particular subject. 

 

Now we've talked for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, about why 

we should change the people that would be directly involved in 

the negotiating process.  And I think it's proper if I use a couple 

of examples of why these people would be more qualified so 

that the government members will understand our requirement 

to have this subamendment passed. 

 

In the area of crop-specific natures within the GRIP Bill, I 

personally am a farmer and I didn't know for sure what that 

meant last year when we first started out with this GRIP 

program.  So if I didn't understand it, being a farmer, I'm sure 

that a lot of the government members who have no farm 

background might not understand that. 

 

And it would be important for us to have an individual like the 

past associate minister of Agriculture or the past minister of 

Agriculture, explain that to the government caucus members 

who might not have a clear understanding of it.  Crop specific, 

of course, being the opposite to the basket approach, is very 

important to many people in the province and it makes a big 

difference on how their financing would result from any kind 

of a GRIP program -- whether it be the '92 program or the '91 

program. 

This is a specific situation within either one of these two 

structures that will seriously affect the incomes of a lot of 

people.  For example -- and I'll just give a quick example of 

how this can work -- if I were to grow canola on my farm and 

we had a basket approach . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is allowed to 

indicate as to why he thinks the two members are more 

qualified to do some of the consultation negotiations, but then 

he can't go into detail into farm programs.  That's not pertinent 

and germane to this subamendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was going to try 

to bring about a conclusion to the fact that these two 

individuals would be a lot better ones to understand how these 

programs would work because of their background in 

agriculture, as different from the House leaders, for example. 

 

We thought that it was more important to begin with that we 

have the House leaders doing these negotiations because of 

their powerful personalities in the area of negotiation.  

However we've come to the conclusion that simply the ability 

to negotiate is not what we're really after.  What we're really 

after was the expertise of the individuals with regard to these 

specific programs that we are discussing. 

 

And I wanted the folks over there to understand that these 

kinds of differences within the programs affect people's 

livelihood and income so much that we have to have that expert 

input. 

 

I would go on to mention that probably the House leaders 

might not know what farm specifics in the program would be.  

And I'm suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of people out in our 

province who aren't directly connected with these programs, 

might not understand what the term "farm specific" would 

mean. 

 

And I think that it's important, when we get into an area as 

complex as this, that we have people doing the negotiating who 

have not only personal background in agriculture but also 

personal background in the developments of the programs. 

 

It's rather unique that we have two programs in this province in 

the past year that are so diversely different and yet they were 

designed by the very people who sit in this House, one on one 

side of the House, and the other on the other side of the House.  

Now granted they've had committees that have advised them 

and have had a lot of folks help them, but the real decision 

making, final decision-making process obviously for the new 

program had to lie in the hands of the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And of course the past program was definitely approved in 

final context by the minister of Agriculture in the past 

administration, and his associate minister having done a lot of 

the work in the consultation and travelling around the province.  

I believe, and I hope I'm not wrong here, but I believe the 

figure was used that he consulted directly with 40,000 

individual farmers, and that was at public meetings where those 

people were actually there, actually had an opportunity to ask 

questions of the minister.  He had to know his program 

thoroughly and 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

completely. 

 

Now the Minister of Agriculture has been to some public 

meetings.  We know he was in Shaunavon to discuss the new 

program and he certainly seems to have developed some 

expertise in that area. 

 

The two programs have got diametrically opposing forces for 

some reason that we don't seem to be able to meld together.  

And it is important that we have those individuals who have 

drawn up those two programs become the individuals who will 

work on this plan to try to come up with some kind of a 

melding of the programs and forging them together to become 

the best of all worlds. 

 

I'm suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that both programs are and were 

flawed.  I'm suggesting that the best program for farmers would 

be a program that would have these two GRIP programs put 

into one.  Take the best out of each and put them together. 

 

Now in order for that to happen the only way it could happen 

would be if the people that were directly involved were those 

people who were in fact on the negotiating team for both sides.  

And that's what we're asking for in this subamendment. 

 

We're asking that these be the two people that will do the 

consultation, that we would somehow get away from the 

partisan politics of this thing for a little while -- maybe lock 

them in a room until they both come out hungry and dry and 

starved and that sort of thing.  And if they don't have an answer 

with a workable plan we just don't let them out of the room 

until they come up with that.  Now that might be a little cruel, 

but it might be a way of doing it.  And if we were going to take 

that approach it would certainly have to be with the individuals 

that know how the programs work and what's involved. 

 

And that could only be those people that designed the two 

programs, seeing as how we have that good fortune of having 

both of those in this very House at this particular time.  So not 

speaking physically of course, but in terms of their being 

members and having worked on the programs. 

 

Now we've had all kinds of debates about the complications of 

the programs and the guidelines to the programs and we've 

talked about things like random auditing.  And again I suggest 

that a lot of folks, Mr. Speaker, might not understand what was 

meant by random auditing and how it affected the programs.  

The one program has that in it. The other program doesn't. 

 

And the two people that designed these programs could sit 

down, and perhaps if they talked for a while they'd be able to 

figure out, you know, why you couldn't maybe have the best of 

each of those philosophies put into one program to better serve 

all of the farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think in reality, Mr. Speaker, that most folks in this Assembly 

would like this program to work.  It's complicated.  There's no 

question about that fact.  It's very complicated, and it won't be 

easy to make it work.  And it 

won't be easy to ever design a program that won't have 

somebody finding some flaw with it or some fault with it.  But 

certainly both programs have been heavily criticized. 

 

And when you have two programs that are heavily criticized 

but both have good points and good merits in them, then the 

thing to do would be to try to meld them together to make one 

good, workable idea out of all of the ideas that have come 

together. 

 

Now it's unfortunate, I guess, that we didn't think of the fact 

that we should have the ministers of Agriculture and the past 

ministers of Agriculture involved in these negotiations at the 

start because that would have lessened the need for our debate 

here today. 

 

But it does seem that the government is not listening to what 

our intent is in this particular move.  It appears that they will 

vote against our subamendment strictly because they feel that 

as government they must defeat any idea that we must have. 

 

And I would suggest again to them that this is not supporting 

our concept of the GRIP Bill.  This is supporting only the 

subamendment that would allow us to change the people that 

would represent us in our concept of how we should go about 

solving the problems of this terrible mess that we have gotten 

into with these two GRIP programs. 

 

Having these individuals set down and draw up a new program 

with the good ideas from both programs and throwing away the 

bad aspects of them seems to me to be eminently the best 

solution in the long run.  Otherwise it simply has to end up 

going to the courts, and it's going to cost some folks just a lot 

of money, a lot of time, a lot of grief, a lot of anger.  And I 

don't really think that that is in the best interests of the province 

or certainly the best interests of the farming community. 

 

We've talked about things like buy-back options in these two 

programs.  And there's some serious need to have people that 

understand what that means working in the consultation, if our 

plan is going to work where we would try to get one good plan 

out of all the mess we're in. 

 

I think that our associate minister of Agriculture from the past 

administration has an extremely good idea of what's going on 

in this buy-back option because he was involved first of all 

with not providing it in the old program and then coming to 

realize that there were people out there that had specific, 

individual kinds of problems that needed to be addressed. 

 

I believe also that the new Minister of Agriculture in this 

administration may very well have not had an opportunity to 

talk to the same 40,000 farmers, that he might in fact learn 

something if he were to take some time to talk to this past 

associate minister of Agriculture about that very problem.  I 

think there's a lot of knowledge here that could be and should 

be shared. 

 

The buy-back option, of course, apparently runs into the area of 

irrigation which I have no personal expertise on.  We don't do 

any irrigating on our farm.  But those people that do certainly 

have larger input costs, they certainly 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

have a lot larger yields to deal with, and all kinds of things that 

are different.  And so the expertise that the minister of 

Agriculture of the past administration would have in those 

areas could be eminently important for the Minister of 

Agriculture in this administration to have access to. 

 

And it would just do my heart really good to see these 

individuals be able to sit down some place and to discuss these 

two programs at very great length, and perhaps get to know and 

understand one another as individuals as well as experts in the 

field of agriculture, with one absolute design in focus for their 

minds and that being to come up with a program of these two 

GRIP policies that in fact would make more people happy in 

our province and bring some much-needed cash flow to our 

rural communities. 

 

We've talked about moral hazards until it's almost a hazard to 

talk about moral hazards.  And it's . . . because really we offend 

farmers by saying that.  And they should be offended because 

what it's really saying is that we're calling them crooks.  And 

the farmers are not crooks out there.  It's almost unheard of for 

that to happen.  And I think it's really important that we get the 

air cleared on those kind of subjects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if our associate minister of Agriculture from the past 

administration and the minister of Agriculture were to have 

some input to the new Minister of Agriculture on that issue, I'm 

quite sure that they would come up with the realization that it is 

demeaning for farmers to be pointed at through various forms 

of the news media, through coffee shop conversations, to be 

somewhat accused -- even if it's indirectly -- of not playing by 

fair rules when they use the system that is provided for them to 

operate under these present recessionary conditions. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that if these two fellows were the 

ones that would get together, because they have good 

backgrounds in agriculture, they would also have an 

understanding of how sensitive people are becoming to the 

slightest bit of slander that is thrown at them.  And this is 

somewhat of a slanderous situation when you sort of take a 

basket approach to all of people in agriculture and suggest that 

they are moral hazards.  The term itself is demeaning, not only 

to all farmers but even to myself.  It makes me feel as though 

I've done something wrong, when in fact all I've tried to do is 

make a decent living off the land that the good Lord provided 

us with in this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1500) 

 

We've talked about some people using fertilizer and not using 

fertilizer.  And these fellows know something about that.  The 

associate minister of Agriculture, I know personally, has used a 

lot of fertilizer on his grasses and different crops at different 

times.  And the things that he hasn't done, his family members 

have done.  And so they have an understanding of that. 

 

And I know that the Minister of Agriculture himself in this 

administration has farmed in an area where fertilizer probably 

is a great advantage.  But the reality is that if you don't use 

fertilizer, some people say that you are a moral hazard; that you 

are being a crook; that you're taking 

advantage of the system because you're deliberately trying not 

to grow a better crop. 

 

Well the reality of life is, Mr. Speaker -- and some people are 

going to find this as a shock -- but if you don't get much 

rainfall, fertilizer can in fact cause your yields to go down.  I 

happen to farm in an area of the province where that is a fact 

and up until a few years ago, our agricultural representatives, 

as they were called when I was younger, used to advocate -- 

and this used to be an extension policy -- that they advocated 

that you do not use fertilizer in south-west Saskatchewan 

because in fact it . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I may be very interested in 

when you should use fertilizer or when you shouldn't use 

fertilizer and in what areas you should use them and in what 

crops.  That may be pertinent and germane to another debate 

but it really has nothing to do with the subvote that is before us, 

and I ask the member to return back to the subvote. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was just leading 

back to that connection unlike the other day when I had lost 

myself in a maze of confusion.  I did have my mind on the final 

conclusion that the reason that I was making that comparison is 

that we have to get back to this idea that we have people 

represent us in these negotiations who have that understanding 

of that particular type of farm circumstance. 

 

You see, the Minister of Agriculture, farming in an area where 

fertilizer always works, and the associate minister of 

Agriculture from the past administration, farming in an area 

where it was advocated by the department that it didn't always 

work, has that knowledge.  And they together can then get 

those ideas together and have an understanding for all of the 

different practices that are used and then you can take out this 

idea of this moral hazard that people are feeling is going on 

because in reality it may not necessarily be there.  And these 

are the people that we have to have in these negotiations to 

describe and explain that to one another. 

 

For example, I will go back to our original concept that the 

House leaders would be in charge of doing these negotiations.  

Our House Leader farms north of Saskatoon where rainfall is 

eminently higher than in the southern part of the province.  His 

contribution to this debate about moral hazard couldn't possibly 

be as accurate in terms of reality for the farmers in southern 

Saskatchewan as the input would be from the past associate 

minister of Agriculture who happened to have lived and farmed 

in south-west Saskatchewan where these common practices 

used to be in effect. 

 

So I hope that I have shown you how this thing ties together in 

terms of the necessity for these individuals to be the ones that 

would do our negotiating if our proposal in the amendment 

were accepted.  And so we need to have this subamendment 

supported by the government in order to ensure that we have 

the right people involved in these negotiations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had talked quite a bit about the needs of these individuals 

to be in place as our negotiating team, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

if the government members seriously 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

consider this they will realize that their Minister of Agriculture 

would certainly be the better person to be involved in this type 

of discussion rather than their House Leader as well. 

 

We've talked about the need for the program to be expanded, 

and I think that if we're going to be looking at expanding the 

program or designing it for 1993 . . . And I've already read in 

the newspaper, Mr. Speaker, that there are some plans and 

some workings being done in that direction. 

 

Now we as an opposition would feel that this particular 

amendment that we have might be carried even a step further 

into those negotiations in the future.  And they might talk about 

such things as deducting payments for your premiums from the 

sales of your product.  Now who would know better about that 

than people who are directly involved in agriculture and who 

have had some experience? 

 

The Minister of Agriculture is a farmer and the past minister of 

Agriculture, from the past administration, is also an active 

farmer.  These two individuals, Mr. Speaker, both know how 

hard it can be to come up with cash, especially in a year when 

you've got heavy expenses in the fall for harvesting and those 

kinds of things.  And then you have short quotas.  I'm not sure 

that the House leaders would really understand about quota 

systems in grain sales. 

 

For example again, my colleague, the House Leader, who is a 

dynamic individual in negotiating all kinds of affairs in this 

House, doesn't farm his land in a way that needs to have the 

grain sold into the grain system where you use quotas.  He's a 

hog producer and his hogs become his quota system -- they 

simply eat the grain. 

 

The member across is indicating that their House Leader used 

to be a grain farmer, and I'm sure he is.  However, I suggest 

that with the work he's got and the heavy load in government 

that he doesn't have very much time to pay a whole lot of 

attention to the matters of agriculture.  Being the Minister of 

Economic Diversification and all those other things, he should 

probably have his plate pretty well full with those kinds of 

things, trying to get some jobs and economic spin-off into this 

province. 

 

So understanding how busy that member is, it would make 

him, in a sense to me . . .. that we would pass this 

subamendment and allow him to be off the hook in this 

negotiating process and allow for the Minister of Agriculture, 

who's portfolio this is, to do that particular work.  It just seems 

natural that the Minister of Agriculture, upon reflection, should 

be the one to step into that role. 

 

And I think that in all fairness, those people that have had to 

deal with the quota systems, as grain farmers, will understand 

things like the need to have your payments attached as you sell 

your product rather than in a lump sum, and then you have to 

borrow the money from a bank and pay these high interest rates 

even though they are lower than they used to be.  It's still an 

adverse effect on cash flow. 

 

And with those people being the ones that understand it, 

we're suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that in reality, those should be 

the ones that would go on to this negotiating team and do our 

discussing for us, and the Minister of Agriculture would do 

those things for the government interests. 

 

Now we've had a fair bit of discussion about this.  And I 

wanted to have the folks know that we had to do some 

checking to find out how we could get this process to work and 

to try to explain a little bit about what's happening here.  I 

know that I have some constituents that were wondering why 

we were doing a subamendment.  And I'll just slip my glasses 

on here and read a little bit of this fine print because I think it's 

important that folks understand what a subamendment really is 

planning to do. 

 

And it's described here in these papers that we have from our 

researchers that came through the Clerk's department, I guess.  

And it says here: 

 

 that a subamendment must attempt to explain the substance 

of the amendment and not substitute the entire proposal. 

 

And I hope that the government members realize that we're not 

trying to change the proposal.  We're only trying to correct 

what we see as a need to change the individuals that would be 

concerned if the entire package were accepted at a later time in 

this debate. 

 

It says: 

 

 but only two amendments can be proposed at the same time 

to a question, but some limit is necessary.  The usage has 

grown into law that an amendment to an amendment is 

allowable, but that no motion to amend further can be 

entertained until one of the two amendments is disposed of.  

Now there is no limit, however, to the number of 

amendments to a question, provided they come within the 

principle. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe that will help to enlighten members 

of the government to know that we are not attempting to 

change the amendment that we put in, just that part that 

pertains to the individuals that would represent our side and the 

government side in the negotiations. 

 

It also goes on to say: 

 

 that the original motion is accordingly laid aside and the 

amendment becomes, for the time, a separate question to be 

dealt with until its terms are settled. 

 

You see we're not dealing with the original motion; we're just 

dealing with the subamendment.  And that means that the 

government could, in all good conscience, support the change 

to the amendment by voting for the subamendment without 

committing themselves to anything that we or they believe in in 

terms of the original motion on the GRIP program. 

 

And the subamendment which proposes an alternative to 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

the original amendment is in order provided it is relevant to the 

question.  And of course, this goes on to state that you can 

check this out in Journals, June 24 and 23 in 1926 on page 465, 

and all that sort of thing.  And I'd be glad to offer this if the 

members opposite would like to do some checking on it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we've got the . . . (inaudible) . . . general 

principles involved in this question, as I see it, with this 

amendment.  We've got the principle of changing the two 

individuals that in fact would be involved in the negotiations, 

and we have also got the other principle, which of course is that 

we have to do this because of the fact that closure was invoked 

and how that affects us here today. 

 

Now because I think some of my constituents were wondering 

just why we were changing this, I should probably just read the 

amendment so that . . . or the subamendment, rather, so that 

they will understand what we are doing.  Now then, proposed 

amendment moved by . . . and okay: 

 

 That all the words after the word "That" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 this Bill not be read a second time because the House leaders 

have not reached agreement on the principles involved and 

the process in which it has been brought forward; 

 

And the proposed subamendment was moved then: 

 

 That the words "House leaders" be substituted for the words 

"the ministers of Agriculture and opposition member 

responsible for Agriculture" . . . 

 

Now I've discussed in some length, Mr. Speaker, why those 

two individuals should be switched, and I'm hoping that the 

government members will support us on that concept.  And it 

goes on then to say: 

 

 and by deleting all of the words after the words "principles 

involved" and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 (And it says) because closure was used to unilaterally force 

introduction of this Bill in the Assembly. 

 

Now of course, I guess what we're saying is that because 

closure was used, Mr. Speaker, it limited the amount of debate 

that we were allowed to put into this program and this Bill.  

And by so doing we have to, as an official opposition trying to 

do the best job that it can, we have to try to find a way to 

deliver our message to the government.  And the way that we 

could deliver that message, if closure is invoked and we can't 

make speeches in this Assembly on the matter, the other option 

we have would be to get the process together where our side 

and their side would designate a couple of people or one 

individual each to sit down and talk about the changes that 

need to be done.  Because closure was invoked we can't do it in 

the Assembly through the debate at these microphones, and so 

we've suggested that 

because the closure happened we now should go on and use the 

other process which would be to get the folks to work in a 

one-on-one situation. 

 

Closure of course, as you're well aware, has only been used 

twice before in the history of the province.  And somebody 

suggested to me -- I'm not sure if this is exactly accurate -- but 

they suggested that in 85 years closure was used twice until this 

sitting of the Assembly. 

 

And now of course we've had four or six, whatever it's going to 

be after today or however it adds up, but anyway it's gotten to 

the point where we're starting to feel that closure is being used 

to the point where we can't get our points across the way that 

we want to. 

 

So we are attempting with this amendment and now this 

subamendment to impress upon the minds of the members in 

the government that we have to do some changing to this whole 

GRIP package; that we have to trade ideas; that we've got to 

get the ministers of Agriculture from the past administration 

and the ministers of this administration together; and we've got 

to share some information, share some ideas, and be willing to 

accept some of the ideas of each back and forth. 

 

And if we can get that done, then we have gotten our points 

across for the farmers of Saskatchewan and for the farm 

families, even though closure has been invoked.  Now we 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people that 

have explained in long, long debates in this Assembly over the 

years -- not that I was here to hear them, but folks have shown 

me the Hansards -- and they've shown us where many people 

have debated long and carefully the concepts of why closure 

should be used not only carefully, but very seldom. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I think likely because of the fact that you haven't got two 

factors involved, you lose the ability of an opposition to use 

time as a factor to allow a government to have people approach 

it to make idealistic changes that could in fact result in 

amendments being made to the original draft Bills. 

 

Now that's one thing that's important in debate in the 

democratic process.  Closure eliminates that time factor, that 

melting-point approach, or melting-pot approach I think would 

probably be the better way to term that, the melting-pot 

approach of allowing the government time to listen to the 

people and to reconsider their actions.  Now closure eliminates 

that.  And in fairness I guess, after a certain period of time, the 

government has thought that all of this process has taken place. 

 

So if it has taken place, then closure would be justifiable in 

their opinion.  But in the opinions of other people, the original 

problems with the Bill haven't really been addressed, so they 

haven't had their problems taken care of.  If they haven't had 

their problems taken care of, then the opposition has to try to 

find another vehicle to impress upon the government the need 

for amendments to the Bill or changes to the programs that 

would in effect bring about the changes that the general public 

in the country are asking for. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

Now, they're asking for a lot of changes in this particular Bill.  

And the only way, with closure having been invoked, for the 

opposition to impress upon the government these points at this 

time would be to have an amendment passed by this very 

government that would allow . . . and if we passed the 

subamendment as well, allowing the Minister of Agriculture 

and the past ministers of Agriculture to get together and discuss 

this thing, then we would be doing our job even though closure 

has been invoked.  We would be doing our job as an opposition 

to get the points traded back and forth, to get that 

communications going that would allow these folks to consider 

some amendments to the program and bring about the better 

program that farmers all through the province have been asking 

for, pleading for, and begging for. 

 

And I say that in sincerity, through the performance of the 

things that they've done -- the assembly on this very lawn out 

in front of this building by all kinds of farmers through the 

spring period.  They didn't drive for 5 and 600 miles some of 

them, 200 miles other, and whatever distances they all came 

from -- some of them flew and some of them drove and all of 

them got here --and they didn't go to that much trouble because 

they weren't concerned.  They were genuinely concerned, and 

they wanted some changes to this Bill.  They want some 

changes to the program.  Basically what they need is cash flow.  

It's not seen to be here. 

 

And then we saw the huge rally down in Shaunavon where the 

skating-rink was almost packed.  After 400 people had walked 

out of that very assembly in protest to the Minister of Rural 

Development getting up and making a statement, there was still 

a massive crowd that you could hardly see that 400 had left.  

That tells you something about the numbers of people that were 

there expressing their concern to the member from Shaunavon 

who incidentally hasn't been found lately in the constituency. 

 

But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that after that you also had the 

folks gathering in the Agridome.  You had a massive crowd of 

people gathering in the Agridome.  And here, Mr. Speaker, it 

was another demonstration of the people of Saskatchewan 

showing this government that they really cared, that they really 

took an interest.  Twice these farmers came from hundreds of 

miles all around the province to this very city, a city that has 

very little to offer in the springtime for a farmer other than a 

protest against something that's going on in this Assembly. 

 

So they made that trip at their own expense, cash out of pocket.  

Took time out of their important farming operations to come 

here to express their needs and their concerns.  And the 

government to date hasn't taken them seriously.  That's why as 

an opposition, Mr. Speaker, we have to do something to attract 

the attention of this government to try to get them to listen to 

the people. 

 

It's obvious that they haven't been listening to the people .  And 

I will go back to the idea of how closure has been viewed by 

some of the members of this very Assembly.  One member said 

that: 

 

 Here we are, (in) Saskatchewan Day, 1989, and 

I'm wondering when the Conservative Party will start to issue 

as a matter of course to their candidates flame-throwers so 

that they can better follow the scorched-earth policy that this 

government is so hell-bent on carrying out. 

 

August 7, 1989 Hansard.  And: 

 

 The government might ask somewhat of a different question.  

And they would say, well why let democracy interfere with 

the goings on in the legislature?  And that's I think the nub of 

this whole question.  Why let democracy interfere with our 

agenda, the government says. 

 

Now isn't it ironic how those statements come full circle and 

apply today in 1992 in this very same Assembly where those 

words were echoed once before on a different matter. 

 

But in all fairness, closure has been invoked on this issue.  We 

will only have a certain length of time to deliberate the 

questions at hand.  And we need now to have a way of getting 

to the government.  And this is, I think, the only alternative that 

we as the opposition will have is to convince the government to 

now sit down and discuss this matter in a one on one between 

our agricultural experts. 

 

One of the other members went on also in Hansard to talk 

about closure and its effects.  And I will quote, and it says: 

 

 But I want to say, as other colleagues of mine have said, that 

even though the government may muzzle us in this 

legislature, we will not be muzzled in saying the things that 

need to be said, because if we can't say them in here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will say them from one end of this 

province wherever we go, because those are the kinds of 

things that are important to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Democracy will be protected by this opposition to the largest 

extent that we can, at every opportunity that we can. 

 

And I couldn't have put those words any better myself, and yet 

they were quoted from August 7, 1989 from Hansard, coming 

from a member of the now sitting government. 

 

Mr. Speaker it's important to note how the full circle of life 

comes around when you are considering actions that take away 

the rights of some individuals in the guise of trying to help the 

majority.  And then you have to wonder, is the majority really 

being helped or are they actually being hurt? 

 

For example, the government says it's going to save $23 

million in this program, and that's not a whole bunch of money 

in terms of the $5 billion that we have in the budget.  At the 

same time, they say we have to control our deficit so we can't 

spend that money.  But when you think about it, $23 million in 

order to attract 240 millions of federal money, then gives you 

$263 million that could have gone to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  And wouldn't have that ever increased all of the 

cash flow throughout our entire economy? 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

The entire cash flow of Saskatchewan could have been 

improved by $263 million by that small expenditure.  I believe 

that the income tax that some people would have had to pay on 

their shares of those monies would have in fact ended up giving 

the government more than that $23 million back.  Just that 

alone, not to mention all of the spin-off taxes that would have 

come from people going out to maybe buying a new grain 

auger or a new grain truck or some other harvesting equipment 

that is so desperately needed in this province today. 

 

We've got farmers, Mr. Speaker, right today that have large 

lines of equipment that are just about like the old one-horse 

chaise.  As you will recall in the poetry of that descriptive 

analogy of the one-horse chaise, it lasted for 100 years and a 

day and then it totally fell apart.  Well half of the machinery in 

Saskatchewan is at 99 years and is just about ready to fall apart, 

and the rest of it is at a hundred and has one day to go.  And if 

we don't see some cash flow in our province, it's going to come 

to that point where all of a sudden one day the people are going 

to go out to harvest crops, and all the machinery is simply 

going to fall apart, and there won't be a harvest because there 

won't be any equipment left for people to work with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it's eminently important that this government 

reconsider its position, that it reconsider its approach to cash 

flow for farm families because they desperately have to have 

that money if their industry is to continue to operate at all. 

 

Now you might say, well it isn't going to hurt us much because 

we'll export most of it anyway.  But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, 

that we do eat a lot of the food that we produce in this 

province, and the people have to have the international trade in 

order for our families to be able to enjoy those things that they 

enjoy from outside of the rest of our country. 

 

For example, how many television sets are manufactured in 

Saskatchewan?  I dare say probably none.  There may be one or 

two that's built by a few experimentalists, but the reality is that 

we import them from other countries.  That means we have to 

export something in order to pay for them.  The things that we 

export are largely food products.  And if we don't keep our 

agricultural machine running, then we're not going to have that 

ability for international trade that will keep our province going 

and keep the people of this province in business.  We've got to 

have that revolving kind of a system or we're in serious, serious 

trouble. 

 

And because of this closure being placed on us so that we're 

limited in the debate, Mr. Speaker, we are unable at this 

particular time to convince the government through the normal 

process of debate in the House.  We will have that closure 

invoked so that we will be muzzled, we will be silenced, as the 

member so adequately put it, the member from Regina 

Dewdney, back in 1989.  And being muzzled in this way means 

that we have to seek out other alternative methods to get our 

message across. 

 

The alternative that we are attempting to convince the 

government to accept would be the alternative of having our 

agricultural experts sit down with their agricultural 

experts and negotiate changes -- not to the 1993 program -- but 

changes to the 1991-92 programs that are causing us so much 

trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that negotiating could then overcome all of the 

problems that have resulted from the fact that we've had 

closure imposed on us.  It will be important, very important for 

us to see these negotiations go on.  And it's amazing, but a fact 

of life, that when people have 20 feet between them and they 

sort of have the adversarial approach in debate, often I think it's 

easy to sort of just stare across and close one's mind and not 

consider the views and the points of view of those that are 

expressing their opinions. 

 

But in a one-on-one situation, eyeball to eyeball, nose to nose, 

it's really hard not to listen to what the other fellow's saying 

and just sort of tune yourself out.  You can't just say, well I'm 

going to sleep now or whatever.  You have to actually hear the 

words and they might just soak in.  We might in fact even 

accomplish something in the area of getting some of these 

problems solved and getting some much-needed cash flow into 

the hands of the community. 

 

This has an effect, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure you're aware that if 

we could convince the government to get into this plan and get 

this cash flow out there, this would have the effect of a spin-off 

that would help our entire province.  The people of Regina and 

Saskatoon would be helped as much as farm families would be 

if we were successful in this area. 

 

And I say in all honesty that the people of the cities of 

Saskatchewan have suffered enough as well.  This recession 

has wreaked havoc on all of the people of our province.  The 

folks in our cities have had to tolerate the need to be 

competitive with the rest of the world with far too little cash 

flow for far too long.  And the ability of the government to 

bring cash to farm families by changing this program . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  This is the third time I had to 

remind the member to speak to the subamendment.  If he 

continues to ignore my suggestion, I will call upon another 

speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was trying to keep 

on the subject of how closure had affected us and how we 

weren't able to use the length of debate in the House to 

convince the government to change its position and to bring in 

amendments to the Bill. 

 

I think you're well aware, Mr. Speaker, and those people 

through you . . . I talked to the rest of this Assembly, the people 

on the government side, I think they're well aware of the fact 

that lengthy debate has always been a tool that has been used 

by oppositions in order to convince the government to take a 

different point of view.  If not to convince the government 

directly, at least to provide the general public with the 

arguments that were being used so that they could put pressure 

on the government. 

 

Now we have closure, Mr. Speaker, that eliminates that ability 

for the opposition to use lengthy debate to convince the 

government that they should in fact take a different direction.  

This has really got, at this point, 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

nothing to do with this particular GRIP Bill as such.  It has to 

do with process and the ability of process to work. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now seeing that we haven't got the ability to make the process 

work, we are now faced with the dilemma, as an opposition, of 

trying to find a vehicle that we can use to get the views of the 

people from out in the country across to the government.  How 

do we achieve the goal of getting the government to bring in 

amendments to Bills?  How do we achieve the goal of getting 

the government to listen to the arguments?  How do we achieve 

the goal of getting time for the general public to absorb what 

we are saying and what we are doing if we have closure, and 

the lengthy debates that used to work for oppositions in the past 

are no longer allowed to this opposition? 

 

So we have taken the view that because closure has been 

invoked on us so many times, we will have to try to use these 

other vehicles, such as trying to encourage the government to 

bring about a process of negotiation where the Minister of 

Agriculture from the government side along with the minister 

of Agriculture from the past administration, and the associate 

minister from the past administration assisting him, would sit 

down and attempt to, in meaningful negotiations, convince 

members of the government that they in fact should make some 

changes to this particular Bill.  But the process goes on even 

further when you're talking about closure, because it can affect 

not only this Bill but any Bill that closure is invoked on. 

 

And so my debate and my points that I make, while they apply 

directly to this particular subamendment, Mr. Speaker, could 

for all intents and purposes be transferred to the argument 

against closure in many other areas as well.  But I'm not going 

to stand here and say that closure should never be used ever by 

any government because obviously there has been two other 

times in the history of this province when it was felt that that 

was necessary. 

 

The reality being though, that when you've seen it used the four 

or six times that we are going to see as this day progresses, the 

reality then is we have to start to question, is this tool of 

government now being abused?  Are they using closure more 

readily than is good for the sake of the democratic process? 

 

And I think our argument will be well taken by those that 

watch how this process and these proceedings work.  I think 

our point will be taken that if you have lost major tools to work 

with as an opposition without getting in return something back 

to use, then you will have effectively muzzled not only the 

individuals but the democracy itself. 

 

In other jurisdictions we understand, for example, that 

bell-ringing was discontinued some time back.  And of course 

now it has been restricted and theoretically removed from the 

tool-chest of opposition in Saskatchewan. 

 

With that gone, it is then even more necessary for the 

opposition to be able to use the tools that it has remaining in 

order to sway the opinion of government.  And that's what 

debate is really all about.  And lengthy debate of 

course, while it seems somewhat boring to a lot of people, is 

designed for that purpose, Mr. Speaker, of giving members an 

opportunity to sway the thinking of the government, to get 

them on track with a different wavelength, as it were. 

 

Because when they listen for a long time they might in fact 

change their mind a little bit and put in an amendment, or they 

might even take a Bill off the order paper and send it back to 

the original drafters and say, this really isn't what we want to 

accomplish; it's going to hurt too many people; we want to do 

something else. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the way that closure has 

affected us, it affects us very directly in this Bill, and we want 

those arguments to be considered by the government as well, 

that we no longer have that tool of lengthy debate to sway their 

opinion.  And because we don't have that, we now need from 

the government some attention in some other way. 

 

And these amendments and the subamendments are designed 

directly to do that.  They are designed directly to get the 

government to listen to our arguments, not in a lengthy debate 

now as we used to have under regular rules because that regular 

rule now is cut off with closure, but now we are asking that we 

will be able to sit down in one room, one on one, with just two 

or three people, and discuss this matter with the experts that we 

each side would choose from among us to debate this issue in a 

closed session, not here in this Assembly where closure has 

limited our ability to debate and to pass on information. 

 

So then I think we have to take this a step further and we have 

to consider the arguments of why closure was used and why it 

should probably not be used so much in the future.  I think we 

have to at this time, when closure is being invoked on this very 

important issue, make some of those points of why closure 

should be used with caution. 

 

We can quote, Mr. Speaker, from some of the people that have 

been in this Assembly to prove our point because they have 

said it so eloquently.  I will quote from one of those members, 

and it says here that:  That is why, Mr. Speaker, I find this 

piece of legislation so abhorrent.  He doesn't have the right to 

deny how long I can speak in this Assembly.  He doesn't have 

that right.  The people of Saskatoon South have elected me to 

speak for them. 

 

Now that's what an eminent speaker in this Assembly said on 

August 7, 1989 in this very Assembly.  And I take that from 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker.  And it's important that those kind of 

eloquent speeches that had substance and meaning then be 

applied to today's circumstance on the issue of closure. 

 

I won't quote from that particular page any further, Mr. 

Speaker, because I don't want to appear to be picking on any 

one individual that spoke on that subject back in those days, 

but I would like to read one more quote from a different 

member of the Assembly at that time, dealing with the issue of 

closure and how it affects the ability of people in a democratic 

process to be able to perform their duties in opposition. 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Ah, here's the one I was looking for.  And I will quote without 

use of name:  A government coming in and using the heavy 

hand of its majority and arbitrarily -- I guess that word is, 

excuse me -- deciding in its opinion that the opposition's debate 

has been too long, in its opinion that our arguments have been 

irrelevant, in its opinion that we ought not to be talking about 

it.  They come here to define the rules of this legislature to do 

this arbitrarily by simple majority and to equate this kind of a 

heavy-handed, undemocratic, unprecedented, unwarranted 

attack on the rules where all the members agree. 

 

That was said on August 4, 1989, Mr. Speaker.  And I expect 

that to some extent these words still apply. 

 

It goes on: But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what this does show, 

this motion today shows that this black Friday for democracy, 

this unprecedented attack on freedom in the province of 

Saskatchewan may be an attack on 26 lonely members of the 

opposition.  Again that was from August 4, 1989. 

 

Obviously there are not 26 members in opposition today.  But, 

Mr. Speaker, in all fairness the same principle does seem to 

apply.  And closure has done exactly what these members in 

those days said it did to them.  It does it exactly the same to 

this opposition today.  The numbers are irrelevant but the 

principles are equal. 

 

And we've said, Mr. Speaker, that having had our opportunity 

to debate in length, to use that as a tool of opposition to 

convince the government to change its opinion, we now are 

restricted to trying to find other tools. 

 

And the tool we are trying to use, for those that haven't figured 

out what we're up to here, is quite simply this.  We are asking 

that the government support us in proposing an amendment . . . 

and that now we've discovered that the amendment itself which 

would lend to having the Minister of Agriculture and the 

agricultural experts from the opposition sit down in a closed 

kind of a meeting, or some other forum where they would 

discuss these issues instead of just ramming this legislation 

through without consideration for the needs of the farm 

families out in the province and for the needs of the taxpayers 

in the city. 

 

Instead of having that happen, Mr. Speaker, we are asking that 

these people be sat down in a negotiating format and that they 

exchange their views and their ideas and try to better the 

situation in the province of Saskatchewan rather than to make it 

worse. 

 

And then we went on with our thoughts in this matter and 

discovered that we had appointed our House leaders to do this 

job for us.  And as I explained earlier, Mr. Speaker, we did 

that, thinking that our House leaders were our best negotiators 

because that's what they do each day in this House is negotiate 

the operation of this very Assembly. 

 

So faced with that reality that we had picked those gentlemen, 

and then realizing that in fact they might not necessarily know 

the most about this particular Bill at this particular time, we 

realized that we should have picked the people who are experts 

in the area of agriculture.  And having that thought, we decided 

that we would put in this 

subamendment to change the amendment, and we are today 

asking the government to support that. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that some of my other colleagues are 

getting anxious to contribute to this debate, so I'm going to run 

a little bit of a conclusion on the things that I've said here 

today, and of course while I complete that I'm sure they will 

have their notes in order and be ready to go into this debate and 

try to convince the government to support us. 

 

We've had the whole issue, Mr. Speaker, of why we brought in 

this amendment to begin with.  We've had the whole issue 

discussed of why we now find it necessary to bring in the 

subamendment.  And as you will recall, there were many 

reasons other than the closure aspect of it that we thought in 

fact that we should get these experts together from the two 

sides of this House to discuss this GRIP Bill.  A lot of input, as 

you will recall, could have been put into this debate by each of 

those sides. 

 

I think I mentioned earlier that -- or on another day -- that the 

1992 GRIP program might have some irony in it for me 

because it might in fact even be better for my personal farm 

situation as a result of heavy rainfall this year.  But next year if 

I had a drought it would be off. 

 

So I wanted to point out to you why we needed to have the 

experts from the two sides go into these negotiations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, instead of the House leaders.  Because the 

expert on our side would be able to reflect those kinds of needs 

that come from my experience this year out in the country 

where we've had the rainfall. 

 

And it would also happen of course that the Minister of 

Agriculture for the government could reflect perhaps to us 

some of the reasons why he has been very adamant in wanting 

his program to go ahead.  And who knows?  He might be able 

to convince our experts in a one-on-one consultation process 

that in fact we should reconsider our position.  It's altogether 

possible. 

 

I should hope that open-mindedness would flow both ways and 

I should hope that if these negotiations were to happen, that 

information would travel from one side to the other and from 

that side to this and back and forth.  We have to have two-way 

discussions with open minds on both sides, especially on this 

kind of a critical issue where so many people's lives are going 

to be affected. 

 

Now we've said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that while it would have 

been nice to have our most powerful negotiators, the toughest 

hitting team we got, the person who could most readily handle 

those kinds of situations, we at the outset would have thought 

that that would be the person to have.  But in reality, we 

realized that what we need is the people with expertise on this 

particular Bill and on this particular issue. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've come to the point where we've got all 

of our ducks a bit in line here.  We've decided that the Minister 

of Agriculture would discuss this with our agricultural experts, 

that they would trade information, that they would come up 

with some kind of idea that would perhaps bring cash flow to 

the farmers of our province and at the same time perhaps not 

break the 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

economy of the province.  It could be worked out in such a way 

I should hope that most of these needs could be served without 

totally upsetting the entire province. 

 

(1545) 

 

And then we came to the point where, how were we going to 

get the folks across the way to listen to us?  And we tried to 

think about the tool of long debate, but unfortunately closure 

has now come into the picture.  With closure in the picture we 

find ourselves having to decide which direction are we going to 

go to get around closure, as a tool by government, stopping us 

from talking about this issue.  And how are we going to get 

around that now so that we can get our point of view across to 

the government? 

 

Well in conclusion, there was only one way, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that was to introduce an amendment that would 

allow us a different process of being able to sit down with 

government members to discuss this very issue.  And that's 

what this amendment is all about.  It's a sitting down by those 

of us who know something about agriculture.  In our caucus, 

we have the former minister of Agriculture and the former 

associate minister of Agriculture, and we know very well that 

the Minister of Agriculture in the government has a colleague 

or two that would be very, very helpful in these kinds of 

discussions.  And we've decided that the only tool we have left 

would be to convince the government to set these folks down to 

deliberate and to negotiate some kind of a sensible resolve to 

the problems that we have. 

 

I'm not saying that they'd redraft the whole Bill, but perhaps 

they could come up with some amendments that would greatly 

alleviate the problems in our province.  And at the same time, 

then closure would not have in fact destroyed the whole ability 

of the democratic process to work in this Assembly.  In fact it 

at the moment does muzzle us because we can only talk for so 

long on the issues.  But in reality if we had a conference with 

our experts along with their experts, we would be 

accomplishing in the end perhaps the same thing that we need 

to accomplish and that being a common sense, conciliatory 

resolve to the problems that are raised in this particular Bill. 

 

And perhaps we could set a bit of a precedent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a precedent where we could try this approach in future 

on other Bills.  It might in fact work.  And if the government is 

intent upon using closure to limit debate in this House, then at 

least we would have another vehicle for presenting the views of 

the people to the government and to make sure that the needs 

of the electorate, the people that put us here, are properly 

addressed and in fact then to justify the opposition being in 

existence and quite simply to justify my collecting my wages 

as an opposition member. 

 

If I can't do a job here, if I'm not allowed to speak, if I'm 

muzzled, if I'm not given an opportunity to sway the thinking 

of the government, then I certainly can't justify in my mind that 

I've earned my wages for the right reasons.  And so closure has 

that effect on me personally, and it has the effect on the general 

public of not getting their view across.  But this new proposal 

that we put forth, where we 

would have the experts from the government and opposition sit 

down and negotiate, might help to alleviate some of those 

problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all seriousness I 

ask the government members to support our subamendment, to 

vote with us on it so that we can straighten out the people that 

will be involved in these negotiations just in case we happen to 

go ahead with it.  And then I would seriously suggest to them 

that they would not lose anything if they voted for our 

amendment and allowed this negotiation to go on.  It would not 

necessarily change the Bill.  It wouldn't change the 

government's position, and in effect it might even help them to 

improve their image with the people in this province.  So I 

strongly urge the government to consider supporting us on 

these matters.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I realize that the member from 

Maple Creek has taken a considerable length of time to indicate 

why the amendment to the amendment should be placed and 

followed.  I don't believe I'll take as long in giving some 

rebuttal to that.  But what I think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Are we going to get a speech on field 

grain? 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- The member from Thunder Creek is very 

interested in what I have to say and I hope that he will continue 

to listen and not leave. 

 

One of the things that the member from Maple Creek did not 

indicate is that the person that they are moving forward to 

negotiate from the opposition side is also . . . has also spoken in 

the debate in one of the . . . in the amendment, I believe.  But 

he indicated in that, while he spoke, that he did not remember 

what items that he had taken out of the crop insurance program 

as the GRIP program for '91 was formulated.  He didn't 

remember that spot-loss hail had been removed. 

 

So I suggest to the members opposite that the subamendment to 

the amendment is probably not achieving any great help to 

them when the individual who they are suggesting as being 

their best negotiator is not in a position . . . or cannot remember 

what the program was that he actually put forward.  And in that 

regard I think that to support the subamendment is not 

something that should be done by anyone, and I know I am not 

going to myself. 

 

One of the things that it appears to me is that the members 

opposite feel that they can drag out a debate in the House and 

achieve something.  Well from my perspective it is not the . . . 

you do not achieve something by dragging the debate in the 

House unless you end up winning public support. 

 

If they were dragging a debate on some other items that have 

been brought before this House where there was probably more 

public support, I would think that they would be achieving 

something.  In this case, they're not getting the public support. 

 

And in the Star-Phoenix of August 11 there is an 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

individual who wrote a letter in and said, the provincial 

government should just lock the opposition out; not even use 

time allocation or anything, just simply just close the door and 

go ahead and implement the . . . move ahead on this particular 

program. 

 

I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that the members might do 

well if they were to take some time and read the advisory 

committee report on GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization 

account).  It would save them having to go back and take back 

some of the things that they're saying.  Because in the report 

most of the things that have been changed in the GRIP program 

for '92 were recommended in the report. 

 

The members that put that together were recommended from 

different groups, and if you look on about the third or fourth 

page into it, you will see that 10 of them signed the complete 

report, and then subsequent to that, two others at the end 

presented a report which would be a minor report.  But what 

they had indicated there would mean that what we are now 

attempting to do is supported by them, and that is, is that to 

shift the cost of this program back to the federal government, 

something which the members opposite, when they were part 

of the government, did not do. 

 

And it's easy enough to indicate what that means.  If you take a 

look at the analysis of how the expenditures fall, you find that 

in the province of Saskatchewan for this particular type of 

program, we are being asked on a per capita basis to put up 

$145.  If you look at other provinces such as B.C. (British 

Columbia), it's 68 cents. 

 

And the grain industry in Canada, I would like to point out to 

the members opposite, is an industry that provides a marketable 

item to the world, that actually offsets the importation of other 

food that we eat.  There is nothing to indicate that the whole 

country shouldn't be expected to pay for maintaining an 

industry such as this.  And in that sense, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

point out that the members opposite have voted against a 

motion in this House that was asking for a $500 million support 

from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the subamendment which is asking for 

negotiation is simply a . . . from their point is simply a way of 

extending the time that they speak, as far as I can determine, 

because except for very limited parts of their speeches, they 

immediately go back and talk about the GRIP program. 

 

There are a number of things that have come up in the papers 

and different areas that would indicate that the program, as it is 

structured, is being reasonably well accepted.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, a farmer from in the Kindersley area indicating that he 

can grow durum for $45 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think I have to remind the 

member that he is on the subamendment.  And the 

subamendment is to why the negotiations should take place 

between the Minister of Agriculture and the member from 

Morse, who is the critic for the government, and closure being 

unilaterally used to force introduction of this Bill.  That is the 

item that is before us . . . Order. 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, as part of the . . . I realize that, 

as you indicate, the amendment deals with changing the two 

members, the opposition member responsible for Agriculture 

and the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment, as I was indicating previously, to 

some degree is only being used to extend the debate and is not, 

from the perspective of actually implementing a program and 

putting together a program, is not that seriously taken.  Because 

if you look at what the GRIP committee put forward in their 

report, this is not a program that one individual put together.  

It's a program that was agreed to and brought together by a 

number of different people.  And as I'd indicated previously as 

well, they signed the report indicating their support for it. 

 

So in that particular regard, it's very unlikely that anything 

would occur.  And, Mr. Speaker, for that particular reason, I'd 

like to say that I will not be supporting the subamendment or 

the amendment, but will be supporting the original motion to 

move forward with the income insurance legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

in the Assembly today to speak to the subamendment to the 

amendment that was proposed some days earlier in this 

Assembly.  And it's obvious from some of the comments that 

we've just heard from the member from Turtleford that it's 

absolutely necessary, Mr. Speaker, for this opposition to bring 

many amendments forward to try and get this government to 

listen to reason.  It's the only tool that's available, when one 

hears the attitude of government members, that we have 

available to us because obviously the member from Turtleford 

makes remarks about locking the opposition out of the 

legislature. 

 

That smacks of totalitarianism, Mr. Speaker, and I just wonder 

if the front benches of the government subscribe to that view.  

It's one that quite surprises me from this new NDP government 

that sort of talked about being open and accountable.  And 

that's why we have to bring these amendments and these 

subamendments forward when we have views like that sitting 

in the back benches. 

 

And it reminded me of a quote, Mr. Speaker, from another 

member of the Assembly on this totalitarianism that we just 

heard the member talking about.  And I quote the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton.  And that would be in August 1989 on 

this topic, Mr. Speaker.  And this is closure and totalitarianism 

that the member from Turtleford just raised here. 

 

And the member from Prince Albert Carlton said.  He said: 

 

 What can we say about closure, Mr. Speaker, and closure . . . 

in this case it's a matter of closure on closure. 

 

Well we've certainly had our diet of closure here, haven't we? 

 

 Sitting back and listening to a lot of the arguments 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

that have been presented, and listening carefully and knowing 

very well that this is the first time that closure has ever been 

proposed in this legislature . . . ever used in this legislature, I 

can say that to me it smacks somewhat of totalitarianism. 

 

And now that very word has raised its ugly head again in here, 

Mr. Speaker, by the member from Turtleford who said that we 

should all be locked out of here and not allowed to bring 

amendments forward and subamendments so that we can try 

and bring some sense to the government on this particular 

question of GRIP.  And I'm afraid that what we've been saying 

so far, Mr. Speaker, obviously hasn't made an impact. 

 

(1600) 

 

And that definitely will necessitate the opposition bringing 

forward reasoned amendments to try and get to a place where 

we can get somewhere here because obviously the House 

leaders, the process . . . And they're both good members of this 

Assembly, but obviously that process of House leaders didn't 

have a feeling for an agricultural issue that it should have, that 

both of them had other things on their mind, and that obviously 

that amendment didn't go well with the government because we 

saw very little feedback. 

 

We didn't see them sort of getting up on their feet and talking 

about that process and whether that was the proper one to 

rectify this situation.  So as a responsible opposition we had no 

alternative, and that was to bring forward a subamendment that 

dealt with a change to the process. 

 

And obviously now we're getting down to some people that 

have some technical expertise rather than perhaps political 

expertise, because the Minister of Agriculture has shown no 

adeptness at all to the political side of this equation.  So maybe 

it's appropriate that we deal with people that have some 

technical expertise. 

 

And they tell me that the Minister of Agriculture has a couple 

of degrees and  our former minister of Agriculture here has got 

a couple of degrees, and the member from Morse here is 

probably as down-to-earth a former Agriculture minister that 

you're going to get in the province of Saskatchewan, runs his 

own ranch and farm.  And I think that if you put the three of 

them probably in a room, with a little bit of help, Mr. Speaker, 

that you might be able to come up with some reasonable 

solutions. 

 

And it amazed me when we put forward an amendment like 

that, a subamendment, saying okay, that you didn't like the first 

part of the process; that when we came forward with a reasoned 

amendment like that, the first government member to get on his 

feet or her feet would have had some comments as to its 

appropriateness.  But instead we get the remark that we should 

lock the doors and throw these guys out of here rather than 

have them bring forward reasoned amendments like that. 

 

And that, given what the member from Prince Albert Carlton 

said about totalitarianism back in 1989, I just . . . well I find it 

very strange, Mr. Speaker, that those kind of views would be 

residing within the ranks of the New 

Democratic Party.  I mean they are the great defenders of free 

speech in this House.  And I'll be reading into the record a 

number of quotes from members opposite and their views on 

closure as this particular delivery goes on. 

 

But I'm very surprised that the first one up would say, well we 

should simply boot these people out of here and not let them 

speak at all.  It harkens back to the amendment made last night 

in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway, who said that we should be quiet, we shouldn't 

speak; that we should simply sit back and let these people do 

whatever they want.  That we didn't have the right to speak 

because we'd been defeated in an election. 

 

And I find that the sequence of events, Mr. Speaker, that we're 

seeing now is setting dangerous precedents.  I mean we have 

obviously speaker after speaker saying that they don't 

appreciate this British democratic process that we have here; 

that oppositions have become a terrible nuisance to the process 

and that we've got to look at ways of removing them. 

 

And we're seeing this in speaker after speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

and that's unfortunate that this Chamber has subsided to that 

level.  And that's why this is a very reasoned amendment, Mr. 

Speaker.  Obviously we've got to get down to some technical 

people here because the political process has broken down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a farmer in this province it was very 

disturbing, when I had a look at the GRIP legislation, to see 

references throughout that . . . well I find they're strange, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think they're a direct affront to anyone that is in 

agriculture today in Saskatchewan because it makes some very 

strange statements.  And I think that's why we've got to get 

some technical people here involved rather than political 

people. 

 

It says -- and I was thinking of my own farming operation, Mr. 

Speaker, last year -- it says that: 

 

 . . . after April 1 of that year, is void (it's talking about 1991) 

and of no effect and is deemed to have always been void and 

of no effect. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all of those things that I did last year on my 

farm aren't void -- at least I didn't think they were.  There's was 

a whole lot of hard work and sweat involved there many days.  

Of no effect?  I mean, everything that I did last year on my 

farm is void and of no effect? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are fairly harsh words.   Those are 

fairly harsh words for the government to use in a piece of 

legislation when it's talking to 60,000 farm families.  Because 

all the planning and all of the endeavour that you did, I mean, 

you're out there . . . last year my combine caught on fire, you 

know, and yet the minister says it was void and of no effect. 

 

Well quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, there was a whole lot of 

things going on that cost a great deal of money.  And there was 

times when I really wondered if it wouldn't be better to slip off 

into the void somewhere rather than try and pay my bill. 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I want to direct 

the member's attention that he is on the subamendment, and the 

subamendment simply indicates that we should replace the two 

House leaders with the Minister of Agriculture and the critic 

for Agriculture, and on closure.  Those are the only two items 

that are on the subamendment.  And I ask the member to get 

back to the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  I 

guess this totalitarianism that I've been talking about does 

equate with closure.  So it is in there.  I've thought that my farm 

treated me that way sometimes too, but I'll respect your ruling, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what this subamendment is really giving 

the members of this legislature an opportunity to do, by 

combining people with technical expertise in agriculture 

together, is that perhaps it'd give us a chance to move off of 

some of the norms here.  I know members of this legislature 

have complained in public.  And I know Mr. Speaker has at 

different times raised the issue with the public about how we 

seem so intransigent here, that we don't seem to have the ability 

to do things the way that this legislature operated in the past, 

that members had the ability to be just really forthright with 

one another in here.  But afterwards they could go out and they 

could socialize and they could come to conclusions that were 

reasonable.  And we seem to have broken down. 

 

Well maybe it's time with this subamendment to think about, 

think about ways that this legislature perhaps moves off of the 

path that we're on and we go to a different system.  And they 

tell me that other systems of government have the ability of 

people of different parties to sort of work together and bring a 

resolution forward to the House to vote on; that oftentimes 

Republicans and Democrats get together and they work out a 

mutually acceptable solution to a particular Bill and then they 

take it to the House.  And the House then votes on it and there's 

none of this partisan-line business attached to it. 

 

And that the British parliament has the same ability, that you'll 

get Labourites and Conservatives and Liberals and whatever 

else . . . Scottish Nationalists, able to get together and they'll 

redefine a particular piece of legislation and bring it forward to 

the House, and they will rectify the problem with a piece of 

legislation. 

 

And maybe, just maybe, if the government would disregard 

some of this . . . well the stuff that the member from Turtleford 

was talking about, about throwing us out of here and locking 

the door, and would rethink this process, then maybe, just 

maybe we could set a precedent here.  I mean it only takes 

once, Mr. Speaker.  It only takes once to set a precedent, as we 

know. 

 

I mean we've seen the rules changed and I suspect that since 

the rules have been changed in this House that that precedent's 

been set and you'll see it happen now unfortunately maybe in 

more occasions. 

 

And it's the same with closure.  I mean we've had member after 

member stand in this House over many debates and say that we 

shan't go forward with this closure stuff because it creates 

problems in the future.  And I think 

we've had most of the New Democratic members from prior to 

1991 well on the record on that, that once you get over that 

threshold, that closure then becomes very easy to use. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we've seen this closure process 

building.  It seems to almost be a daily occurrence now, and 

that unfortunately once we got over that first hump, it's a 

slippery slope.  You know, it's that old expression, on a 

downhill roll and the brakes are gone, and where we're going 

nobody knows.  Well that seems to be where we're at with this 

closure stuff. 

 

Matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the member from . . . well no, I 

won't use that member right now.  That member fits into a 

different part of my speech, Mr. Speaker.  I would go to the 

member from Regina Hillsdale, the current Minister of Health 

-- very, very definitive on this particular subject, very definitive 

person, yes. 

 

This debate I quote.  This is from August 7, 1989 Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 This debate, Mr. Speaker, is about a government with its own 

agenda, an agenda that is not in the best interest of the people 

and that is not good for the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

 This debate is about muzzling the opposition, Mr. Speaker -- 

muzzling the opposition -- something that this government is 

not reluctant to do because we've seen repeated examples of 

how they've muzzled other people who have effectively 

spoken out against their policies, (I didn't know that the 

Minister of Health knew about spandex, Mr. Speaker, but 

obviously she was thinking well into the future) their 

cutbacks, (oh, RMs, cities, that sort of thing, hospitals) and 

their harsh and cruel tactics, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

 Another thing that I wish to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that this motion violates the very spirit of democracy.  It 

violates the right of freedom of discussion, free debate in the 

legislature on an issue of importance. 

 

Very definitive, Mr. Speaker.  Very, very definitive about 

where that MLA stood on this issue.  And that's why I think 

that member . . . and I would really invite that member to come 

and speak to this amendment because there is a classic example 

of a mind-set that says we need another alternative, that the 

process is flawed.  The process is flawed. 

 

It's flawed for many reasons.  Perhaps partisanship.  It's flawed 

because members have grown accustomed to certain things.  

And I would invite that member to join this debate and explore 

the idea of the people with the technical expertise in 

Agriculture and the technical expertise in Agriculture on that 

side getting together and sort of being a first -- being first, 

setting history, being precedent setting. 

 

Because I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, with the amount of issues 

that are on that member's plate now as Minister of Health, that 

it might open up whole new avenues of 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

discussion for that member. 

 

I mean instead of using closure on all of these health initiatives 

that are coming along -- and I can think of a Bill that's before 

the House right now, the MCIC (Medical Care Insurance 

Commission) Bill -- instead of having closure as part of that 

matrix, then perhaps the member from Regina Hillsdale, the 

current minister would get together with the Health critic on 

this side and perhaps other people in this Assembly, and we'd 

get through some of these questions.  We'd get through some of 

them rather than having this repeated use of closure over and 

over again. 

 

Closure just simply isn't acceptable, Mr. Speaker.  It never has 

been.  And I guess it's unfortunate that it's gotten so out of hand 

and used so often because it has just quite frankly brought this 

legislature to an impasse.  And it's going to take a lot of talking.  

It's going to take a lot of reasoned amendments, 

subamendments, I think to . . . a lot of argument to bring the 

government members back to the point where we can have 

these reasonable discussions. 

 

It's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that when you think that you can 

void a person's life for a year and a half that you've got a long 

ways to come.  It's going to take a lot of talk, reasoned talk, in 

order to get people off of that, that they would void my life for 

a year and a half.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, the only way that's 

going to be done is people that clearly, clearly understand the 

issues involved. 

 

Now it was tough, Mr. Speaker, I know prior to the October 

election, for the New Democratic Party to have that ability 

because they only had one rural member.  But that process -- 

Mr. Speaker, now with many rural members, many, many rural 

members -- I think it could move forward because you not only 

have our two agricultural critics presently, the minister and the 

opposition critic, available to the legislature, but they've got 

lots of back-up. 

 

(1615) 

 

I mean our opposition critic in Agriculture here can draw on a 

wealth of expertise, information, people that have had 

negotiating ability in the agricultural sector for many years.  

We've got people that have been reeves of RMs.  We've got 

people cattle business, hog business, people that have been 

involved in their fair boards -- all sorts of agricultural 

endeavours. 

 

And I know on the other side now, since the election, there are 

all sorts of people in the New Democratic Party seats that have 

some agricultural expertise.  And when you think of the ability 

of the minister to listen to some of that, I think there's a decent 

chance that the impasse could be broken. 

 

I mean obviously, as I said before, Mr. Speaker -- and no 

disrespect to the House leaders because they both have 

finely-honed political skills -- but obviously it was political 

skills weren't getting us anywhere, you know.  The Minister of 

Agriculture has no political skills.  It's obvious by the GRIP 

Bill.  Therefore some of the other members of the government 

benches that have expertise 

in agriculture -- they may be a little light on political skills also, 

but they're learning as new members -- could bring that 

agricultural expertise to the fore. 

 

And I don't care how many people really we have in the room 

to start with, Mr. Speaker.  I mean they could draw lots over 

there, I suppose, and come up with five, and I'm sure we could 

get five.  I don't know what the correct formula would be but, 

you know, you could get them to sort of be there as back-up to 

these two individuals that we've mentioned in the 

subamendment -- two individuals picked because of expertise, 

technical expertise, not political expertise necessarily. 

 

Because politics seems to be what's getting everybody in this 

Assembly into trouble these days, Mr. Speaker, it's too much 

politics and not enough rational thinking, not enough sort of 

down on the farm, get down in the dirt and scratch around . . . 

you know, kick a few tires type of thinking.  If that had been 

the case, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn't have been faced with a Bill 

that would void farmers' lives for a year and a half.  Not a 

chance, Mr. Speaker.  We would have never had such a piece 

of legislation come forward in this Assembly.  You just can't. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, it's like every farmer in Saskatchewan 

was Alice in Wonderland.  And we all were going along one 

day, and we popped down a rabbit hole and -- poof! -- 

everything just disappeared.  Just like that -- poof!  Everything 

just went down the rabbit hole.  And that's, Mr. Speaker, that's 

the kind of legislation that quite frankly I think makes a 

mockery, makes a mockery out of this legislature.  It says to 

me that there was none of that down on the farm, you know, 

tire kicking kind of thinking put into this particular piece of 

legislation, that it was done in a dream world somewhere. 

 

You know and I hate to cast aspersions, Mr. Speaker, but I 

have this terrible feeling that some of that dream world existed 

in the Department of Finance, that the bureaucratic mazes there 

in the Department of Finance were sort of dictating to the 

Minister of Agriculture that you didn't want any of this 

practical stuff.  That's why we had to get to this voiding 

business, you know.  That's where we had to sort of take a year 

and a half out of the lives of people and just void it. 

 

And that's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, and it's all the more 

reason, all the more reason that members of this Assembly 

have got an opportunity, an opportunity to get back down to 

some down home kind of thinking about some practical sides 

of solutions.  And I can't think of anything more practical than 

people . . . 

 

I don't know how many years the former associate minister of 

Agriculture would have as far as public life; I suppose it's got 

to be close to 25 years, probably as much time as the now 

Premier spent in this Assembly, about a quarter of a century.  

And I would think that the former minister of Agriculture, the 

former premier, when you add up his days in university and as 

a lecturer, as a farmer and as a minister of Agriculture, he's 

probably got about 20 years experience.  So there's 45 years 

right there.  And they tell me the Minister of Agriculture's got 

two degrees. He got at least five or six years of university in 

agriculture, and then he's been farming since the early '70s, so 

there's 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

another 20 years.  So there's another quarter of a century of 

agricultural expertise. 

 

So you add them up, Mr. Speaker, and you're looking at about 

75 years, 75 years of various abilities and know-hows, you 

know.  I think if you put that kind of expertise together, Mr. 

Speaker, you might come up with something that would be a 

little saner, a little more palatable than what we've had foisted 

on this Assembly through the use of closure.  Mr. Speaker, that 

to me seems to be an alternative that is far more acceptable to 

the general public than what we have before us today. 

 

I mean, I for the life of me can't think that people want their 

elected representatives to come down here and just be involved 

in closure day after day after day.  I mean, my colleague from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow there -- and it was read into the record 

last night when he was talking about closure -- said that he 

didn't want to have anything to do with a front bench that 

would get involved in that, that he couldn't sit with them, that 

his distaste for closure was so great that anybody that did that 

he'd have to distance himself from. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's fairly strong words, fairly strong 

feelings.  And I'm afraid if this closure business keeps going at 

the rate it's going so rampant, that we are going to lose a 

member of this Assembly.  I just for the life of me can't 

understand how a member of as much integrity as the member 

from Wakamow, who's made those statements about not being 

able to associate with people that would do that, will be able to 

take this much longer. 

 

I only warn the Government House Leader that those kind of 

strong feelings obviously are going to cause problems in this 

House because we're going to see somebody up and pick their 

seat up and go who knows where with it, Mr. Speaker.  That 

member would far sooner see, I think -- rather than having that 

ultimate sort of solution to the integrity problem -- would 

rather I think vote for an amendment that allowed some people 

with some real problem-solving abilities as far as agriculture to 

get together and sit down and iron this Bill out because the 

alternative is pretty gruesome for that member, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's a step that's almost irrevocable when you can't stomach it 

any more and you simply got to up and leave.  On the record, 

very definitely on the record about closure and principles and 

where the alternatives are, and I think this alternative is far 

easier to accept. 

 

And I'm sure the other members of the government who are on 

the record in such a way that they . . . Well they just felt very 

strongly about it, can look at this as not only precedent setting 

because it sets some new directions, but also that it gives 

people the opportunity to get off of that very pointy stick that 

one gets on when you make definitive statements like that 

because they're always there for the public to be reminded of 

that you just can't get away from it when you get on the record 

like that. 

 

And that reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of another member that did 

get on the record.  And I think this member, because that 

member is one that would probably join with the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose in any sort of 

technical discussion, would be a first choice.  Or if he wasn't a 

first choice, I think he would be very disappointed because he 

was the sole voice of agriculture in the former NDP opposition.  

The only one that did come through sometimes with rational 

comments and statements about agriculture.  And that person 

wouldn't want to be excluded, I don't think, from the 

discussions that might emanate from this particular 

subamendment. 

 

Anyway this is the member's views, Mr. Speaker, on this 

particular issue.  And that's the issue of closure and how it 

would affect agricultural discussions: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we are in this debate because this government, I 

believe, is (oh dear) drunk with power as well.  They are so 

consumed with themselves, so consumed with their friends, 

and so consumed by the power that they wield, that they just 

refuse to allow the democratic process to work.  They simply 

just do not respond to democracy in a traditional way in this 

province because they are so drunk with the power that they 

hold. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was on August 7, '89, but I think it 

referred to a very large New Democratic Party victory in 

October 1991 because all the evidence that's been presented to 

this legislature and all the evidence that we've seen, particularly 

with things like Bill 87, says that the member's words -- and 

they're so fitting for that member to use in this Assembly, that 

they are drunk with the power that they hold -- I think, Mr. 

Speaker, is one that we have to think about very seriously. 

 

And he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 It sets that arrogant attitude, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the reason they're doing this is because every time 

they do it it becomes easier, (every time they do it, it 

becomes easier) it becomes more accepted (it becomes more 

accepted) by the people of the province.  Once it's done, (it 

being done, I think, is referring to closure) then the people 

they think will say, well it's been done before, then they'll 

accept it a little easier next time and the next time and the 

next time. 

 

That's from August 7, 1989 Hansard, Mr. Speaker.  And that's 

what I was trying to tell you before, Mr. Speaker, earlier on in 

the debate.  It's a slippery slope that we're on here with this 

closure business.  And the member from Humboldt identified it 

so aptly in 1989.  I wonder if he was having premonitions, Mr. 

Speaker, of what we were going to see in this legislature in the 

summer of 1992. 

 

I wonder if those words that were so eloquently spoken in here 

weren't a premonition of what would happen when the New 

Democratic Party achieved power in this province.  And you 

know what they say, Mr. Speaker.  Some people when they're 

thinking terrible thoughts, they sort of dream out loud, you 

know, because they're scared of their own conscience.  And 

they say things, you know, right out loud when they don't want 

to but it's on their mind. 

 

And obviously the member from Humboldt was speaking 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

out loud about this use of this slippery slope that we're going to 

get on when we use closure.  Because I mean, it's very clear:  

every time you do it, it becomes easier.  Once it's done, then 

the people will say that it's more acceptable.  I mean, very, very 

definitive about this closure business and where it would lead 

us. 

 

Now that member, Mr. Speaker, is another member that I think 

should be ready to vote for an amendment like this, because as 

the sole voice of agriculture in the previous opposition, now 

he's one that could join with the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, could join with the member, and add 

something to the debate. 

 

That these very technical points that we've obviously got in Bill 

87 -- and I won't go into the depth of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

because I know that's not what you do in a subamendment -- 

but that goes to the depths of . . . I mean, the member from 

Humboldt farms just like I do.  And I've got to say to the 

member from Humboldt: it says here, Mr. Member from 

Humboldt, that last year was a void for you, that everything 

was grey and fuzzy, that you didn't have a clue what you were 

doing out there on the farm.  It was a big void and it had no 

effect.  All the work that you did last year had no effect at all. 

 

Now that's a terrible thing to say in a piece of legislation.  And 

I think every farmer in this legislature, every farmer in this 

legislature should be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 

don't think, Mr. Member from Humboldt, that all of those 

people that voted for you . . . Just like those guys up in 

Humboldt the other night, I don't think that they would 

appreciate knowing that they were in a void in 1991, that you 

had voided everything that they had done in their particular 

endeavours. 

 

So I think the member from Humboldt would be one to join 

with the member from Rosetown-Elrose as the agricultural 

expert, as the guy with the technical sort of know how to join 

with the member from Morse, the member from Estevan. 

 

And like I said, we can broaden this subamendment, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because there's a lot of agricultural expertise 

now in this legislature.  It used to be one-sided but now it's 

spread around.  And we can broaden that subamendment out so 

that the member from Humboldt can get his two-bits in to get 

this thing straightened away. 

 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the member form 

Humboldt has a fairly loud voice in the government's 

agricultural caucus.  People have told me that he's fairly 

forthright with some of his opinions.  Now I can't think of a 

better place for that member to place his vote in the legislature 

so that he can have a say, a direct say in what's going on in this 

House through this negotiation process. 

 

(1630) 

 

Because that's a far, far better way, Mr. Speaker, than to have 

this closure thing hanging over us, that the member from 

Humboldt objected to so vociferously a couple of years ago.  I 

mean he objected very, very strongly.  His own words say that, 

that he doesn't like this closure process. 

So the alternative to the closure process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is for him to join with the member from Rosetown and join 

with this process and start straightening it out. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are other members of the 

New Democratic Party that had views on closure that didn't fit 

very well with what we're describing here.  And they were just 

kind of an aside, I think.  But I think I need to read this one into 

the record because members on this side of the House have 

been getting this sneaking suspicion that rather than deal with 

an amendment like this that talks about the process of our 

House, they've got other things on their mind. 

 

Now I hope this isn't the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think 

I need to read this one into the record just so members of the 

government will have the opportunity in this debate to get up 

and refute it.  Because I think it's important that this sneaking 

suspicion not be left with the public at all, the public who are 

watching on television and this Assembly. 

 

I quote the member from Regina Churchill Downs.  The 

member from Churchill Downs in 1989 was also very strong 

on the question of closure, but he had a different twist.  And I 

think it's a twist that's bothering some members of the public 

today: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, (he says) it is undoubtedly another factor -- I 

wish it were not so -- (but it's) undoubtedly another factor is 

simply the desire of members opposite to enjoy their summer. 

 

 . . . They don't want to be here, Mr. Speaker, because they 

don't want to face the music.  They don't want to admit and 

they don't want to be reminded that the public don't want this.  

They are acting contrary to public opinion and they are being 

arrogant, insensitive, and undemocratic. 

 

Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as we've gone through this 

debate, there are those -- and the evidence has mounted 

unfortunately -- that members of the government would rather 

be some place else.  They'd like to be enjoying their summer 

holidays.  And unfortunately the attendance has been dismal 

lately.  And it's left the public with this idea . . . And I mean, 

I'm only quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm only quoting from 

the member from Churchill Downs on this issue.  I mean he 

identified the problem some years ago, and I think there's a 

sneaking suspicion, a sneaking suspicion by members of the 

public that what we've got going here now is the same thing. 

 

And I can only commend the member from Churchill Downs.  

And I'd like him to get on his feet in this debate and tell the 

folks emphatically, tell the folks emphatically that that isn't the 

case with this government; that in 1992 that's not what's going 

on at all; that the 25 or 26 members that are missing all the 

time are simply doing something, simply out there doing good 

works; that they're not enjoying some type of holiday.  And I 

hope the member does join in this debate because we're talking 

about a process here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is very serious, 

very serious. 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

We've got a subamendment.  We've got a subamendment here 

that can get this House back on track.  We've got a 

subamendment here that can set a precedent, can be first, can 

allow this minister to draw on some expertise garnered in a few 

other areas.  Garner on the expertise of the member from 

Humboldt, the member from Nipawin over here, and the 

member from Kinistino and others that are touted as being 

agricultural people; that we garner some of that expertise up 

into a concerted drive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a concerted drive 

to get this Assembly out of the hole, out of the jam, out of the 

public's suspicions, so enunciated by the member from 

Churchill Downs, that members of the government are simply 

in a holiday mode. 

 

We've got this opportunity to allay all of those suspicions 

simply by having the members of the government support this 

amendment.  I mean it gets us out of the political process that 

we were in with the government . . . with the House leaders.  

The House leaders, well by nature they're political people. 

 

And because that didn't work, it gets us out of that mode.  It 

allows us to . . . well I wouldn't use the term, Mr. Speaker, but 

it allows us to maybe venture into the realm of either 

congressional or some of the changes done in the British 

parliamentary system that are different than Canada's system.  

It allows us to attain some all-party type of consensus on an 

issue. 

 

Obviously in this province agriculture is still the number one 

industry.  It's still the largest employer.  It's still the one that 

makes or breaks come budget time, you know.  I mean we're 

several hundred million dollars short in this province on 

income tax that used to be paid by the farming sector.  You can 

only ask the Minister of Finance to verify that.  So we know 

that an industry that has that much effect on the province is one 

that we've got to put a lot of time and diligence into, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And that's why it might behove this government, even though 

they have a very large majority -- and they seem very intent on 

sort of using that majority at each and every excuse -- that it 

now would behove them, now that things have not worked 

well, that the heavy hand hasn't worked, so now it might 

behove them to try something different.  I mean, I would think 

something like this that is open, it's above-board, it's precedent 

setting, isn't that the kind of campaign rhetoric that we heard 

from the New Democrats for so long?  You know, we're going 

to be so different, we're going to change, we're going to open 

government up to the people, this open, honest, forthright . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the ideal opportunity, the 

ideal opportunity to practise what you preach.  Absolutely 

practise what you preach.  I mean there have been suspicions 

I'm afraid in the last 10 months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 

hasn't been the fact, that this practising what you preach is sort 

of . . . Well it's crawled back under the carpet a little bit. 

 

But you know, we've got an opportunity here to break the 

mould, an opportunity to break the mould, a reasoned 

amendment, a reasoned amendment that says from now on, 

once this is done -- this is like closure, remember? --  

we said that once we use closure, it would happen over and 

over and over and it would gather its own momentum.  It 

would become a creature of this Assembly.  Well that prophecy 

came right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What we're saying now is that this amendment has the same 

ability.  It has the ability to be that kind of a creature that it can 

kind of feed on itself, you know.  It can kind of grow once it's 

done once, once it's done once.  Once these sort of political 

things that designed a Bill that voided my life for a year and a 

half got put aside, that then we'd get down to some technical 

stuff -- all-party technical stuff -- that would never dream, 

never dream, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I mean I can't imagine 

the member from Morse and the member from Nipawin and 

other people ever coming up with a piece of legislation that 

would try and void my life for a year and a half as a farmer.  I 

mean on the reality side that would never occur. 

 

So what we have here is a precedent-setting subamendment.  

It's a process tool that can be just like closure, just like closure.  

See once members lose the fear of doing it once, doing it once, 

then somebody else will say, well that didn't hurt quite so bad; 

let's do it again and again and again. 

 

And, you know it's like the member from Humboldt said, the 

public will start to accept it.  You know they'll say, gee these 

guys have broken the mould here.  They're not quite the same 

old political creatures that we knew in the past and have come 

to loathe so much, that they've broken the mould.  And I'm sure 

that as it's done over and over and over again, that the public 

will start to accept it.  It's like some of the rule things, you 

know, that have been contemplated around here about, well, 

political satire and other things, that we're not sure how the 

public is moving with them.  But I'm sure that once this 

subamendment was tried once, that the public would grow to 

accept it.  And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I bet you 

down the road a couple of years that if this thing ever got tried 

and worked that they wouldn't let us go back to our old ways. 

 

You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that if this 

process that we're talking about here amongst agricultural 

people worked -- and then we found it worked in Health and 

we found it worked in a few other areas -- that they wouldn't 

accept us going back to our old ways. 

 

I'll bet you that by the time the next election rolled around, 

when people were saying now where do you stand on this, if 

you said well, I'm going back to this old partisan, 

heavy-handed closure kind of mode to get my job done, they'd 

say, no, I don't want any truck with you.  You're behind the 

times.  You're behind the times. 

 

I want the guys that are ahead of the game; that are willing to 

sort of do these technical discussions ahead of time and sort of 

make the political passage of things much easier.  Those are the 

guys that I'm going to vote for. I don't accept this old stuff. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as politicians and as 

people that are supposed to have the best interests of the 

taxpayers of this province at heart that we would want to 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

embark on a process like that.  That they would simply say 

you've got to change, that you can't have this old process any 

more. 

 

That's why I find it so strange, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 

haven't had more people from the government on their feet.  

This is the kind of thing that I thought New Democrats were 

talking about when they were . . . last fall they were 

campaigning and they were talking about openness and 

above-board and being diametrically different than the process 

that we saw before, that that old process just wasn't acceptable. 

 

I mean, the former government used closure a couple of times 

and that's why we had so many people getting on the record 

about it.  You know they were warning, as the member from 

Humboldt did, about the slippery slope, about closure over and 

over and over again. 

 

And I go back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member from 

Regina Dewdney, another member that obviously recognized 

this slippery slope and was prepared to stand up in this 

legislature on principle and get on the record and say, I'm 

willing to put myself in front of the people, on record. 

 

And I would quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from Hansard from 

August 7.  August 7 was a very popular date in 1989 for 

members of the New Democratic Party to sort of draw a line in 

the sand about the issue of closure and how important it was.  It 

was a hallmark day in the lives of many New Democrats. 

 

And the member from Regina Dewdney on that day rose to his 

feet and said: 

 

 But I want to say, as other colleagues of mine have said, that 

even though the government may muzzle us in this 

legislature, we will not be muzzled in saying the things that 

need to be said, because if we can't say them in here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will say them from one end of this 

province wherever we go, because those are the kinds of 

things that are important to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Democracy will be protected by this opposition to the largest 

extent that we can, at every opportunity that we can. 

 

 . . . And when the people cannot be heard, freedom, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is destroyed. 

 

Well see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was talking about that issue 

of closure and how once we got on that slippery slope, bang, it 

was going to happen time and time and time again. 

 

It's unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on that whole issue 

of closure that when one of the motions came forward that the 

member from Regina Dewdney was the mover of that motion; 

one of the closure motions that we've seen in this legislature, 

that the member from Regina Dewdney was one of the people 

that brought that forward. 

 

And that's a real travesty because I think that member would 

have preferred an amendment . . . a 

subamendment such as you've seen presented by the opposition 

today, Mr. Speaker.  One that wouldn't have got us on this 

downhill ride with no brakes.  Because given what I hear here, 

now unless words mean nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless 

words mean absolutely nothing in this legislature, what I think 

I read here was that anything was preferable to closure -- 

absolutely anything. 

 

And it would really, really surprise me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

that were the case.  I mean, I wouldn't want members to say 

that they come to this House just to speak words, that there was 

no heart, no soul, no feeling attached to them.  I am sure, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that this next person does always speak with 

heart and soul because I've known this person for a great many 

years.  I belonged to the same toast-masters club as this 

individual for six and a half years.  And I always heard him 

speak very pointedly, with a lot of preparation, a lot of 

forethought. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I know this person speaks with heart and soul.  So I think 

it's important that we put this one on the record too because I 

fully expect him to enter this debate on this subamendment, 

because this subamendment is the kind of issue that that 

member often spoke about in private life.  It was an 

opportunity for people to draw together.  That member is on 

record in my community over and over and over again in 

private life about drawing people together.  And I know he'd 

want to enter this debate. 

 

And I quote, Mr. Speaker.  Oh, once again this is August 7.  

This is that hallmark day, August 7, 1989 -- hallmark day for 

New Democrats. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this is a government afraid of words, afraid of 

words and afraid of ideas, afraid to let opposition MLAs, 

elected by their constituents to speak for them, do just that in 

these legislative chambers, the chambers of the people. 

 

Very eloquent, isn't it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

 This PC government with this motion has said formally and 

officially with their closure upon closure motion, they said, if 

you dare to oppose us, if you dare to criticize us, if you dare 

to speak against us, we will eliminate your right to speak. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is quite a 

revelation.  I mean, one could interchange the words in that 

particular dissertation.  You could take out the PC and put in 

NDP, and you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  You'd be 

where we are today and why we're bringing this subamendment 

forward, why we're offering these people an alternative. 

 

I mean, we're talking about eliminating the right to speak here 

in this Assembly.  I mean, it goes back, unfortunately, to the 

words I heard coming out of the member from Turtleford 

earlier today in this debate.  You know, he quotes a newspaper 

article saying that they should simply lock the doors and kick 

them out.  Lock the doors and kick them out.  And the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose says, there you go. 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those kind of negative 

thoughts, those kind of negative thoughts are why we are where 

we are today, where we have this . . . Those are the kind of 

negative thoughts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that designed a Bill 

that tried to void the life of farmers for a year and a half in this 

province. 

 

Now what we got to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is get rid of those 

negative thoughts.  We've got to get rid of these thoughts that 

would simply say, well throw the opposition out of here 

because I don't like listening to their arguments, and let me get 

on with life even though my life is dedicated to destroying farm 

families. 

 

Now that's a very poor alternative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this 

amendment that we have here.  This amendment that allows 75 

-- and I added it up just with three individuals, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker -- 75 years of agricultural expertise just in three 

individuals to get together.  Now that didn't include the 

member from Humboldt, and that didn't include other members 

that obviously have many years of agricultural experience.  But 

I'm just talking about the member from Rosetown-Elrose, the 

member from Morse, and the member from Estevan -- just 

those three. 

 

We've got 75 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of good . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well and some would argue that 

some of it wasn't so good, but I'll give the members the benefit 

of the doubt.  They tell me the member from Rosetown-Elrose 

was not a bad farmer, that he got pretty decent marks in 

university, that he performed his duties with the rural trustees 

in an adequate fashion.  Okay? 

 

And they say the same thing about the member from Morse, 

that when he was on SARM's (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) council, that he performed his duties up 

to snuff.  They said the same things about the member from 

Estevan when he was a prof at the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) in agriculture economics, that he went into the 

class-room and he gave the folks their money's worth, and that 

students learned and they graduated, and they've gone on to do 

other things in the agricultural sector.  Certainly then there was 

all those years as minister of Agriculture. 

 

Now that kind of stuff you don't ignore, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- 

you don't ignore.  When you put all of that together you should 

be able to come up with something better than what we have.  I 

mean, one thing you definitely want to exclude from this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . and I show a bias here because my years in 

politics have shown me that certain things happen when you 

mix too many lawyers into this agricultural process.  When you 

get too many lawyers in this agricultural process, you start 

getting these words like "deemed" and "void" and "of no 

effect." 

 

And that's the problem here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of 

going the technical route with some good, old-fashioned, farm 

know-how, tire-kicking, knowledge.  What we've had here is, 

I'm afraid, is we've gotten too many, we have had too many 

people get into this mix that have this legalistic background.  

And they have definitely influenced, definitely influenced 

people that should have 

used agricultural common sense. 

 

And I guess maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should have had 

more to this amendment because we not only have excluded 

the House leaders now because they're on a political agenda -- 

they're on a definite political agenda, and we can forgive them 

for that -- but we should have made darn sure that there's no 

lawyers get mixed up in this mess, that we're sticking straight 

to agricultural expertise.  I mean the Minister of Agriculture, 

the member from Morse, and the member from Estevan.  

Because if we get, if we get lawyers involved, I'm afraid, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we're going to get more of this deemed stuff.  

And we're going to get more voiding of people's life. 

 

And that simply won't do.  That's what got us where we are 

today.  And that's why we're having to talk to this government.  

We're having to be very, very lengthy in our debate.  We're 

having to make all sorts of analogies and arguments for these 

people.  We're trying to remind them of their own words.  

We're trying to make sure that we can get through this process, 

that we can make our arguments in here, and we can do it 

without this closure business.  That we don't need.  We don't 

need closure. 

 

What we need is dialogue here.  We need dialogue between 

that minister removed from the hindrances of the legal 

profession.  We need that member relieved of the hindrances of 

some of the political people around him so that he could get 

together with some of the people on this side that also aren't 

hindered by lawyers and aren't hindered by this political 

process, so we could get on in fixing this thing.  So we get rid 

of those terrible "deemed" words and these terrible "voids" that 

are existing in the lives of farmers right now and come up with 

something that is a sane solution. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, no one, no farmer out there wants to feel 

like Alice dropping down the rabbit hole, like I described 

earlier.  That's not what they want.  They don't want to know 

that their life just went poof, and all of a sudden we've got a 

whole host of different things going on in our life.  We want to 

know that we've got elected representatives, elected 

representatives who are going out and setting new directions. 

 

I mean it's an affront, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when one 

reads all the verbatim that's been entered into in this legislature 

by members in the last few years, to think that the only solution 

that the taxpayers and the voters of this province will accept is 

closure.  I mean I would think that would be . . . that would 

simply be abrogating our responsibility.  That would be 

abrogating all the things that you promise when you run to be a 

member of this Assembly. 

 

I mean, is not the whole idea that you come here and you stand 

on your feet and you speak and you speak for . . . Well no one 

ever said that you couldn't, that there was any sort of time limit 

on it.  You're supposed to come and make rational, lucid, 

arguments that you put back and forth, you know.  I mean they 

always talk about the great debaters, don't they, in this 

Assembly?  I mean the people that sort of leave their mark, that 

leave their mark here, are the ones that could stand and debate 

for days on end.  I mean they make all those jokes about how 

these people 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

used different accessories in order to stay on their feet for days 

on end.  And I mean the litany goes on and on about the great 

debaters that have spawned in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just think, there would be no . . . With closure, with closure in 

the last 85 years, as prevalent as it is today, where would 

Tommy Douglas have been with all this closure around?  

Where would Ross Thatcher have been with all this closure 

around?  I mean where would Davey Steuart have been with all 

this closure?  I mean they would have never had an opportunity 

to get on their feet at all because we would have nothing but 

closure.  I mean day after day after day -- closure. 

 

And we would have never had these people sort of garnering 

this tremendous reputation in this Assembly.  I mean people 

used to . . . Can you believe it, Mr. Chairman; they used to 

broadcast this on the radio.  And people in this province -- 

because they enjoy politics and they always wanted to know 

what their legislators were saying -- would gather around the 

radio and they would listen to these great debaters.  And the 

reason that they were having these great debates was because 

they weren't hampered by closure, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They 

weren't hampered by these rules day after day, and I think that's 

why members in the New Democratic Party have spoken so 

long and hard on that issue because they always remembered . . 

. and some of these members here I know are old enough that 

they can remember the days when it was broadcast on radio. 

 

I unfortunately am a little bit too young to remember those 

days, but there are members around that probably got around 

the radio with their family, and they listened to Tommy 

Douglas debate in this Assembly.  And he would debate 

without closure.  He would debate freely for days on end 

without closure hanging over his head. 

 

And I have to wonder if maybe they didn't work things out a 

little bit differently than we do now, that maybe there was 

some informal sort of negotiating back and forth about these 

things, like on agricultural issues.  I don't know who the 

Agriculture minister was back in the days of radio, but 

probably that member got together with the opposition critic 

for Agriculture once in a while as they rode the train home, and 

they probably talked over things.  Maybe one of the problems 

we've got here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we don't ride the train 

any more.  I don't know. 

 

Maybe we don't spend enough hours in an informal setting 

together.  They tell me that it took two days sometimes for 

members of this Assembly to get down here because they had 

to ride the train.  And maybe they spent some time, as the 

Minister of Agriculture and the member from Morse should do. 

 

Maybe we should buy . . . I know what we could do, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  It's just like when you go to a stag sometimes 

and everybody pitches in and you buy the bridegroom a ticket 

on the train and you plunk him on the train and you send him to 

Calgary or something like that. 

 

Maybe what this House should do is . . . I'll tell you what, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you pass the Speaker's hat and we'll 

take a collection here.  And we'll get up enough money to get 

two train tickets to Vancouver, and we'll put the Minister of 

Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture on that train together.  

And we'll ship them out there and see if at the end of that two, 

three days -- and maybe they could even share a berth together 

if they were so inclined -- that we would get this thing ironed 

out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Instead of deeming and voiding and all of these things . . . and 

I'm sure after these two shared a compartment for all that time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would have a Bill, a Bill that most 

farmers in this province could live with. 

 

I don't think we'd have any protests on the lawns of the 

legislature.  I don't think we would have those things occurring.  

And this legislature would just be moving right along, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I'm sure while these two were on a train heading for Vancouver 

we'd be down to some other business here, and we'd probably 

get a few Estimates done, and we'd probably get a few Bills 

passed and this legislature would just be moving right along.  

Because we knew at the end of that process, just like when you 

ship off the expectant bridegroom, that he'd come back with a 

different frame of mind and prepared to settle down and get 

things consummated the way they should be consummated and 

not this process that we've got in front of us today, that that 

consummation would . . . If we had these two on the train 

together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, outside of this Assembly and 

removed from this partisan process here, that we would end up 

with a Bill that . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can see from the points I'm 

bringing forward, that there's a great deal of interest here by 

members of this Assembly.  For the first time today, there's a 

great deal of interest in this solution.  And I think that's what 

it's going to take.  It's standing on our feet, standing on our feet 

in this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and coming up with . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  It being 5 o'clock, I do 

now leave the chair until 7 o'clock pursuant to an order of this 

House. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


