




















































Hansard: May 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 493 

 May 20, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I want to introduce some people to you today, not actually in 

my capacity as the member for Regina Churchill Downs -- 

these are not students -- but in my capacity as the member 

responsible to the Legislative Assembly for the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

A program was begun some time ago of bringing groups of 

public servants on a periodic basis to the Assembly so that they 

might understand, better understand, what we do, or attempt to 

do, here.  Thus today we have 25 public servants who work in 

Social Services, in Justice, in Energy and Mines, in Agriculture 

and Food. 

 

I know all members will want to join in sending a particularly 

hearty welcome to these people who serve us and the public. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

you and through you 16 grade 3 and 4 students from the 

Kawacatoose School situated in the west gallery.  With them 

today is their teacher, Sylvia Nagy.  I look forward to meeting 

with them after question period for photos and so forth, and I 

ask the members to please make them welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today actually it is my 

pleasure to introduce some students from a school that actually 

is represented by the Hon. Bob Mitchell.  Unfortunately he is 

not available today, but I feel it's a great privilege to be able to 

stand in for him because this is an area of the city that I used to 

represent while I was on Saskatoon City Council.  Today 

seated in the Speaker's gallery are some 49 students from 

Confederation Park School, as well as some students from the 

John Dolan School.  They are accompanied by their teachers 

Nora Sutherland and Ford Mantyka and by Mr. Ash. 

 

And there's one very special student here today that I would 

like to particularly draw the Assembly's attention to, and that is 

Buffy Ash who is present here today on the House floor.  I 

would ask everyone to join me in welcoming them, and I will 

be meeting them later for drinks and pictures. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thanks, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to you and 

through you to all members of the House introduce 40 grade 4 

and 5 students from William Grayson School in Moose Jaw.  

Mr. Speaker, they're seated here in the east gallery.  I had the 

enjoyable treat of having lunch with the students from William 

Grayson.  We had our photo taken, and they had some very 

good questions for the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Today the students from William Grayson are accompanied by 

their teachers Ms. Barbier, Ms. Turcotte and Ms. Hicks.  I hope 

they have enjoyed their tour of the legislature and wish them a 

good and safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of all 

I'd like to join my colleague the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow in welcoming the William Grayson students.  Up 

until the change in boundaries, Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure 

to introduce them to this Assembly, and my loss has been the 

gain of the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you seven grade 

12 students who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They 

are from Vanier Collegiate and are here today with their 

instructor Ruth Schneider. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is something of particular interest to 

members in the Assembly, in that I think Vanier Collegiate is 

unique in the province, in that for the last three years they have 

had a student citizenship affirmation, a reaffirmation program 

for their grade 12 students, and something that I think many of 

us here would find to be highly desirable, and we compliment 

them for that practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have been on tour and I look forward to 

meeting them following question period for refreshments and 

discussion.  I would ask all members to welcome them here 

and to wish them every success in their grade 12 studies this 

year and in their careers to follow. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel Rate Increases 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

my question is for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, SaskTel has made 

51 million in profits and had retained earning of $40 million -- 

or $91 million that the corporation has in its kitty.  Mr. 

Premier, your excuses for grabbing the people's money through 

massive and, I must say, very deceptive rate increases in the 

telephone utility, was also that the money was needed to keep 

SaskTel financially sound. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you telling this Assembly that you believe 51 

million in profits and 40 million in retained earnings is not 

financially sound?  Is that your position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, two points.  One of them is that the increase was 

modest, at about the rate of inflation.  The other comment I 

would make to the members opposite is that their 

administration left the Crown corporations as a whole in really 

desperate . . . in desperate straits. 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

As you will recall from the budget which was given a few days 

ago, the taxpayer actually has to pay part of the interest for the 

Crown corporations because, as a whole, they are unable to 

meet their interest payments.  Thus the extent to which SaskTel 

or any other Crown corporation can turn a profit, helps to carry 

the freight for the Crown corporations which can.  And if you 

want me to list the Crown corporations which aren't able to pay 

their own way, I'd be delighted to do so because it is a litany of 

trouble and debt which your administration left us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, for the same minister.  The 

people expected more from you.  I am convinced that you 

really do not understand the impact these rate changes are 

having on the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm going to relate to you a true story that 

happened in my constituency so you may understand the 

impact.  A small business was in the process of being 

established in a very small community.  The family involved 

had priced out the cost of installing the telephone into that 

business.  The cost would have been approximately $200.  The 

cost after those rate increases was $2,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that a modest increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The increases which were taken by 

the Crown corporations were done in response to the 

inordinate, and I may add, unbearable debt load being borne by 

the Crown corporations.  The administration of which the 

members in the front row were a part of left the Crown 

corporations with a debt they simply couldn't manage. 

 

What we are attempting to do as best we can is have the Crown 

corporations, as a group, carry their own weight. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the members wish to have their 

questions answered, then I think we should allow the ministers 

to answer those questions with the least of interruptions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll just conclude very quickly by 

saying these increases were necessitated in large part because 

of the abominable conditions in which you left the Crown 

corporations, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 

Minister, the rate increases were imposed on the people of 

Saskatchewan without first presenting a resolution to this 

House concerning those rate increases.  Mr. Minister, I think 

we will be able to convince you that the legislative approval for 

such rate increases will be necessary because I think you will 

be hearing from the public about this. 

 

But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, since $91 million is not 

enough and since your government has decided to bloat the 

deficit with massive interest charges from CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) -- 

interest charges that could have been serviced with this money 

-- it's not true that it is your . . . is it not true that is your 

intention to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could I call the Government 

House Leader to order please? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe in 

question period it's the opposition's right to ask . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member has a question, let him put his 

question without any other comments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it not true 

that your intention to simply build an election fund over the 

next four years to buy the next election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Members opposite may have run the 

Crown corporations in a fashion which bordered on fraud.  It is 

not the intention of this government to run the Crown 

corporations in such a fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, we see SaskTel retaining 

$40 million of earnings that could be turned over to the Public 

Accounts.  Mr. Speaker, the government is instructing their 

Crown corporations to act like vampires in the night.  They're 

sucking the very life blood out of Saskatchewan people and 

businesses. 

 

Mr. Minister, again I ask you: is it your intention to build 

retained earnings in SaskTel and to generate very little profit?  

Is it your intention to then release those retained earnings just 

prior to an election, thereby trying to position your party to 

make lavish election promises to buy an election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is our goal to attempt to restore the 

Crown corporations to a degree of fiscal health which will 

enable them to once again contribute to the economic 

development of this province.  That's our goal and we think we 

have a reasonable opportunity of recovering from the mess in 

which your administration left the Crown corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, one last question for the 

minister.  If it's not your intention to use the money for election 

goodies and you've already decided not to use the money to 

service CIC debt, and you've already decided not to pay the 

money to the taxpayers through a dividend to the Consolidated 

Fund, what, Mr. Minister, are you intending to do with this 

money? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this might be a more 

useful question period if the member opposite were able to 

table his supplementaries to my answers.  He is obviously 

reading his supplementaries without ever 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

having heard or at least considered the answers which I've 

given you. 

 

I have said to the member opposite, we are attempting to 

restore the Crown corporations to a degree of health which will 

enable them to at least pay their own debt if not contribute to 

the economic development in the province.  At the moment we 

can't do that.  There are some healthy Crown corporations, but 

you left an inordinate number of messes which we are cleaning 

up. 

 

That is the answer to your first, second, third, and fourth 

questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Rate Increases 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, yesterday you tabled the corporation's annual report 

which showed a profit of $118 million and return earnings of 

$155 million.  Together, Mr. Speaker, that amounts to $273 

million, yet when you announced rate increases early this year, 

you said it was necessary to maintain the corporation's 

profitability in the light of inflation. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the excellent performance of this 

corporation, how can you justify this obvious tax grab? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has 

indicated, the profits, the net income from the Crown 

corporations, obviously is used for a number of things, not the 

least of which -- if you turn to page 13 of the annual report -- is 

the $1.1 billion in debt that the Crown corporation has.  And 

when you look at a profit around $100 million, the net profit 

for $100 million in a Crown corporation of this size, obviously 

it's not unique or . . . (inaudible) . . .  The idea of profit for the 

members opposite would be a novel idea, having run the 

province to debt of $15 billion. 

 

But I want to say to you, to the members opposite, that the idea 

of having some retained earnings, that having some retained 

earnings and not ripping it off to be used for your fancy 

projects like Rafferty and Alameda, I tell you to have some 

money in the bank for the next project that you want to do may 

be a novel idea for the former premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister is 

certainly skilled at step dancing and political rhetoric, and I 

would say the antics today, Mr. Speaker, would qualify him for 

Hollywood material. 

 

I have a new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, in 

announcing the rate increases in your February 5 news release, 

you said: SaskPower tax increases was because -- and I quote -- 

we must take steps to protect the fiscal position of the utility.  

That's the end of the quote. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, with $118 

million in profits, $155 million in retained earnings, clearly the 

fiscal position of SaskPower was secure without these 

increases.  Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is simply 

this.  I ask you: what level of profits and retained earnings do 

you demand from the farmers, small business, and the 

householders of this province before you deem SaskPower to 

be in a fiscal secure position?  How much are you going to take 

from the people of Saskatchewan before you claim it is fiscally 

responsible, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it 

clear, as I did when the rates were announced I believe in 

February, that our government believes in very small, regular 

rate increases as opposed to what has happened in the past 

where you have a freeze the year before the election and then 

massive increases after the election.  We're not intending to do 

that. 

 

But I want to say to the members opposite that over the next 10 

years the corporation has planned about $3 billion in expansion 

to meet the power needs of the province.  And in the sense that 

we don't want to borrow all the money, which has been the 

pattern of the previous government, that having some net 

income is very, very important.  And to have regular rate 

increases comes as a surprise to no one except for members 

opposite who want to continue the ever increasing mountain of 

debt and not paying for their bills as they go.  We're not doing 

that any more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

believe the minister is capable of answering.  He just simply 

refuses to answer. 

 

I have a question to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, it's 

abundantly clear that you are playing games with the people.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that it's a very dangerous game 

you're playing.  Business cannot avoid paying their power bills, 

neither can farmers or families.  Mr. Minister, these are fixed 

costs, these are fixed costs and they filter destructively down 

through the economy.  Mr. Minister, it's clear to us that you do 

not care, you don't care what effect your policies have on the 

people.  The question I have for you, sir, I want to ask you: 

what precisely do you intend to do with these profits and 

retained earnings?  What are you going to do with them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, a novel idea to 

the member opposite is to pay for some of the debt that you've 

racked up over the past 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member raises the 

issue of the confidence of the people in Saskatchewan and how 

this is very hard on business people and on residents in the 

province.  And it's true that 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

any rate increases can be problematic. 

 

But I want to refer to something else that is even more 

impressive, and that is, is that the major problem facing 

Saskatchewan is the debt.  Since the election there has been a 

renewed confidence in the province of Saskatchewan as 

indicated by today's Leader-Post.  The title of the story is: 

"Sales of homes go up quickly."  And it says . . . yes, let's see 

what it says. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the two cities in 

Saskatchewan, in Canada, that lead the way against all the 

trends across Canada are Regina and Saskatoon.  And the 

increase in Saskatoon -- I'll use that for the member from 

Estevan who has a hard time getting his mind around the issue 

-- it's up by 23 per cent, up by 23 per cent while the Canadian . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Let me remind the Leader of the 

Opposition that if he has a question this is question period and 

he should get up and ask a question.  Otherwise I ask him not 

to interrupt, continually interrupt, when the ministers are trying 

to answer.  I recognize the minister; shortly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the numbers in 

Saskatchewan are that housing starts are up significantly, that 

real estate numbers are up significantly as a result of the 

commitment of this government to do something about the $15 

billion in debt that the member from Estevan should be taking 

personal responsibility for but has refused to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This might be the 

final question, depending on the answer.  Mr. Minister, I 

understood you to say that you would be using that money for 

debt reduction.  We will be watching you closely to make sure 

that you do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing I would like to say is I sincerely 

wish that the ministers over there would realize you're not 

speaking to an NDP (New Democratic Party) convention here.  

You are supposed to be accountable to this Assembly in your 

answers. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you not now agree that the government 

could have used the profits and retained earnings from 

SaskPower to service a great deal of the debt in CIC, and avoid 

bloating the government's debt with the entire range of huge 

write-offs?  Will you agree to that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, one thing I'll 

guarantee the members opposite, that we're not going to go 

through the phoney exercise of shifting debt out of the 

SaskPower Corporation to another corporation the way you did 

when you hived off SaskEnergy and shifted about $226 million 

of debt. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if I could have the member from Estevan's 

attention. He hollers from his seat to the point where . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think that's the job of the 

Speaker to have, to . . . (inaudible) . . . order in the House.  If 

the minister wishes to answer, he can answer; otherwise I'll call 

another question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the role of this 

government will be to try to get rid of the mountain of debt, 

$15 billion, that the member from Estevan has racked up and 

left to the people of this province, a legacy of thousands of 

dollars per person in the province of Saskatchewan.  And not 

one word from him about why or how or why he left the 

province in this situation.  He just continues to sit and holler 

from his seat.  And I say that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporation Profits 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question will be to the Premier or to the Minister of Finance or 

to the minister in charge of most of the Crowns, and it is their 

response to this huge profit and retained earnings and now rate 

increases that add up to hundreds of millions of dollars -- and 

I'm just summarizing question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskPower has a profit of 118 million, retained earnings of 

155; SaskTel has a $50 million profit and retained earnings of 

40 million; SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has a 

$15 million profit for a combination of $375 million.  Plus, Mr. 

Speaker, the media knows and the public knows you're going to 

have rate increases on top of that. 

 

So the previous administration, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to have to ask the 

member that he must put a question.  If you have a . . . I'm 

asking the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, we 

improved the debt/equity ratio in the Crown corporations -- we 

on this side of the House -- so that in fact, Mr. Speaker, so that 

in fact you could make a profit.  The profit from these Crown 

corporations are the result of our administration.  Right, this is 

1991-92.  And on top of that there is retained earnings of 

almost $400 million because of our administration.  Why, Mr. 

Premier, are you having rate increases for the public when we 

brought in almost $400 million in profits and retained earnings 

in the last year of our administration? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Even with the legendary ability of the member from Estevan 

for self-deception, I am surprised that you believe that you 

improved the debt/equity relationship of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that the Crown 

corporations, taken as a whole, are unable to pay their interest 

on their own debt.  The taxpayers got to do it for 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

them.  These increases are as a result of 10 years of the worst 

mismanagement in recent Canadian history.  And that's where 

the rate increases come from.  You need look no further than 

the people behind you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- If the Premier won't respond to this, I'll just ask 

the minister again.  This profit and retained earnings of almost 

$400 million is a result of our last year of our administration.  

Now if the debt/equity ratio was so bad, how can you run up all 

that profit and all that retained earnings? 

 

My question to you is, is not that true?  And secondly, why 

would you ask the public for 30 per cent rate increases on these 

major Crown corporations when you have this kind of profit 

and this kind of retained earnings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter into 

this question period very briefly to give the former premier the 

answer which was given to the legislature early in December of 

1991 when Deloitte & Touche did an independent accounting 

opinion on Crown Management Board financing and said, and 

I quote the following, quote: 

 

 The documents presented to the CMB Board of Directors 

indicate that the management of CMB believed that the 

corporation did not have the financial (capacity) to pay the 

dividend of $310 million dollars and that CMB's present 

financial situation would deteriorate by this payment because 

of the assumption by CMB of additional interest bearing 

debt.  In fact, management . . . (listen to this, Mr. Speaker)  In 

fact, management recommended that the Board not approve 

the payment by CMB of the $310 million dollar dividend. 

 

 The documents further state that the payment of this dividend 

would ultimately lead to (the) situation where CMB will 

require significant dividends from the Crown Corporations 

each year just to meet its interest expense.  This means that 

the corporation was anticipated to have little (capacity) to pay 

dividends to the Heritage Fund in future years. 

 

What has happened . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll take the next question.  Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Premier another 

question.  In 1982 finance charges as a per cent of revenue for 

SaskPower were 32 per cent.  Last year they were 17.6 per 

cent.  So we cut the interest charges in half for the public of 

Saskatchewan, and as a result of that the public utilities can 

make $400 million in profits and retained earnings. 

 

And on top of that, I ask you, Mr. Premier, if we were able to 

cut the debt/equity ratio for SaskPower and the interest 

expense as opposed to what it was before, almost in half, why 

do you raise the utility rates up to 30 per cent and hit the 

farmers and hit the utility people all across the province?  

Explain that to the public. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Among the things that was criticized 

by Ernst & Young and by the Gass Commission was the 

phoney accounting in which you people engaged. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It seems . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the Leader of the 

Opposition want an answer to his question?  He can't just sit 

down and then immediately interrupt.  He might not like the 

answer but you have to accept the answer that the ministers 

give. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It seems, Mr. Speaker, there are 10 

people left in the province who haven't got the accounting 

methods of the former government straight, and that's the 10 

people sitting opposite.  Everybody else understands that you 

used phoney and sometimes accounting that bordered on 

fraudulent to conceal a mountainous debt. 

 

I say to members opposite, that day has come to an end.  This 

government is going to be open and accountable and honest 

with the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, you know the Gass report said 

that every year books were accounted for.  The public 

information used people like Ernst & Young, and in 1991 I 

think this is the Minister of Economic Development and Trade 

and responsible for SaskPower, Ernst & Young's report, and 

what does it say? 

 

Ernst & Young's report says in 1982 finance charges as a per 

cent of revenue were 32 per cent.  Last year they were 17.  So 

we made a tremendous change from '82 to 1991.  And as a 

result of that, you can now record profits in the utilities and 

retained earnings, and it's $375 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question goes back to the Premier, and I quote 

the newspaper that talked about why the Minister of Finance 

wouldn't put the money into the central savings departments of 

this government so that you could approach the deficit of last 

year.  And I quote: the Conservative . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  You have asked your 

question.  Whoever wishes to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite shuffle debt 

around from one corporation to another like a card-sharp trying 

to hide a deuce.  You really did.  Debt went from one 

corporation to another to another. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh well, the member 

sanctimoniously says, no.  Indeed it did, and it was the 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

subject of scathing criticism in the Gass Commission and in the 

Ernst & Young report. 

 

I simply say to the member opposite, the day is gone.  From 

now on, we are going to be open, accountable, and honest with 

the Saskatchewan public, and they understand that if the 10 

members opposite don't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, for the introduction of guests, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to introduce 

to you and through you to the House a group of 28 students 

from Rosetown Central High School who are from the grade 8 

class there.  I welcome them to Regina and to the Assembly 

and look forward to meeting them for pictures and drinks.  And 

I ask the members to welcome this group to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Wills Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Wills Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Jury Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Commissioners for Oaths Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by 

repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, pursuant to section 

225 of The Election Act, I wish to table the report of the Chief 

Electoral Officer respecting reimbursements made to registered 

political parties and candidates. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of a Standing Committee on Constitutional 

Affairs 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

move, seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That a Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs be 

appointed and empowered to examine and inquire into all 

such matters and things as may be referred to it by this 

Assembly, and to report from time to time their observations 

thereon; with the power to send for persons, papers, and 

records, and to examine witnesses under oath; and that rule 

89(1) of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan be amended by adding the said 

committee to the list of standing committees of this 

Assembly; and that the said committee shall continue for the 

duration of this legislature but shall be subject to membership 

changes as may be affected from time to time by resolution 

of the Assembly pursuant to rule 92(1). 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and to speak to the 

motion that has been presented by the Premier or the 

Government House Leader regarding the Standing Committee 

on Constitutional Affairs and the appointment of this 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I want to speak for a few moments and address 

a few concerns that we on this side of the House have with, 

first of all, the fact that this is going to be . . . we're introducing 

a standing committee to this House on the constitutional 

affairs. 

 

I guess the question we will be raising first of all is do we need 

another committee established in this province or even 

established by the NDP government.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

on October 21, 1991, Saskatchewan people made it clear what 

they wanted in regard to the constitution.  I believe they spoke 

out very loudly, and they indicated in a plebiscite at that time 

that they wanted to have input.  They wanted the opportunity to 

approve by referendum or plebiscite any proposed changes to 

the Canadian constitution or to the Saskatchewan position. 

 

If anything, Mr. Speaker, a special committee should be set up 

to make recommendations based on the public's desires.  And 

let me just remind the members of this Assembly and just bring 

to your attention as well, Mr. Speaker, of some of the results of 

that plebiscite conducted during that vote in October. 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

Mr. Speaker, of 482,926 votes counted regarding the plebiscite 

question, fully 383,060 voted in favour of, that being, having a 

plebiscite or having a referendum question posed regarding the 

constitutional question that would be delivered by the province; 

and 99,000 voted against, which is . . . I would indicate a clear 

indication that people across this province are certainly 

concerned about their country and certainly concerned about 

the role our province will play in the establishment of a 

constitution. 

 

In fact, just a reminder, just to let people know of what some of 

the people in other . . . To break it down a little bit, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatoon Riversdale, the riding of the Premier, 

5,403 voted yes on the plebiscite question; 1,368 voted against.  

That almost looks like an almost an 80 per cent vote in favour 

on that question. 

 

In Regina Elphinstone, the riding of the Government House 

Leader, 6,589 voted in favour of having a referendum or a 

plebiscite or the opportunity to voice their opinions, Mr. 

Speaker; 1,774 voted against.  There again, an obvious, almost 

80 per cent of the voting public that expressed their opinion on 

election day voted for that opportunity. 

 

Even in my own riding, the results were 5,250 in favour and 

1,341 said no.  There again, basically, Mr. Speaker, almost 

80.59 per cent of the people who voted on the plebiscite 

question, Mr. Speaker, voted and asked for the opportunity to 

be able to speak out through a plebiscite or a referendum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this committee can examine the issues and report 

back to the legislature and be dissolved.  We're suggesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that rather than being a standing committee, this 

committee should be a special committee.  And why would I 

suggest we have a special committee rather than a standing 

committee as it's brought forward in the motion? 

 

The reason, Mr. Speaker, is a standing committee, as I 

understand it, becomes another ongoing committee of this 

Assembly and of this legislature, and we would have to 

question whether it is in the best regards of the province and 

the best interest of the people of this province that we establish 

another committee, a committee that would be ongoing, a 

committee that certainly would be deriving . . . and becoming 

more costly to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What we're suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is we should have a 

special committee.  A special committee would give the 

committee members an opportunity . . . a special committee 

with some guidelines as to time frame in which they would 

address the questions and maybe consult with people and report 

to this Assembly, thereby, Mr. Speaker, having a definite 

purpose and plan and reason to exist, as well as being more 

frugal managers of our public economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the resources of this Assembly need not be 

directed to a full-time standing committee, a standing 

committee as I indicated earlier which will collect per diem 

expenses each and every time they meet.  In fact 

since the election of October 21, 1991, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen numerous committees sitting.  In fact it seems that there's 

been an ongoing litany of committees meeting on different 

questions and issues in this province, and we have a 

government today talking about fiscal responsibility and I 

would suggest is establishing more committees.  Is that being 

fiscally responsible?  Are we using the taxpayers' money well?  

Why does this government need a standing committee on 

constitutional affairs? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have right here in this building a 

constitutional unit set up by the NDP.  And I would have to 

ask, Mr. Speaker, what is the role of this committee?  What is 

their role in government?  What was the unit, this special unit 

set up by the NDP, what was it set up for?  What are their 

duties if not to advise this government?  If they have already 

established a committee, doesn't the basis of the committee 

they've established have the opportunity or the ability to 

address the issues and the concerns that the government is 

looking for? 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, have an intergovernmental affairs office 

right here in the legislature.  And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, do 

they not play a role in advising the government on issues 

regarding the constitution?  Can the government not have these 

two offices play a larger public role? 

 

It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that we have enough 

people already involved in constitutional debate right here in 

this Legislative Assembly; that, given the role or maybe an 

expanded role, Mr. Speaker, they indeed could address some of 

the concerns that are not only concerns that the members 

opposite have regarding the constitution or their desires 

regarding this constitution or their suggestions as to 

Saskatchewan's role in the implementation of ratifying the 

constitutional agreement in Canada, but as well, Mr. Speaker, 

they probably and could even have a mandate I'm sure to 

accept responses from people across this province as people in 

Saskatchewan have indicated their desire to be involved in the 

constitutional debate here. 

 

(1445) 

 

So can the government not have these two offices work 

together playing a larger role in public life?  Can these offices 

not conduct public meetings for input, take the time to go and 

talk to people, or invite input from people right across this 

province as to how they view the constitution and their view of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of this legislature have met for 

departmental briefings before.  Can they not receive the 

information collected from the constitutional unit and 

intergovernmental affairs in the form of a briefing?   Can this 

government not then act on recommendations from their own 

departments?  I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

certainly will, at least I anticipate that they will be, looking to 

their departments for some information.  And as I've just been 

indicating, possibly, Mr. Speaker, they could expand the role of 

those departmental areas and give them the opportunity to 

speak to people across this province or solicit reports from 

people. 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, the current constitutional process has been a long, 

sometimes painful but none the less important journey for this 

country.  In fact when I think back to prior 1982, and the 

repatriation of, what I would have to say is a very flawed 

constitution of that date, pushed forward by the then prime 

minister of Canada, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, and aided very, if 

you would say, ably by the former premier of this province, 

Mr. Blakeney, and also the now Premier of this province, then 

attorney general, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that that 

would have been the time when more discussion, more debate 

should have taken place.  And possibly we wouldn't have the 

problem that we face today, being dragged into such a 

strenuous constitutional debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you think about it, when you look back to 

prior '82 and you ask yourself, well where was the government 

of the day at that time?  Where were they when it came to 

discussing this issue?  Why did they not put pressure on the 

then prime minister and then federal government of the day to 

indeed look at a way of repatriating the constitution that would 

have been agreeable to everyone in this country? 

 

Mr. Speaker, yet they decided to bring back . . . the federal 

government of the day decided to repatriate a constitution 

without the support of a good majority of Canadian people.  

Mr. Speaker, this country is just . . . this is too great a country 

for us to enter into a fractious debate.  Mr. Speaker, this 

process of consultation has been characterized by the most 

extensive consultation efforts ever undertaken by any Canadian 

government. 

 

And I think when we talk about the constitution, we talk about 

another committee, we just have to look back over the debate 

since 1982 -- almost 10 years basically, I guess it's pretty well 

10 years today or this year -- there have been many forums that 

have been established.  First we had the Citizens' Forum on the 

constitution.  Next, Mr. Speaker, there was the 

Beaudoin/Edwards committee on the amending formula.  And 

then we had the Beaudoin/Dobbie review of the federal 

government's constitutional proposals, then a series of national 

conferences followed.  And now under way and nearing 

completion is the multilateral process involving the federal 

government, nine provincial governments, two territorial 

governments, and leaders of four major aboriginal groups. 

 

It would appear, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that we 

have had continuous and ongoing discussion.  We have had 

opportunity for people across this nation to be involved, people 

have been invited to be involved.  Certainly the federal 

government has taken the opportunity of inviting -- even going 

out of their way to seek -- input from groups and agencies to 

make sure that they at least voice their opinions publicly 

through the forums that were placed forward. 

 

And I guess I, like many Canadians too, we tend to sit back and 

we look to somebody else to raise the concerns, raise the issues 

we would have.  Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

ongoing debate we have had . . . and certainly the debate on the 

constitution is something that is going to probably continue for 

many years to come. 

When I think about our country . . . and there's a copy of the 

preamble that has been put forward for the constitution, and I'd 

just like to read it to this Assembly.  This is what we as 

Canadians, I believe, really are: 

 

 We are the people of Canada, 

 drawn from the four winds of the earth, 

 a privileged people, 

 citizens of a sovereign state. 

 

 Trustees of a vast northern land, 

 We celebrate its beauty and grandeur. 

 Aboriginal peoples, immigrants, 

 French speaking, English speaking, 

 Canadians all, 

 we honour our roots and value our diversity. 

 

 We affirm that our country 

 is founded upon principles that 

 acknowledge the supremacy of God, 

 the dignity of each person, 

 the importance of family, 

 and the value of community. 

 

 We recognize that we remain free 

 only when freedom is founded on 

 respect for moral and spiritual values, 

 and the rule of law 

 in the service of justice. 

 

 We cherish this free and united country, 

 its place within the family of nations, 

 and accepting the responsibilities privileges bring, 

 we pledge to strengthen this land 

 as a home of peace, hope, and goodwill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly men and women of this Assembly, men 

and women across this province want to see our country 

strengthened.  We want to see not only our province 

strengthened but we want to see our nation strengthened.  And 

I don't really understand how a standing committee is really 

going to address all that or just by implementing another 

committee of the House is going to further the process of 

indeed strengthening and uniting people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to ask why would we be creating a 

standing committee?  Why not a specific committee or special 

committee with specific guidelines and specific goals and a 

role?  Can it be, Mr. Speaker, that this committee is being 

created so that our Premier can have another form of 

constitutional debate, a forum that maybe he can use to his 

advantage, maybe. 

 

As one of the government members mentioned yesterday, and 

speaking to the debate on the health question about politics, 

certainly when it comes to debate, whether it's in this Assembly 

or whether it's in the federal Assembly or federal parliament or 

across this province, politics is going to enter any area or any 

part of our society where politicians get involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I realize that the 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

Premier of this province has a deep interest in our constitution.  

Mr. Speaker, I believe that's evident in the fact that the Premier 

was quite involved in debate even back in '82. 

 

But we would suggest . . . we also know that the Premier is still 

busy, and we wonder, Mr. Speaker, that with all of his 

involvements if part of the reason for bringing forward or 

suggesting or bringing the motion forward regarding a standing 

committee rather than a special select committee, is not to 

maybe give members of his government, members on his side 

of the House, another forum debate -- giving them another 

forum where they can feel maybe they're more a part of the 

parliamentary or the legislative process. 

 

For instance, what about the member from Cumberland?  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, there are probably many members on that 

side of the House -- and no doubt maybe in 1982 the premier of 

the day found the same thing -- many people who found 

themselves in the back benches who thought maybe they had a 

chance for cabinet, who are feeling just a little down and out.  

And maybe the Premier today is looking for a way of giving 

his members something just a little more to be involved in so 

that they could feel that they are part, part of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate.  The Premier said last week that 

western wishes have been shoved off the plate during the 

constitutional negotiations.  He warned that talks could end in 

deadlock if that continues.  And yes, there are many questions, 

there are many concerns that are very important to each and 

every one of us.  Even in our own province we face many 

concerns.  And it would appear to me that there are many 

people becoming very tired of this debate, the constitutional 

debate, as it appears, Mr. Speaker, it's a way of trying to deflect 

the real issues and the concerns that many people face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has been at the forefront of the talks; what 

has been a priority of these talks?  Aboriginal issues and 

concerns?  Aboriginal issues and concerns have been taken 

very seriously.  Are we to assume when the Premier states 

western issues have been shoved off the plate that issues 

pertaining to aboriginal peoples are of no concern to this 

province?  Is that what the Premier is saying?  Is this the case? 

 

How does that make the member from Cumberland feel, 

knowing that his own leader doesn't feel issues of our 

aboriginal peoples are western issues?  I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

we have seen . . . and the federal government certainly by 

opening the door, inviting aboriginal groups to be involved, has 

really extended a hand to all groups across this nation and 

certainly the first nations of this country to be involved in the 

constitutional process.  If aboriginals' concerns are not the 

issue, then whose concerns are they? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe now is the time for the NDP to use the 

constitution for public relations purposes . . . now is not the 

time.  The previous administration had a constitutional 

committee.  Why does this government not refer to this 

committee's findings? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have shared their views with a 

number of committees, both federal and provincial.  Will they 

continue to share their views, or will the standing committee sit 

amongst themselves and collect 

per diems? 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly are certainly 

concerned about our future.  We're concerned about Canada's 

future because we have such a great country to live in.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at Canada and we talk of Canada 

and just . . . I was at a function last week and talking with the 

president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, who just returned 

from a trip to Russia.  He was talking about some of the things 

he had seen in Russia, some of the things he had seen on his 

trip overseas.  And his comment again was, yes, we may have a 

lot of problems.  We may have a lot of divisions.  We may 

have a lot of diversities in this country, but we still have a great 

country.  We still have one of the best nations in the world. 

 

My colleagues are concerned about Canada's future.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, not only are we in this Assembly, people across this 

province, but as well the lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan, 

Frederick W. Johnson, is concerned about Canada's future.  At 

a speech in Estevan, hosted by the Estevan Knights of 

Columbus, Mr. Johnson got up, began his speech, and then 

decided, because the constitutional issue was at the forefront 

and was one of the major things . . . issues of the day, decided 

to speak from the heart as to what he really saw and what he 

really felt about Canada as a whole. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just in talking to a number of people who 

were at that meeting, they really felt that Mr. Johnson really 

gave a good, sound deliberation on Canada and what it means 

to be a Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, we are concerned about our country.  And 

we're not opposed to this committee because we're opposed to 

national unity.  Not in the least.  We are opposed to this 

committee because it is repetitive and expensive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Have the people of this province told you that they want a 

standing committee on the constitution?  I wonder, did the 

government of the day ask the people of Saskatchewan whether 

they want another committee?  Do you care if the people of this 

province want a standing on the constitution?  No.  It seems the 

Premier wants to create it to placate his back-benchers into 

playing. 

 

The federal government provided ample opportunity for 

Saskatchewan people to share in national dialogue.  And note, 

Mr. Speaker, I said national dialogue, not provincial dialogue.  

And as I say that, Mr. Speaker, and we are all very well aware 

of the . . . it seems that every province and every leader across 

this great nation is dividing or laying out their own turf to 

address the special needs of their areas. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us 

must learn how to work together, and there is going to be an 

awful lot of give and take.  We're going to have to give and 

take -- everyone from the West to the central Canada to the 

eastern Canada -- in order to arrive at a constitutional format 

that each and every one of us can feel we are a part of our great 

country and feel that we can address the needs of the citizens of 

this country. 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, the Citizens' Forum on Canada's Future travelled 

across the country and listened to the views and suggestions of 

thousands of Canadians.  The Special Joint Committee on a 

Renewed Canada sought the input and advice of Canadians on 

28 specific proposals for constitutional change.  Participation in 

these various forums was not restricted to constitutional 

experts, politicians, or representatives from special interest 

groups.  Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Measures were taken to ensure that Canadians from varying 

backgrounds had the opportunity to participate in the 

constitutional renewal process because all Canadians -- and I 

reiterate that, Mr. Speaker -- all Canadians have a stake in its 

outcome. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you, were all these forums and committees 

all in vain?  Was the province of Saskatchewan ignored, Mr. 

Speaker?  Did we in Saskatchewan not have the opportunity to 

attend these forums held in our province?  I believe we all had 

a chance, all Canadians had a chance, any interest group had a 

chance.  People from all walks of life had a chance to attend 

the special committee and the committees put forward by the 

constitution, the federal government, to address the 

constitution. 

 

I'm not saying that we should now be shut out, but what I am 

saying is that it is now time for the Saskatchewan government 

to start governing.  Why do we have to have another 

committee, another committee to hold more public hearings in 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

If we can have a committee on the constitution, why don't we 

have a committee to address hearings and address the concerns 

of people across this province to the changes made by this 

government in health care.  Maybe we should ask people 

whether they really want to pay a deductible of $380 a month.  

Why don't you hold public hearings on whether diabetics 

should be taken off of the drug plan? 

 

If we're going to establish a committee for the constitution, Mr. 

Speaker, the door is open to establish committee or could be 

open to establish committees on any number of topics in this 

province.  Is this the open and consultative government that 

people voted for?  Did they vote for a government which will 

pick and choose which issues the public will be consulted on?  

Of course people didn't.  If you're going to consult, consult on 

health matters as well. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people must pay their bills 

and carry on with their lives whether there is a constitutional 

crisis on our hands or not.  After that, people have attended 

hearings on the constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please do not get me wrong.  Nothing is more 

important than the unity of this country.  But the people spoke 

and the people voted.  The people voted.  And let me reiterate 

again, to be specific, 383,060 people cast a ballot on the 

constitution, and what did they say? -- 383,000-plus voted yes 

in favour of an opportunity to vote in a referendum.  Yes, they 

wanted approval by 

referendum or plebiscite of any proposed changes to the 

Canadian constitution. 

 

And how many people voted no?  Less than 100,000 --  less 

than a quarter of the population voted against an opportunity to 

speak out.  Mr. Speaker, I believe the people last fall spoke and 

gave the members of this legislature and gave the government a 

mandate to give them the opportunity to then vote on the 

constitutional question.  Of course I think maybe we should 

also warn the public that they should, rather than ask for a 

plebiscite, should ask for a referendum to be held on 

constitutional change, if at all possible. 

 

For, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me, and we've all seen in the last . 

. . since this House has come back into session that this 

government has not given any consideration whatsoever to the 

three major plebiscite questions.  It appears to me that the 

government has ignored the plebiscite questions before, and 

they probably will ignore them in the future.  After all what did 

the government do regarding the plebiscite on abortions in 

which more than two-thirds of the people of Saskatchewan 

spoke out on the funding of publicly funded abortions? 

 

The matter at hand is whether or not a Standing Committee on 

the Constitution should be created.  I believe the government 

has the mandate they need to address the questions.  Do we 

need a standing committee?  The matter at hand is whether or 

not a committee should be created that will be with us for the 

existence of this legislature and beyond, as a standing 

committee would be. 

 

As I said, if the government were bent on creating a committee, 

create a special committee, a special committee with specific 

time lines, Mr. Speaker.  A special committee with specific 

time lines will give the government what they want: higher 

profile for few of their back-benchers.  And it will be at a 

minimal cost to the taxpayers of this province. 

 

The people elected the NDP to form the government and to 

govern on October.  They elected them with a specific 

mandate.  This mandate included allowing the people to vote 

on any proposed changes to the constitution.  The government's 

role is to participate in the talks and put forward the best 

interests of our province.  It is not the Saskatchewan 

government's role to threaten these talks -- as it would appear 

to be indicated by reading the newspapers regarding some of 

the Premier's comments -- to threaten the success of these talks 

with deadlocks or ultimatums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, legislation has been put in place to permit a 

federal referendum.  We all know that this legislation is just a 

precautionary measure, but it is in place to ensure that the 

federal government has every means at its disposal to achieve 

success in the Canada round.  Having the legislation, regardless 

of what the Premier would have people think, does not mean 

that a referendum will be held. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if a referendum were held, what would it 

mean to the people of Saskatchewan?  If the question was 

presented to the people of Canada in a referendum 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

and the people voted in favour, what would it do to this 

province unless we are at the bargaining table, unless we are 

speaking out rather than just running with another committee 

around this province, around and around and another circle 

again? 

 

If a federal referendum were ever to be held under the proposed 

legislation, it would not interfere with the right of any province 

to hold its own referendum.  We still in this province would 

have that opportunity to give the people of Saskatchewan their 

time to vote and to voice their opinions based on what has been 

said and the rhetoric and the debate that has taken place over 

the last number of years.  A federal referendum in a 

parliamentary democracy such as Canada's is a serious step. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does Saskatchewan's Premier agree with 

referendums or plebiscites?  Is he willing to give the people of 

Saskatchewan a chance to put forward their wishes through a 

referendum?  I would ask him to ask the people, if given a 

choice, whether they would rather have the opportunity to vote 

on a referendum or whether they would like a Standing 

Committee on the Constitution.  Just ask them. 

 

Instead of setting up committee after committee under the guise 

of being consultative, just be consultative.  I believe that's what 

they indicated in the throne speech -- that they would be more 

consultative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, invite the people, hold public meetings on the 

constitution organized by the constitutional unit, by the unit 

that's already in place in this province.  Give them the 

opportunity.  Let them put some of their expertise to work and 

give people in Saskatchewan an opportunity to voice their 

opinions. 

 

Or allow the intergovernmental affairs office to organize a 

public forum or public debate on the constitution and then have 

them report to the committee, have them report to the House, 

have them report to the government.  Don't set up another 

standing committee at the expense of taxpayers in order for the 

Premier to have his own constitutional sand-box to play in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of what I have said here today, I move 

that the motion be amended as follows.  Mr. Speaker: 

 

 I move, seconded by the member from Morse, that the 

motion no. 1 be amended as follows: 

 

 That the word "Standing" be deleted and replaced with 

"Special" in all instances, and that those words following the 

phrase "to report from time to time their observations 

thereon;" be substituted with the following: 

 

 and this special committee make its first report to the 

Assembly by September 1, 1992 and its final report to the 

Assembly by October 1, 1992; and that the said committee 

shall dissolve upon tabling its final report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member continues, the debate shall 

continue concurrently. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of 

concerns and observations I have regarding the standing 

committee that is being brought forward in a motion by the 

Premier, and I want to just go into that a little bit. 

 

The constitution and its discussion have been a part of an 

ongoing concern and interest to me through the past years ever 

since I probably began to be involved in politics, and I want to 

point out some of the observations that I have made as I take a 

look at some of the things that have been done. 

 

If we begin in the early '70s, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the 

discussion on the constitution, the prime minister of the day, 

the Hon. Pierre Trudeau, made some systematic changes in his 

role as a prime minister in dealing with involving the provinces 

and their roles as a part of a overall change in a philosophical 

way of managing the affairs of the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prime minister of the day changed a lot of 

things that went on, and one of the things that he changed was 

that parliament became a part of Canada that the prime minister 

really had less and less to do with all the time.  And I noticed 

that as a part of his involvement he began to involve the 

premiers of the various provinces and in that discussion 

brought about the opportunity for premiers to involve 

themselves in special interest groups as it related to the context 

of Canada. 

 

And I'm not sure that that was an asset or a benefit to the 

people of Canada.  I know that discussions are necessary to 

implement change.  I know that discussions need to take place.  

I want to point out that in his responses to the parliament, he 

was negative to parliament and with that he brought forward 

the premiers' conferences and various kinds of responses that 

they gave him. 

 

And we had special interest groups forming from all across 

Canada that said, my priority is first.  It came from Quebec.  It 

came from the Maritimes.  It came from western Canada.  And 

these interest groups, Mr. Speaker, focussed their attention on 

strictly regional areas, disciplining themselves only in relating 

to their own specific needs in relation to Canada. 

 

And some ways, Mr. Speaker, those responsibilities were 

supposed to be borne by members of parliament, to the 

Parliament of Canada.  And I believe that they usurped that 

responsibility and gave that to the premiers of the various 

provinces.  And through that we have a fragmentation of the 

parliamentary system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prime minister of the day did not involve the 

Senate as a part of that discussion.  He involved only the 

premiers of the provinces of Canada.  And it in some ways was 

profitable for him, because what he could do is he could 

manage the politics of it a whole lot better than he could if he 

managed the politics through the Parliament of Canada.  And I 

think that that was his goal in 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

doing that. 

 

I want to point out to the Assembly also that there were 

significant reforms that he made and that dealt with some of the 

things that we are talking about in this constitutional debate.  

And those items in this constitution refer to a number of things.  

The special interest groups, as I said before, in certain areas of 

the country -- one is agriculture in western Canada; one is 

French in Quebec; one is dealing with French in New 

Brunswick . . . and all of the context of that dealt with special 

interest groups.  And the Parliament of Canada needed to be 

involved in that. 

 

And I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that the prime minister of the 

day did that.  He involved the leaders of the various political 

parties, who at that time generally were Liberal and NDP, and 

he involved them in a discussion that did not allow for any 

opportunity to deal with the benefits that could accrue to 

having a solid, systematic form of constitutional reform that 

would have a pattern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear to me that we need changes in our 

constitution.  If you would have had this constitutional debate 

going on in the United States, you would have had the 

constitution bring strength to the country.  And in Canada what 

the discussion on the constitution does, it always seems to tear 

us apart.  And that's one of the things that I find the most 

difficult to understand about the politics of the Canadian people 

is the ripping and the grinding and pitting one group against 

another group that we have in the context of being a Canadian. 

 

(1515) 

 

The United States doesn't do that.  What they do is when they 

come out of a constitutional debate, they come out stronger.  

And the question we have to ask ourselves: are we going to 

come out as a Canadian stronger because of this debate, or are 

we going to weaken our opportunities as it relates to being a 

Canadian? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of respect for the people who 

have begun the parliamentary system in Canada, and I have a 

great deal of respect for the wisdom that they had in dealing 

with the make-up of the country.  But the evolution of it, we 

have to be very careful that we don't tear the country apart by 

the very fabric of who we are, and with the intensity with 

which we address the concerns that we have. 

 

We have a very serious constitutional discussion and, Mr. 

Speaker, we always have economics coming into this 

constitutional debate.  Now in dealing with the question of 

whether that's proper or not proper, I guess is a matter of 

debate.  We need to assess whether it is economically 

beneficial for us to be discussing the constitution and what 

impact it will have on each one of us.  However as we go into 

that, we need to make sure that corporately we're better off than 

we were before.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a part of what we 

need to do. 

 

I believe that we need to have a time line for the discussion on 

the constitution in the province of Saskatchewan that is limited 

to a specific time.  Otherwise what we're going to be doing is 

we're going to be at the 

personal discretion of the Premier of this province.  We're 

going to be dealing with it in a helter-skelter basis whenever he 

chooses to implement that.  And I think that it's better to have 

the opportunity to address it from the perspective of this 

Assembly, that we conclude some of these discussions; that we 

say, this is where we're going. 

 

On the Senate, for example, is there an opportunity for us to 

have an elected Senate, an effective Senate, an equal Senate in 

the province of Saskatchewan, equal with Ontario or Quebec.  

Those are the kinds of questions that we need to raise and I 

believe that we need to raise them.  But I think, Mr. Speaker, 

we need a set time line to deal with that in the context of the 

constitutional discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province voted to say that they 

wanted to be a part of that.  They wanted to know at the 

conclusion of this discussion that they had an opportunity for 

them to decide.  And 80 per cent of the people in this province 

said they wanted an opportunity to participate in that 

discussion. 

 

Now the people in this Assembly, and specifically probably the 

legal people, will say, well they won't understand the legal 

implications.  But, Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan know and understand a great deal about politics.  

As a matter of fact, they're probably the most in-tune political 

people that there are in Canada.  And I believe that they are, 

and I believe that the people in my constituency are. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for us to deal with 

this in a concrete, definite way is better for us to deal with it in 

a special committee with a specific time line and a specific 

date. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to reaffirm some of the points made 

by the mover, the member from Moosomin, that it needs a 

definite plan.  It needs a specific time for reporting.   It needs a 

fiscal responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had through this past six or eight months 

of the NDP being in power, we've had committees running all 

over -- committee doing this and a committee doing that.  And 

you know what, Mr. Speaker, it costs money to run those 

committees, and that's a specific concern that we on this side of 

the House have. 

 

We need to have the input from the constitutional unit that was 

set up by the Premier as a specific focus of attention into this 

committee, and deal with it in a way that it's going to come to a 

conclusion and say, this is what we want to have and this is 

what we're taking back to the people.  Now you tell us whether 

you agree with that.  And that opportunity is what the people of 

this province wanted to have. 

 

Your intergovernmental affairs people should be able to give us 

some opportunity to give the people of Saskatchewan a view of 

what the constitution should be about.  I haven't even begun to 

deal with the elements of what we do with the people in this 

province, with special interest groups, as they relate to natives, 

as they relate to Metis, as they relate to European Canadians.  

These are all people that will want to have a specific say in 

their 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

responses to the committee. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure as I stand here today and say this to 

this Assembly, that we need a specific time for this to be 

accomplished.  And the reason I say that is we're going to have 

a vote, Mr. Speaker, in Quebec this fall.  And the reason that 

we need to understand that that's as significant as a vote taken 

in Saskatchewan or one taken in Manitoba is that we need to 

say to the people of Canada we want to support the general 

philosophy of being a Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that voice in Quebec is going to be heard.  We're 

not sure today whether it's going to be sovereignty or whether 

it's going to be part of Canada.  And, Mr. Speaker, it would be 

a sad day if Quebec did decide to leave.  It would be a sad day 

for the people of Canada for their contribution to this country 

and for their willingness to participate.  The majority of them 

would.  However, Mr. Speaker, we need to know that.  And 

this committee needs to have a time line in which to address its 

opportunity in relation to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of other things that I 

think that are important for a time line.  We need to have the 

decision made, and the decision has to do with a number of 

areas.  And I believe they are significant, they are significant 

enough to mention. 

 

And one of them is that I believe that we need to do this in 

co-ordination with a vote in Quebec, and I know that 

opposition members know this also.  We need to do this with 

an election in Canada which is likely going to happen within 

the next 18 months.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is also significant 

in this whole discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are important areas that we need to deal 

with and why we need to have a time line for the people of 

Saskatchewan to have an opportunity to respond to the 

questions that we are going to raise as a part of the discussion 

on the constitution.  We have to have some final documents for 

the people of Saskatchewan to begin to decide whether they 

really want to participate in that way in the discussion with 

Canada.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very important. 

 

I want to just say that we can have a government that 

determines within itself what it's going to do.  We can have that 

in Saskatchewan here.  We can stand on this side and say 

whatever we want.  However the people have said what they 

want. 

 

The interesting thing is that you are staring directly in the face 

of public opinion, a response that they gave you in the election.  

They gave you the responsibility of telling them what you want 

to do and then you asking them for that support.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is very important as a part of this discussion.  And I 

think you need to do it within the framework of the times that 

we have suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a whole lot of things that we could say on 

this issue and I am going to look with interest at what the 

government members are going to say on this matter as it 

relates to this amendment. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to speak to 

the amendment and have given this some consideration this 

afternoon.  I couldn't agree more that this legislature should 

have a committee on the constitution.  However I wish to 

discuss two issues of concern and both related to timing. 

 

First, given the crucial nature of the constitutional debate, Mr. 

Speaker, I question why any committee was not struck in 

November so that there could be input from Saskatchewan 

citizens on this extremely important issue which ultimately 

defines who all of us are as Canadians. 

 

Secondly, I listened to the Premier this weekend act as 

spokesperson for the western premiers regarding their stand on 

the constitution and he outlined their bottom line.  It makes one 

question how much value or input there will be from this 

committee in a concluding kind of way when, indeed, the 

western premiers seem to have already made up their minds. 

 

It appears that the power of the proposed Standing Committee 

of the Constitution has already been usurped.  And I support 

the amendment to have a special select committee, which I 

truly hope will be empowered to make some actual 

contribution. 

 

In conclusion, people must be included in their democratic 

process.  And to be fully participating in democracy, the people 

must first listen and become well-informed and then have their 

voices heard when they speak.  I ask that the Constitution 

Committee be a special select committee with the authority to 

truly listen to all of the people of our province. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's 

important that all members of this legislature enter into this 

debate today.  Before us we have a very crucial question, a 

question put forward by the Premier in designing what 

relationship this committee, indeed this legislature will have 

with Saskatchewan people as we discuss the ongoing 

constitutional question in Canada. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it's a question that Saskatchewan 

people feel very strongly about.  So strongly, as my colleague 

from Moosomin pointed out, that they voted in overwhelming 

numbers last October.  They voted in overwhelming numbers 

to say to those they have elected to govern them in this 

province that they want a direct say in what Saskatchewan does 

ultimately in the constitutional process. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that we have seen the 

phenomenon of the Reform Party strengthen in western Canada 

is that the process that we as Canadians have been following 

over the last 10 years in regards to our constitution is one that 

people feel a degree of alienation with.  And certainly people 

around our country and within our province have been fond of 

finger-pointing at the various failures that have accrued to our 

constitutional process over that time. 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

As has been pointed out many times, both in this legislature 

and indeed across Canada, that the process in 1982 which 

resulted in the repatriation of our constitution from Great 

Britain was one that was flawed.  Not that, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan or indeed Canadian people were against the idea 

and the concept of individual Canadians having more rights 

and freedoms.  Not that Canadians as a whole were against our 

court system playing a stronger role in our daily lives.  And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think amongst those that tabulate the 

pluses and the minuses for individuality in our country would 

say that there have been a number of advancements in the lives 

of individual Canadians. 

 

But the very fact, Mr. Speaker, that that process had one basic 

flaw in it -- and that was that a third of our country ultimately 

was not included in the final solution -- has meant that for the 

last 10 years in Canada we have had this nagging doubt as to 

the role of our political leaders, as to the role of our institutions 

in being able to come to some type of finality that will keep our 

country together over the next century.  And I guess it's 

achieving that finality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has seen so 

many, particularly in western Canada, take issue with the 

processes that we've gone through. 

 

(1530) 

 

Certainly the Meech Lake accord and the obvious flaws that 

were pointed out by people in our society was a process that 

was really a continuation of the 1982 process whereby the 

premiers and their select few advisors met behind closed doors, 

even though in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we did see 

ratification and indeed it all came down ultimately to one 

provincial premier as to whether the Meech Lake process 

would come to some final conclusion. 

 

But the very fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that process was 

viewed by many to have flaws, because it excluded the average 

Canadian still from having that final say in how their country 

will have a shape, a form, a substance, and ultimately what 

degree of individuality they wish to express in the make-up of 

that country. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when Saskatchewan people had 

that first opportunity to express themselves on their inclusion in 

the process, it's why we saw such large numbers, why we saw 

so many Saskatchewan people say, I want to play a role. 

 

With that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and I don't think 

anyone can disregard that result -- it ultimately then comes 

down to this Assembly, the people chosen to sit as 

representatives from each and every constituency in this 

province, putting our best foot forward in allowing them that 

process. 

 

As my two colleagues have pointed out earlier in debate, we 

find some difficulty in supporting the concept as brought 

forward by the Premier to have another standing committee of 

the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the history of this legislature since 

1905 there have been many standing committees, 

some of which as you know, sir, have not met for a great long 

time.  I think one of the reasons that perhaps the validity of a 

standing committee of this legislature that could sort of go on 

infinitum is that it would not send the proper signal to the 

people of this province. 

 

Everyone in Canada knows that the days and the weeks shorten 

as we come to some type of finality. And that is because the 

province of Quebec have expressed the will to allow their 

people some type of broad based voice in the make-up of a 

constitutional process.  We have seen the federal Parliament of 

Canada introduce legislation -- referendum legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker -- that would do the same thing for the people 

of Canada. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as was pointed out by one 

of my colleagues, that any time politicians enter into this type 

of process, you will have politics.  And I can't help but wonder, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if some of the reason, the raison d'tre 

behind the government's motion is not brought about by some 

degree of pressure from their federal counterparts in Ottawa 

who obviously have found things that they don't like in the way 

that the present federal government is conducting the 

constitutional process. 

 

One of the reasons I think that we in the opposition have said 

that a special select committee of this legislature, under some 

very stringent time frames, should be struck to go and meet 

with our citizenry, is that they will then have the confidence 

that as the deadlines in other parts of Canada come upon us, 

that we as Saskatchewan people will have had the opportunity 

to express ourselves.  And that this committee will come to 

some basis, either through, as we believe, a plebiscite or 

referendum that all Saskatchewan people can speak in, or at 

least a basis that our Premier and those gathered around him in 

this constitutional group that has been put together in this 

Legislative Building, will go forward into those final 

negotiations with a true sense of what Saskatchewan people 

think and feel. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it would be flawed for our 

Premier to go into those negotiations, as he did in 1982 as the 

attorney general of this province, with a mandate to negotiate 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people without the opportunity for 

them to express themselves in some broad-based way.  The last 

thing that this province or this country can afford is to have 

another deal done in the middle of the night in somebody's 

kitchen. 

 

And I think the Premier fully recognizes that that in today's 

society would be unacceptable, that the hurry and the need that 

some people felt was present in 1982, that the deal-making that 

went on over things like the right to own property, the 

deal-making that went on in regard to resource ownership in 

western Canada, that the deal-making that went on as to the 

various rights and liberties of Canadian people cannot happen 

again; that the special interest groups cannot have the ability to 

influence the outcome in 1992 as they did in 1982. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know of only one way that that can 

happen.  And some would argue that it is too final a solution, 

that it unnecessarily will exclude, that it will exclude those 

minority groups in our society who have strong views.  But I 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

think what we're talking about here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

ultimately is a consensus among Canadian peoples -- English 

speaking, French speaking, people from the minorities whose 

mother tongue may not have been French or English. But as we 

come to that final conclusion that a simple, and we would hope, 

large majority of Canadians would feel strongly enough about 

their country that they would express that view in a final 

referendum. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with that in mind that I would make 

an amendment to the main motion in the hopes that the 

government members would listen to what has been said by all 

opposition parties in this House and that they would listen to 

the words of Saskatchewan people last October who voted in 

overwhelming numbers.  And I would therefore move, Mr. 

Speaker, seconded by the member from Maple Creek: 

 

 That the words "and that the said committee shall continue 

for the duration of this legislature but shall be subject to 

membership changes as may be affected from time to time by 

resolution of the Assembly, pursuant to rule 92(1)" be deleted 

and replaced with the following: 

 

 "and that no constitutional resolution will be introduced into 

the Assembly that has not been ratified by the people of 

Saskatchewan in a general referendum." 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have carefully examined the 

amendment and I wish to draw to the attention of the members 

Beauchesne's, paragraph 579, 6th Edition, where Beauchesne 

says: 

 

 An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a 

matter which is foreign to the proposition involved in the 

main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 

 

And number 2: 

 

 An amendment may not raise a new question which can only 

be considered as a distinct motion after proper notice. 

 

I have read the main motion very carefully and in no way is 

there any reference at all to constitutional resolution.  And 

therefore I find the amendment foreign to the main motion and 

out of order. 

 

The debate shall continue on the main motion.  And I'll have to 

remind members that the Premier is on his feet and he will be 

closing debate, and if any members wish to speak they must do 

so now. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure for me to be able to discuss this particular motion 

before the Assembly today.  I had hoped of course to rise to 

second an amendment but obviously that can't be done, so I 

will go back to the main motion. 

 

I guess it's a little bit awe inspiring for me to talk about the 

constitution of our country.  It's not very often that a farmer in 

Saskatchewan would find himself in the midst of such an 

important debate in the Legislative Assembly.  And this is a 

most amazing thing because we had thought, Mr. Speaker, that 

this problem would have been solved many years ago and that 

we would probably not have to be indulging in redoing the 

same debates over and over, year after year. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the constitution as it was repatriated 

from Great Britain was, by the very nature of the fact that it 

was old, bound to be outdated.  And it was probably necessary 

that we would have to consider bringing it up to date into our 

modern-day world just with the technologies and the changes 

we've seen over the last few years, it just naturally seems that 

we would have to review it. 

 

But we seem to be doing more than just reviewing our 

constitution, Mr. Speaker.  We seem to be getting into a 

situation where we are actually reformulating the direction that 

our future and our country may go.  And that makes it an 

extremely important issue because, if we were simply adjusting 

the constitution so that we could live in a modern context, then 

our general direction would still be going the same way.  And 

that would be quite easy for most of us in our country to 

accept. 

 

But if we're going to change the constitution in such a way that 

it redirects the way our nation is going to travel politically and 

perhaps even morally in issues such as language, which have 

become so important in this round, things like the aboriginal 

questions, questions like self-government for certain groups of 

people, this certainly throws a whole new slant on what a 

constitution is going to do in the direction we will travel in the 

future as a nation because it won't be the same as it was before.  

It'll be different. 

 

And so it's very important that if we strike committees that are 

going to go out, Mr. Speaker, to discuss things with the people, 

that we have it clear in our minds what we're trying to achieve 

with that committee. 

 

I think we have to go back to the plebiscite.  I know some folks 

who would rather forget about that idea, but the reality is that 

the esteem people have for politicians in our country is 

dropping.  All kinds of polls have been taken, and people have 

clearly indicated that they're just in a mood where they don't 

trust politicians very much any more.  And probably one of the 

reasons for that is that we sort of promise people that we're 

going to go a direction, and then a new administration comes 

along, and they just dissolve the whole thing. 

 

And what it happens is that people count on certain things 

happening because the politicians have said that that's what's 

going to happen.  A new administration will come along and 

completely change that, so the trust of the people is totally 

destroyed, Mr. Speaker -- the trust, not only in one 

administration, but in all politicians.  And I'm sure that most 

politicians are good and honourable people, and most people 

basically understand that.  But in reality when you talk to folks 

out in the coffee shops or 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

around the communities, you get the impression that they sort 

of put us all in the same bag.  And one guy said, shake them all 

up, it wouldn't matter which one came out the corner; they're 

all alike anyway. 

 

And obviously that isn't true, but the problem is that we are all 

being tagged with being the same kind of low-life characters 

that the media sometimes portrays us in in cartoons.  And that's 

unfortunate because it could be corrected.  And it could be 

corrected with some real, fundamental, easy things to be done, 

and that would be to live up to the obligations that are set out 

as we go through our society. 

 

A basic and fundamental thing like honouring a plebiscite that 

was taken last fall could go a long way to convince people that 

we are genuinely all interested in doing the right things, and 

that politicians can be trusted that when the people vote for 

something, that in fact what they vote for is what they get. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it's important in this day and 

age that if people vote for something, that they should get it.  

Because in a democracy the people have the right to decide 

their own fate even if they're wrong.  And they also have the 

right to stop and say, we were wrong; we want to now change 

our minds and do something else. 

 

That's what a democracy is about, is to have the ability to be 

able to change your mind or to do something that you want to 

do and then change and do something else.  You have that 

option to be able to change directions in where you're going by 

a majority of the people deciding that that's what they want to 

do. 

 

I said to myself as we entered this discussion, I wonder what is 

the motive for setting up a committee that would travel around 

the province to discuss this matter with our people.  And on the 

surface it would seem it's a good idea because, after all, this is 

an important issue; it's an extremely important issue.  And if 

the motive then is to genuinely go out and research the 

problem, to ask people their opinions, that's good.  And if it's to 

go out and educate people, to explain to them what is at stake 

and what's going to happen, that's also good. 

 

But if the motive is to try to somehow convince the people that 

we've done enough after it's finished and that we no longer 

need a plebiscite, that we no longer have to honour our past 

commitments, then we're wrong. 

 

So it is extremely important that we identify what the motives 

are for having this committee so that we do it in an honourable 

fashion, so that we do not destroy the trust of the very people 

that we are consulting with. 

 

We've seen all kinds of boards and committees go around our 

province in the last little while.  We've had probably more 

boards and commissions set up than I've ever heard of before.  

And I hope that they do a lot of good.  But they're expensive 

and they have to be done for the right reason. 

 

I can justify the cost of this kind of manoeuvre in our province 

if we have clearly identified, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to 

go out and do it for the right reason, and 

follow it up with a plebiscite or a referendum or some kind of a 

final conclusion that gives the people the confidence that they 

are being honoured in their request through the plebiscite to 

have a final say on what is being done in our constitutional 

moves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constitution is so important to us that we must 

ask our people what is going on in their minds.  The other day, 

just to point out how important the issue of the constitution is, I 

was in the town of Maple Creek where the horse riders were 

coming through.  They had started out from Victoria and 

they're riding through the country in honour of our 125th 

anniversary.  They also were honouring in that ride, and trying 

to bring focus on, a peaceful and proper conclusion to our 

constitutional issues. 

 

Wouldn't it be a shame, Mr. Speaker, if those folks and all 

kinds of them like that who are working throughout our 

province and throughout our country, were to be doing all of 

this celebrating of 125 years of birthday only to find the 

country coming to an end? 

 

Wouldn't it be a tragedy if the people that took a flag all the 

way across our country and through our province, honoured 

that flag and said all of those great and inspiring words about 

the greatness of our country, wouldn't it be terrible, Mr. 

Speaker, if that were all for nothing; if we found ourselves 

playing politics and playing games that would end up having 

the very constitution destroyed that keeps our country together? 

 

We've talked a little bit about having to keep a constitution 

that's updated and modern and new and we have to accept that, 

I'm sure.  But we have to be very careful each time that we 

open up a constitutional debate, that we don't start to destroy 

the very fabric of the thing that holds our country together. 

 

It has been suggested, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the motive is 

that the government of the day and its leader might be wanting 

to blackmail Ottawa into coming up with more dollars for our 

province.  And I can see that being used as a tool.  I guess in 

our society we get into politics, it's no different than if you're in 

business.  You try to use whatever you have available at your 

disposal to get a better deal if you can. 

 

But this is too important an issue.  This is the constitution of 

our country.  And to be trying to trade off the very real issues 

within our constitution for financial gain seems to me to be 

playing the wrong cards at the wrong time.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have to reconsider that motive.  It's important 

for the farmers of this province to have more money to operate 

with and I think it's important that people in our social services 

network have more dollars to have a more respectable standard 

of living. 

 

I'm sure I'll get no argument that all of the folks who work in 

our labour force and all through our province in other ways 

need a better standard of living, or would at least like to have a 

better standard of living.  And certainly they can have that.  

And certainly there are tools that we can negotiate those needs 

with our federal counterparts in some way.  Certainly there are 

ways that we can do that 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

without having to take a chance on gambling the constitution of 

our country, the very thing that could hold our country 

together, the very thing that has to be there to hold our country 

together. 

 

And so I would strongly urge, Mr. Speaker, that as we consider 

this committee to be struck, that our Premier take that into 

consideration, that this issue is far too important to be putting 

dollar and cents values in an attempt of blackmail of our 

federal counterparts.  It's far too important to take a chance on 

destroying it all for those kinds of things.  Those things are 

important, and we'll get to them.  And we will find tools to 

negotiate and ways of getting our way. 

 

But right now, we have things that concern . . . the Triple E 

Senate, for example.  This is a fundamental issue in the 

constitutional debate; one that I've heard a long time.  And I 

have to be honest with you, Mr. Speaker, I didn't really at first 

understand what equal, effective and elected senates would 

mean to our country.  But as I have researched it and studied it 

and listened to my colleagues, I've come to understand that this 

is a very basic and fundamental need of western Canada. 

 

Western Canada needs somehow to get the same kind of 

recognition from our country that Quebec is looking for for 

things like language and culture.  A Triple E Senate is not so 

important as the status that it has in representing something, 

that the West uniquely needs to be recognized so that we, as a 

western people, have something we can say that we got out of 

the constitution that makes us somewhat distinct as well as 

others. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, much could be said about the costs of this 

program.  Much could be said about the safety and the security 

and the prosperity of our country and the fair representation 

that we need within our country.  And we could talk about 

priorities of aboriginal rights, Quebec, and western alienation.  

And we could talk about the real issues of whether we're going 

to ask for an educational program or if it's going to be a 

research program.  And we can talk about the timing, as my 

colleagues have pointed out.  And it's all very important. 

 

But I think we have to remember that the fundamental bottom 

line should be that we lead to a plebiscite so that when the 

opinions of all have been traded back and forth, we put it to a 

legal and reasonable conclusion; so that the people will feel 

that they have truly been included in this debate, that they 

haven't just been used as pawns or tools in the political 

benefitting by political parties. 

 

It's important that we discuss things like resource ownership, 

property rights, provincial jurisdictions, federal jurisdictions 

and trade interprovincially and internationally.  And I would 

hope that we would take these things all into consideration, Mr. 

Speaker, because it is all so very important. 

 

But most important of all, as my colleague pointed out a few 

minutes ago, is the fact that we must not strike a deal in the 

middle of the night on someone's kitchen table.  This time 

we've got to do it right.  This time we've got to do it out in the 

open, out front, in front of the people, and let them make the 

final decision with their vote in a 

democratic society.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I must tell you that I am somewhat surprised that 

a relatively, I would have thought, non-controversial resolution 

of this nature would have sparked the kind of comments which 

we have heard from the Liberal leader and from the 

Conservative caucus. 

 

Speaking, first of all, to the main proposition of the 

Conservative caucus, I wish to point out what I think is a 

fundamental flaw in their reasoning.  They suggest, they state 

in fact, that somehow if this House adopts a Standing 

Committee on the Constitution, a Saskatchewan plebiscite or a 

Saskatchewan referendum is thereby excluded.  That is 

incorrect.  The two propositions are not mutually exclusive nor 

is the acceptance of this motion predicated on any assumption 

that there will not be or that there will be, for that matter, a 

plebiscite or referendum in Saskatchewan at some appropriate 

time. 

 

I'm very aware of what that motion was on October 21.  I think 

it's an important expression of public opinion.  It's a tool which 

a government should consider at the appropriate time, namely 

when the discussions and the negotiations have either come to 

a successful conclusion or, heaven forbid, have fallen apart, at 

which point this legislature, this government, may very well 

want to consult the public.  This motion does not deny this 

legislature or this government the opportunity of consulting 

through plebiscite or referendum with respect to the end result 

of the discussions on negotiations in the constitution. 

 

So the statements which are made, based on the implied 

assumption -- in fact on the part of a couple of the members, 

the direct assertion -- that this was somehow an attempt to 

avoid public consultation, is erroneous.  We are not mutually 

excluding the options which are taking place here. 

 

Now the second argument that they advance is an argument 

that says: this shouldn't be a standing committee; it should be 

some form of a special committee -- a special committee with a 

very limited time frame.  I frankly am a little bit surprised at 

that.  The members full well know that even if there is a 

broadly based package of agreement on constitutional matters 

-- highly unlikely; I think what is likely, if there is any 

agreement is a short range of items that have been agreed to -- 

there will be other items which will require ongoing discussion, 

ongoing negotiation, and ongoing consultation with the public.  

The issue of inherent self-government for aboriginal peoples is 

possibly a specific example, possibly. 

 

Most of the governments seem to be aiming toward 

recognizing that principle.  Maybe they can move beyond the 

principle to fleshing out the details of what the concept of 

self-government specifically means in the constitution.  But it's 

very possible that in fact this will entail further constitutional 

negotiations.  There may be 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

other items which require this kind of a consideration. 

 

To close the legislative deliberations by bracketing them in the 

strict confines that the Leader of the Liberal Party and the 

Conservative caucus would have this legislature do is surely 

very, very narrow-minded and I think very unrealistic. 

 

These negotiations are going to be ongoing.  They'll be 

ongoing.  Who knows how they will play themselves out over 

the summer months and the fall months.  There will have to be 

a period of reporting, public reporting to a standing committee.  

There will be an opportunity for the public to be heard through 

the standing committee. 

 

There will be an opportunity to debate and discuss and to 

disagree and to agree.  This is an act of democracy; this is not 

an act of exclusion.  A standing committee which goes out and 

meets the public, as this committee very well would have the 

right to do, is perfectly within the keeping of the legislative 

traditions. 

 

If there is no deal, the reasons behind that, I think this 

committee can play an important role in explaining to the 

public.  And similarly if there is a deal, the same function can 

be fulfilled.  There is nothing . . . in fact it is very 

complementary for the establishment of a standing committee 

to do this. 

 

I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, to the members of the 

House that almost all of the legislatures of Canada have 

standing committees on constitutional matters.  That's not 

necessarily an argument that we should have one too.  I 

suppose we can say that the army is out of step, but that Johnny 

is the only one in step -- I suppose we could take that position. 

 

But the truth of the matter is, that in those legislatures where 

there have been standing constitutional committees there has 

been an informed dialogue and debate and there has been a 

level of awareness which is commensurate with the importance 

of the topic.  I don't think this is something that the members 

opposite should fear.  I think the members opposite should 

welcome this opportunity. 

 

The other aspect about the standing committee, I think, is also 

important to keep in mind.  This is a committee on 

federal-provincial relations.  It's not so easy to 

compartmentalize federal-provincial relations into constitution 

negotiations only, and separate those from the other plethora of 

interprovincial relationships which we have. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, this province, this country, has a crisis by 

virtue of the federal government's persistent and determined 

effort to shuck its federal government responsibilities and pass 

it off onto the provinces.  The off-loading in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, costs the people of this province 

$517 million less revenue this fiscal year, '92-93.  We could 

have, Mr. Speaker, if there had been no change in the federal 

funding, balanced our budget this year on that 517 million or 

had other options to use a portion of that either for health care 

or for education or for a number of other federal-provincial, 

cost-shared programs to sustain better 

the quality of life of which we seek. 

 

Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, that fiscal federalism is 

as important a concept of nation building as is the provision in 

the peace, order and good government clause.  Fiscal 

equalization of opportunities amongst Canadians is as 

important as the amending formula is. 

 

In fact, many constitutionalists have advocated the proposition 

that this has been the glue which has bound this country 

together.  It has given the people in Newfoundland or other 

parts of the country that have gone through serious difficulties 

economically the chance to have a standard of living, a 

provision of services which is more or less commensurate with 

those of Canadians from sea to sea to sea, as the CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) journalists and others of 

us have commented on. 

 

When a federal government embarks consciously on a 

program, blind and oblivious to the economic difficulties of the 

regions by off-loading -- as this federal government has done 

over the last number of years -- it delivers a damaging 

body-blow to the unity of this country, as difficult and as 

dangerous to the unity of this country as any call for separatism 

might be, whether the call for separatism is in Quebec or any 

other part of the country.  Make no mistake about that. 

 

And if the members opposite think that we should, as people of 

this province of Saskatchewan, not raise our voices of concern, 

that we ought not to look at new ways for equalization or 

established program financing, to improve the relationships of 

fiscal federalism -- a basic tenet of constitutional history of 

which I wish the members of the opposition opposite would get 

some fundamental grasp on -- if they don't think that's a part of 

nation building, then they ought to go back and read 

MacGregor Dawson, the first year Political Science 101 on 

Canada.  This is in fact an important aspect of what is 

happening in our country today. 

 

There's another aspect of federalism today which is very 

damaging.  Not only are we not practising fiscal federalism, 

there is, as some of the members opposite have described I 

think quite accurately, a new kind of federalism which is the 

flip side -- and complementing fiscal federalism or the lack of 

it presents also as big a threat -- it's competitive federalism, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is federalism where there is a jousting over turf and 

over territory. 

 

If members opposite don't think that there is lot of work to do, 

ongoing work to do to eliminate duplication between federal 

programs and provincial programs, to straighten out which 

environmental assessment programs should be federally 

conducted and which should be conducted provincially, to 

determine how we could harmonize the various fiscal 

arrangements with their taxation or expenditures, I tell you they 

are virtually alone. 

 

All the premiers of all political ideologies have taken the 

posture, and correctly so, that we can spend a lot of time to 

eliminate competitive federalism and practise that which Lester 

Pearson has talked about, and which has also been an important 

glue of this nation, and that is 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

co-operative federalism. 

 

Fiscal federalism, co-operative federalism -- those are 

corner-stones of nation building, and those are issues which 

this legislature should be talking about.  Those are issues which 

this province should be talking about.   And it is issues which 

are important and central to this constitutional debate just as 

much as the provisions of the distinct society or the provisions 

of Senate reform or the other issues which have been on the 

table and debated by the premiers and the ministers over the 

last little while. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question of a referendum or a plebiscite 

which the members have raised.  I have said in my opening 

remarks we do not rule out, we do not accept.  You have ruled 

out of order, sir, a motion with respect to a referendum in 

Saskatchewan before any arrangement is accepted. 

 

I say to the members opposite -- I guess it's about the only 

thing I can say because my remarks would be out of order as a 

consequence -- I would say that that is premature to say the 

least.  But I do want to say this about the principle of referenda 

-- and this was raised by members in the course of the main 

debate -- right now the federal government has introduced and 

the House of Commons is debating a proposed . . . I'm not sure 

whether it's a plebiscite Bill or a referendum Bill. 

 

I want the members of this House to consider these four or five 

key dangers pertaining to what this federal government has 

done at this time.  First of all, who sets the question?  I was 

astounded to hear the members of the Conservative Party talk 

that the questions should be determined by parliament.  That 

belies an absence of any understanding of the concept of 

federalism.  Yes, the member from Moosomin did, and so did 

the member from Morse.  The record will prove that you did. 

 

There are two aspects of the Canadian system which are 

important.  One is parliamentary form of democracy, but the 

other system which the members opposite -- and I'm going to 

say a word about this -- obviously don't understand or don't 

accept is the concept of federalism. 

 

Federalism, Mr. Speaker, is a joint sharing of power between 

two orders of government and the people.  The federal 

parliament can speak for federal responsibilities, but it does not 

necessarily mean that it speaks for national interests or 

responsibilities.  What the federal parliament does, does in the 

interests of its constitutional authority, but it does not mean that 

what it does is in the interests of the national interest. 

 

The Fathers of Confederation had the balance between 

provincial and federal governments precisely for that reason.  

And this legislation which is before the House of Commons -- 

which our standing committee should be debating and looking 

at -- proposes that the question should be set by whom?  The 

government of the day in Ottawa alone.  They won't even, so 

far as I know, agree to amendment to allow the opposition 

parties in on the debate, let alone the provincial governments.  

Is that your notion of federalism? 

 

Here's a second issue, the rules for a referendum fight. 

There's no ceiling on expenditure.  Does this mean that those 

with the money, those who can hire the ad agencies, those who 

can hire the polling firms, are going to be able to be in an 

advantageous position against the unemployed, those on 

welfare, those on social assistance, the aboriginal people, the 

very people that those members opposite profess so much 

concern about? 

 

How are they going . . . how are the working men and women 

going to raise the funds to be able to mount a contrary, if that 

should be their point of view, argument on the referendum with 

no ceilings?  Even in the Quebec referendum of 1980, by law 

they structured a yes committee and a no committee.  And they 

set ceilings for it, and they tried to make the rules for the 

referendum fair, make that referendum fight fair.  This 

legislation doesn't do that. 

 

Is that your view, members of the opposition, Liberals and 

Conservatives, of how this nation building should be decided?  

To the richest go the spoils.  To those who can contribute to the 

funds, they'll decide what kind of nature Canada should look 

like in the future, in the 1990s and the year 2000 and beyond.  

It may be the Liberals' and the Conservatives', it is not mine. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me ask you another question.  Why the 

referendum legislation now in the middle of the delicate 

negotiations?  Why?  If we are negotiating in good faith, 

somebody should be asking the Prime Minister and the federal 

government why it is that this referendum Bill or plebiscite Bill 

has to be moved at this time. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party was talking about my 

timeliness.  Well where has the Prime Minister been for the last 

two years?  He could have introduced the referendum Bill two 

years ago, a year ago.  What about his timeliness?  Why is it in 

the last ten days or two weeks of these negotiations 

ministerially, there is all of a sudden now a motion and a Bill 

for plebiscite and referendum? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this doesn't help the negotiations.  I 

think this puts a threat on the negotiations.  Is that their way of 

how we should be building a Canada and reconfederating and 

building national unity?  It may be theirs; it isn't mine. 

 

I want to speak to the question of where this referendum will 

be conducted, as a fourth point, Mr. Speaker.  The legislation 

permits the referendum to be conducted in some provinces and 

not others.  It may be a national referendum; it may not be a 

national referendum. 

 

And by the way, the members opposite in speaking about a 

solely Saskatchewan plebiscite, are also in this same trap.  Can 

you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the prospect of 11 questions -- 10 

provincial government questions, one supposed national 

question, or some combination thereof -- 10 different questions 

with 10 different answers.  What do we do as Canadians?  Pick 

your answer that you like and continue to fight on it?  Is that 

the way you build unity in this country?  Maybe their idea; it's 

not mine. 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, how about this point, the fifth point: does a 

referendum in this nation divide or does it unite?  Just consider 

the contentious, complex issues which may be on a referendum 

plate.  Now I'm not going to comment about the substance of 

the question of distinct society or the question of 

self-government, inherent self-government, or the question of 

Senate reform, or any of the other issues which are there, but 

these are complex, highly emotional issues.  Does a referendum 

in this nature going to be a unifier or a divider? 

 

Let me ask you another question, Mr. Speaker.  If a national 

referendum was to be conducted, how do you decide whether it 

passes or not?  Would the members of the Conservatives and 

the Liberals opposite say, well a majority vote across Canada 

decides that it's passed, thereby putting it in the hands of 

Ontario and Quebec only and excluding the regions again?  Or 

must it pass 50 per cent plus one in every province?  Or must it 

pass 50 per cent plus one on some regional basis?  If on some 

regional basis, what regional basis?  Why doesn't the Bill speak 

to this? 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, a referendum at the end of the day 

becomes a referendum on the government of the day.  At the 

end of the day, a government that proposes a referendum 

inevitably will have the referendum question mixed up with the 

issues of how people feel toward that government.  Is that 

really what the Prime Minister wants to have?  Does he want 

that kind of a debate conducted in this kind of an atmosphere? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are issues which are not only applicable 

nationally, but they're also applicable to those who advocate 

that there should be a plebiscite or a referendum provincially as 

well.  Not all of them, but many of them do. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the establishment of a 

standing committee fits in logically and perfectly.  When we 

establish a standing committee we have an ongoing vehicle for 

ongoing consultations of the public and this Assembly in public 

about the nation's business and about the constitution. 

 

We have the chance to -- if we have to have a plebiscite in this 

province -- work out the wording in a bi-partisan way if we 

have to do it.  We have the chance of having ongoing reports 

on an educative value, not only to the Chamber but to the 

public at large. 

 

We will have an ongoing body which will receive reports from 

the minister responsible for the constitutional negotiations, the 

member from Fairview who's in Montreal and in Toronto next 

week to answer questions to defend the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why would the members shy away from that?  Why would the 

members opposite turn their back on a chance to explore in 

detail?  They say, well give us access to the constitutional 

affairs people.  There's no problem to doing that.  But that's the 

very back-room kind of exchange of information of which 

they're so highly critical in previous constitutional negotiations. 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a substitution.  This is in aid of, in aid 

of the objective which I hope fervently, we all hope, will be 

achieved, and that is a resolution of this constitutional impasse 

and a more unified country. 

 

This committee is a buttress to that.  Not the most important 

development, but an important development -- an important, 

ongoing way to dialogue and to use the members of this 

Legislative Assembly in a proper role as the representatives of 

the people of Saskatchewan in determining the right 

constitutional position. 

 

I want to make two final points -- three very quick final points 

before I sit down, Mr. Speaker.  I said I would return to the 

question of vision of Canada.  And I want to make this point 

one more time, Mr. Speaker, as firmly as I can. 

 

The record will show that the Conservative opposition in this 

legislature believes that whatever the Parliament of Canada 

decides with respect to question or constitutional consultation 

is good enough for it.  The argument was, by the members 

opposite, that they've had Dobbie, they've had Spicer, they've 

had Edwards, they've had the constitutional committee 

meetings, they've had all the federal government consultations 

required, and what more do we as Canadians need? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a position which says that the 

national interest is decided by the federal parliament.  I am 

frankly astounded at that proposition by any Saskatchewan 

political party.  Provincial governments have been established 

to speak for regional interests.  Ontario and Quebec have 

enough power in parliament, thank you very much, to look 

after their own interests. 

 

Provincial governments through their powers as assigned under 

section 92 and through co-operative federalism can speak about 

their interests, and in the debate evolves the national interest.  

To take the position -- as the Conservatives provincially 

apparently have done so in this debate today -- that they're 

simply going to withdraw from a Saskatchewan point of view, 

that they're going to withdraw from a western Canadian point 

of view, is putting the interests of this region and this province 

to the tender mercies of Ontario and the larger provinces of this 

country.  And I say no matter how well intentioned they are, 

that is not federalism and that's not what any responsible 

political party in Saskatchewan or the West should be doing.  

Not whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And that's why I was surprised about 

this debate.  I was surprised how they come out so vigorously 

again even in opposition -- although in some ways it isn't 

surprising -- to defend the Prime Minister, as they have in 

government and now in opposition. 

 

In this regard, however, the defence is not a matter of the Prime 

Minister.  I leave him out of it as an individual who's doing the 

very best that he can.  But this is a skewered vision of 

federalism, and I really urge the Leader of the Opposition and 

all the would-be leaders over there to carefully think out their 

points of view before they next step out on this particular issue. 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

Now two more points.  The Leader of the Liberal Party talked 

about timeliness.  I would say to her, as I said in my remarks a 

few moments ago, that it was not timely to bring in the motion 

earlier.  Dobbie had not reported, the constitutional ministers 

have not been set up, the nature of the direction of the 

negotiations had not even been unveiled.  It is timely on day -- 

whatever it is -- 15 or 16 of the House . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Seventeen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- . . . seventeen of the House, timely 

right after the debate in the budget speech to introduce this 

motion and to debate it.  The member also, from Greystone, 

says that what does this mean in the context of the western 

premiers who apparently have set out a bottom line.  There 

again she is completely and totally wrong. 

 

The western premiers have not set out a bottom line.  I 

forwarded to the Leader of the Liberal Party, as I did to the 

Leader of the Opposition, the communique -- communique 9 

from the western premiers which all of the premiers and the 

two territorial premiers agreed to, six of us.  And there's no 

bottom line here. 

 

What this communique says is this: that the premiers received a 

disturbing report and they expressed alarm at the federal 

government dismissing western concerns, and that little 

progress had been made on western concerns.  And they 

identified the western concerns -- fundamental Senate reform 

such as Triple E.  Such as. 

 

They identified the provincial ratification role on treaties which 

affect provincial jurisdiction -- international treaties of trade.  

They identified the transfer payments -- off-loading, a part of 

fiscal federalism.  It's a part of federalism. 

 

They identified regional development opportunities, whether 

it's telecommunications.  And I'm surprised about this because 

the members opposite were defending SaskTel when they were 

in government.  They tried to be as vigorous about it as any 

government could be, and I give them credit for this. 

 

This is what the premiers were concerned about -- why aren't 

we talking about communications as a matter of a regional 

development tool, or resources.  They wanted clarification on 

duplication and services.  I've spoken to that issue.  And they 

want the issue of the establishment of new provinces on the 

same basis that existing provinces were established. 

 

There's no bottom line there.  What there is is a plea for the 

western current concerns, those concerns and perhaps others to 

be heard and to be debated and not to be summarily shoved off 

the table by the federal government in its negotiation 

approaches. 

 

We've got to remember, Mr. Speaker -- and this is as important 

a point as I have to make in this debate this afternoon -- this is 

not Meech Lake round two.  This is the Canada round of 

negotiations.  And if it's the Canada round, it means 

everybody's concerns have got to be a part of this. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It means that the aboriginal concerns 

have got to be a part of this.  It means that the concerns of the 

West have got to be a part of this.  It means that the concerns of 

the Maritimes and the Atlantics have got to be a part of this.  

And it means the concerns of Quebec have got to be part of this 

as well. 

 

I mean, I am absolutely astounded that the Conservatives and 

the Liberal leader there by implication would say that it's okay 

for the Premier of Ontario to fight for one of his main issues, 

which is an entrenched social covenant, or social charter which 

is enforceable.  Whatever we say is good or bad about that, let's 

leave the merits aside from that.  It's okay for him to stand up 

on that, but the western premiers shouldn't get up to stand up 

about resources and telecommunications.  I say shame on both 

the Liberals and the Conservatives for abandoning the West on 

that issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I say shame on you that you criticize 

us for me standing up and taking the issues which you fought 

for when you were in government at the time -- many of them, 

or pretended to -- and saying that they've got to be dealt with.  

It's not that all of them should be dealt with or can be dealt with 

or that we aren't flexible in the negotiations.  There is no 

bottom line.  The bottom line is that this is the Canada round. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, if they think that this is 

something other than the Canada round, they've got to get their 

heads out of the sand and get into the reality of the 

constitutional negotiations.  And I say that specifically to the 

members opposite.  This is what we're trying to do and that's 

what the communiques did.  There is no bottom line, and 

herein lies another good reason why the standing committee 

can be a forum for the exchange of views in the directions that 

we're taking, and the ideas and the criticisms from everybody, 

private members included. 

 

Nobody has the absolute wisdom on nation building.  There is 

no monolithic party whip approach to this.  This is building 

Canada.  We come from different perspectives.  And the 

members opposite should come on side and help us build rather 

than stand on the sidelines and be critical about this duty which 

any premier, regardless of ideology, has to fulfil. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, although it's not particularly relevant 

to this motion but I simply have to say this because it is used I 

would say insidiously from time to time, but thankfully not 

very effectively, the issue of 1982 by the Conservative caucus 

and by other people, but particularly the Conservative caucus 

opposite -- they argue that in 1982 what happened was wrong.  

And the member from Thunder Creek says it was. 

 

And that means that the member from Thunder Creek takes the 

position that what the nine provincial governments and the 

prime minister of the day should have done is walked away 

from the table, had no 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

constitutional agreement, and left the tender mercies of Canada 

to the hands of Ren Lvesque, the separatist deluxe of this 

country.  That's what the would-be leader of the Conservative 

caucus in Saskatchewan says, because that was the option. 

 

(1630) 

 

Is 1982 a perfect deal?  Of course it isn't.  I said that in 1982; 

I've written about it; I repeat it again.  Was it the deal that was 

necessary at the time?  The answer is yes.  Because no deal 

would have left those who say they defend Canada . . . would 

have left those who say they support Canada, having turned the 

issues over to a situation where there had been no compromise 

and no arrangement or agreement at all, and the separatist 

government of the day would have been there.  And what do 

you think they would have made of that situation? 

 

Now we've got a federalist government in Quebec that wants to 

come to the table.  We've got to seize this opportunity to make 

a deal with him -- a reasonable and a fair deal for them and for 

the rest of Canada.  That we have to do.  But to argue that we 

should not have made a deal is an argument that plays in the 

hands of the Quebec separatists. Make no mistake about that.  

And I'm surprised by the Conservatives opposite advocating 

that position. 

 

Of course it's not perfect.  Of course it's not perfect.  But what 

of the 1982 deal would you do away with, Mr. Member from 

Morse?  Would you eliminate the Charter of Rights?  Tell us 

about that.  Well tell me, would you eliminate the Charter of 

Rights?  Well I'll ask the member from Thunder Creek whether 

he would eliminate the Charter of Rights.  You see what they 

do.  They don't answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Would they eliminate section 92A which gives the control of 

resources to a high extent to the provinces?  Would you 

eliminate that from the 1982 deal?  Would you do that?  No, 

you see.  He doesn't tell us on that either. 

 

Tell me, would you eliminate section 35, which for the first 

time recognized constitutionally the existing treaty and 

aboriginal rights of Indian, Metis, and Inuit people, an historic 

first?  Would you eliminate that from 1982?  Tell me about 

that.  Would you eliminate the amending formula which for the 

first time put the provinces on a footing of equality?  Would 

you do that in 1982?  Would you do that? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about property rights? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The member says property rights.  I 

tell you who eliminated property rights.  Every premier of 

every political stripe and every prime minister eliminated 

property rights right from day one -- every one of them did.  

Every one of them did.  Every one of them.  And you know 

that to be the case.  Everybody knows that to be the case. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are people who do not understand the 

concepts of federalism.  They do not . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I don't understand them perfectly, but I'll 

tell you one thing -- I understand a little bit about 

history and I understand a little bit about federalism, and they 

simply do not want to learn; they simply say, this shibboleth 

that they mouth, that this thing that's brought about by 1982.  

Look, 1986-87 when they opened up Meech Lake -- when they 

opened up Meech Lake, I think questions had to be asked at 

that point as to why it was done and in the way it was done. 

 

The reality is the members are right -- we have deficiencies.  

The members are right -- we have to make sure that Quebec 

has an honourable entry back into Canada.  The members are 

wrong if they think that it means that western Canada has 

nothing to gain from this either, because we do.  We have 

issues which we want to advocate as well. 

 

I say to the members opposite, in this business of nation 

building, nothing can be done with perfection.  It is a question 

of give and take; it's a question of compromise; it's a question 

of speaking up for regional interests and keeping your mind on 

the national interests, getting a balance, striking a balance, and 

working and working and working to keep this great country 

together of ours. 

 

It's a miracle, Canada is, as Arthur Lower once wrote.  And its 

existence has to be reworked. That miracle has to be reworked 

every generation.  That's why we need the standing committee.  

That's why we need to talk about these issues and these 

differences to understand and to better accept the foundations 

upon which this great country is built and upon which this great 

province succeeds and has been in some ways the leader, like 

in medicare and other issues, of what it means to be Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can do it.  We can do it in a . . . with our 

differences, political and otherwise, we can still do it.  And this 

standing committee is the right forum in which to do it.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I'm therefore very pleased to move this motion.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:41 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Johnson 

Van Mulligen Trew 

Thompson Sonntag 

Wiens Flavel 

Simard Roy 

Tchorzewski Cline 

Lingenfelter Scott 

Shillington McPherson 

Koskie Wormsbecker 

Anguish Crofford 

Goulet Stanger 

Atkinson Knezacek 

Kowalsky Keeping 

MacKinnon Renaud 

Penner Langford 

Upshall Jess 

Hagel Neudorf 

Koenker Swenson 



May 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

 

Lorje Martens 

Lyons Britton 

Lautermilch Toth 

Calvert Goohsen 

Hamilton D'Autremont 

-- 46 

 

Nays 

 

-- Nil 

(1645) 

 

Authorization of the Standing Committee on 

 Constitutional Affairs 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move the 

second government motion: 

 

 That the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs be 

authorized: to review and make recommendations to the 

Legislative Assembly on proposed constitutional 

amendments brought forward by the Saskatchewan 

legislature, the Parliament of Canada, or any other 

legislatures in Canada, and to invite presentations and the 

expression of views from individuals and groups; that the 

committee report from time to time to meet the constitutional 

time lines arising out of nation-wide negotiations and 

amendment processes, and in this regard the committee is 

authorized to release its report when the House is not sitting 

by filing with the Clerk for distribution; and further, that the 

committee shall have the authority to meet during the session 

when the Assembly is not meeting, or between sessions, to 

meet outside the seat of government to hear testimony and to 

acquire research assistance as deemed advisable by the 

committee. 

 

And before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, there is a small 

technical amendment which has to be introduced by my 

colleague, the member from Cumberland, which is straight 

technical, but I'll move this now for the moment.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly and speak on this matter, the 

matter of our constitution and how Saskatchewan is going to 

deal with it.  During my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'll be moving 

an amendment to the motion as presented by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was very interesting in hearing the Premier 

close debate on the past motion, and as a sort of an aside 

toward the end of the debate say that I know it doesn't have 

much relevance on this particular debate today, but I want to 

make a few comments about 1982.  Those few comments, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously went on at some length.  And it reminded 

me of the poem of the ancient mariner, the way the Premier 

sort of justified his part in that process some 10 years ago; tried 

to sort of set the record straight, if you will, Mr. Speaker, with 

the people of Saskatchewan particularly who took a great deal 

of issue with some of the things that happened during that 

debate some 10 years ago. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that this 

opposition has brought forward amendments to the motions 

brought forward by government today is that people in 

Saskatchewan are telling us that they don't want that same 

process to happen again.  Now the Premier would like to stand 

in this Assembly and tell us that somehow he has changed his 

suit of clothes, that he would not embark on a process that was 

similar to that one. 

 

And we heard him just a few moments ago stand in this 

Assembly and give all sorts of justifications in his mind as to 

why it was right and proper.  He says that Canada would have 

been thrown to the separatist wolves if they hadn't struck that 

deal; if McMurtry and Chrtien and the hon. member from 

Riversdale had not sat up in that kitchen all night and designed 

a deal, then the separatists would have had their way with 

Canadians. 

 

Well quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, by leaving the province of 

Quebec out of that process, I'm not sure that we haven't given 

separatism that extra life, that extra bit of something to hang 

their hat on with Quebecers that we might not have had, had we 

either worked a little harder, taken the process down the road a 

little further and not excluded one-third of Canadians from that 

1982 deal. 

 

But I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, there were certain things on 

the agenda of people back in 1982 that necessitated that 

process going forward.  We had a government in this province 

that said, we are going to control our resources through the use 

of Crown corporations, through the use of nationalization.  We 

are going to create a whole different system in western Canada, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure that preyed on the minds of people 

like Allan Blakeney and the member from Riversdale. 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that when the trade-offs were being 

made at that time those things such as the entrenchment of 

property rights by individual Canadians . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  I have listened very 

carefully.  The member must realize we have just voted on the 

last resolution or the last motion.  He is now on a new motion 

and his comments must relate to the establishment of the 

committee on Constitutional Affairs and not dwell on what was 

discussed and debated in the last motion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I 

certainly will attempt to keep my remarks germane to the 

motion as moved by the Premier.  But I must say that, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe this motion is as wide-ranging as the 

previous one was, that the issues that are before us in designing 

a committee and a mandate that will truly try and grasp the 

feeling of Saskatchewan citizens vis-a-vis the constitutional 

debate, necessitates, Mr. Speaker, as we go through that 

process, that we are absolutely sure in our minds in this 

legislature about how that process will affect the people of this 

province. 

 

And if we don't learn from the mistakes of the past, that if we 

don't look at the future, then, Mr. Speaker, this standing 

committee as proposed by the government will not do the job 

that it's purported to do.  Mr. Speaker, I can think of nothing, 

nothing more special for this Assembly 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1992 

to come to than some kind of reasonable conclusion.  It means 

that as this committee is struck, that the parameters under 

which it works are going to have to be something that people at 

the end of the day, in this province at least, can stand up with 

pride and say that we did our best as far as keeping Canada 

whole. 

 

And that means, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day . . . And the 

Premier in his previous comments said, I don't rule out 

referendum or plebiscite as an end result of this committee's 

work, but he took an inordinate amount of time saying I don't 

believe that that process is the right one.  And, Mr. Speaker, if 

we have some preconceived notions about whether it will or 

will not work, preconceived notions that this committee of this 

legislature is going to take out to the people, then I say they 

will not work. 

 

If we have a committee, Mr. Speaker, that as part of its 

mandate is to not only talk about the four or five issues that the 

Premier said may ultimately decide whether we have a 

constitutional deal or not, but as part of its mandate is to study 

the very broad spectrum of things as he said, such as federal 

off-loading in various areas of our society, then I think, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to have to have an awful lot of standing 

committees of this legislature if we're going to discuss each and 

every one of those issues in the context of our constitutional 

matrix. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think that that's what Saskatchewan people 

are expecting out of this process.  I don't think they are 

expecting members of the New Democratic government going 

around this province with this very broad range of economic 

topics on their agenda. 

 

I think those are rightly issues that are debated in this 

legislature.  If the question is off-loading in health care, then 

we have a forum in this province, in this Legislative Building, 

to discuss that and debate it, pass legislation, take on the 

federal government as the Premier said in the area of 

telecommunications.  The electors of Saskatchewan have 

elected you and I and all the other members gathered here to do 

that. 

 

But yes there are some issues that are absolutely crucial.  I 

agree with he Premier.  The question of aboriginal rights, 

aboriginal self-government is one that is fundamental to us 

coming to some type of agreement in this country.  We cannot 

have a situation occur again in this country like we saw in 

Quebec a year ago.  It simply is unacceptable to expect that that 

portion of our citizenry would feel that alienated from the 

process. 
 

And that's why I think the earlier arguments on a special 

committee were valid.  I know that the legislature has decided 

that we will have a standing committee, but I think I want 

Saskatchewan people at the end of the day to feel that this was 

a special effort, that the mandate of this committee is special 

compared to some of the other standing committees, and that 

its make-up, its mandate, and how the members on that 

committee conduct themselves, will indeed be special and that 

the urges to delve into every sort of partisan rhetoric indeed 

that are often not far below the surface in this very political 

environment in Saskatchewan . . . . It means that indeed this 

committee will have to have a very special thought 

and word and deed attached to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say that in listening to the Premier's earlier 

comments, that if he truly believed some of the things that he 

said, that he wouldn't have this automatic defensive attitude 

toward the mistakes of 1982.  That he wouldn't take such a 

defensive attitude with other members of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, who feel as deeply, who feel as deeply about their 

country, as what the member from Riversdale does; who feel 

just as deeply when they propose amendments to the 

government's motions as the member from Riversdale does 

about his country. 

 

And yet he tried to assign motives to members of the 

opposition in their opposition to that motion.  And I think if the 

Premier truly believed the things that he said in this legislature, 

that maybe he would take that to a little higher plane and 

realize that that motion was brought forward, that amendment 

was brought forward, and has exactly the same amount of 

feeling for Canada as the member purports to have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this debate is going to go on, I'm sure, at some 

length as we design the committee that will deal with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And today I would like to move an amendment to the motion, 

seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington, that reads as 

follows: 

 

 That the following be inserted after the words "amendment 

processes": 

 

 and further, that the committee will not make a final report 

until such time as the people have been able to express their 

opinion on any proposed constitutional resolution in a general 

referendum; 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- I find the amendment in order . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . What's your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order is very 

simple and to the point.  The first motion set up a committee.  

The second motion sets up the terms of reference of the 

committee.  When under the first motion the referendum 

amendment was proposed and ruled unlawful, out of order, 

with the greatest of respect, sir, how can a subsidiary motion 

permit the amendment? 

 

The Speaker: -- It's simply that the Premier says the second 

one is a subsidiary motion.  The two motions stand by 

themselves.  The one simply sets up the committee; the second 

one sets up the process of how the committee is to go about 

doing its consultation with the people and reporting back to the 

Legislative Assembly.  Therefore I find the amendment in 

order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a fair 

amount I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, but at this time I 

would like to adjourn the debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 


