




















































Hansard: August 24, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2939 

 August 24, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think, Mr. 

Chairman, it was . . . perhaps the Premier wasn't quite 

understanding what I was getting at prior to the supper hour, 

and now that we've had a couple of hours to refresh ourselves 

and watch the news from Melfort, I'm sure that we can go on 

with these Estimates in a new vein. 

 

Mr. Premier, the point I was trying to make that I need you to 

sort of square with this Assembly is the fact that on October 5 

you said the provincial deficit was $14.2 billion, during the 

leaders' debate.  Now on page 61 of your own budget address 

the number used by the Minister of Finance is, say, twelve 

eight, to round it off. 

 

Now that leaves you over a billion and a half dollars to play 

with, Mr. Premier.  From what you were telling the people of 

Saskatchewan on October 5 what the debt of the province was, 

to what your Finance minister delivered on budget day, there's 

a discrepancy of about a billion and a half dollars that you 

could do with as you wish.  Now at the same time we have seen 

unprecedented tax increases, tax increases that you campaigned 

very vigorously against in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now being that you knew what the deficit was on October 5, I 

would like to know how you are squaring with the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer the fact that you knew the deficit was 

at that point, yet you could promise all of this tax relief, all of 

this change and still be truthful with people.  And that's the 

simple answer that I'd like you to square with us tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have given the 

answer to the hon. member several times now.  He won't accept 

it from me; he won't accept it from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

editorial board or the other various commentators.  I don't 

believe there's anything I can do to convince him obviously. 

 

He knows what the deficit was, although I'm not so sure that he 

did.  I'm not sure whether or not in that former administration it 

was limited to two or three people, and I don't mean to be 

diminishing of the hon. member opposite, but he might have 

been excluded from the inner cabinet there that had that 

information. 

 

None the less, the figure which the Gass report revealed and 

the various arrangements which came out as total surprises to 

us, I've made these points before the dinner break and I think 

there's not much more I can usefully add to the observations 

which we make. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well let's get right down to basics here then.  

Mr. Premier, on October 5 did you say that the provincial 

deficit was $14.2 billion?  Yes or no? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I don't have a copy of the transcript.  

But if I did say it, I say I predicted it to be there. 

 

I say what I said to you before.  You and your government hid 

from me and the Leader of the Liberal Party and the people of 

Saskatchewan the true number.  You hid it.  Not only did you 

hide it, but the minister of Finance, the former minister of 

Finance said that it was only a $250 million deficit, which 

turned out to be an absolute, blatant misrepresentation. 

 

So if anybody is playing politics or misrepresenting, it is you, 

sir, and the former minister of Finance in the administration.  

That's what I said. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll have to read it into 

the record again.  This is the words of the Premier on October 

5, that evening, in the leaders' debate on province-wide TV.  

And I'll only go the last sentence here:  There was no debt.  

That's the point.  The debt was 3.2 billion on the Crown 

corporations and it's now 14.2 billion since 1982.  That's not 

our fault.  That's the fault of Liberal and PC (Progressive 

Conservative) policies that's put this situation into this 

circumstance. 

 

Now were these your figures and your words or not, Mr. 

Premier, on the night of October 5, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the member can 

continue to ask and I'll continue to give the answer which I've 

given to him.  I simply will say the figures which the former 

administration failed to give the people of Saskatchewan, the 

shocking cover-ups, whether it's in the Crown corporation side 

or on the regular side, are all documented after we assumed 

office and Mr. Gass and Ernst & Young uncovered it.  Now 

that member either knew, or if he didn't know he should have 

known, and he was part of the cover-up in not telling the 

people of Saskatchewan the true state of finances. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I find this kind of incredible, Mr. Chairman, 

that a statement made by the now Premier a short 10 months 

ago, made in the presence of . . . The member of Saskatoon 

Greystone is here tonight and she was the next person on the . . 

. 

 

The Chair: -- I think the member should know better than to 

refer to the presence or absence of other members in the House. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My apologies, Mr. Chairman.  I'll let the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone speak for herself. 

 

The figure used by the Premier was $14.2 billion.  Now he 

seems to want to deny that figure tonight in his Estimates in 

this committee.  And I think it's incumbent, Mr. Chairman, if 

we are to understand the government's financial direction and 

the broken campaign promises of last October, that we have the 

Premier tell us if this is the numbers he was using or not. 

 

And it can't be all that difficult for the Premier because, I mean, 

that was a province-wide debate.  It was all recorded.  I mean 

hundreds of thousands of people heard 



2940 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

the debate.  I don't know why the Premier would be so hesitant 

to say that this was the number that he used.  I can only 

speculate that if he tells us that that was the number that used it 

will put in some jeopardy the promises that were made that 

evening and other evenings all across Saskatchewan. 

 

And I ask you once more, Mr. Premier, was this the number 

that you used in the debate?  Was this the number that your 

people had derived for you in preparation for that debate, that 

the province's debt was $14.2 billion?  If I have a transcript that 

is incorrect please tell me and we will go and try and dig up the 

proper transcripts of the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I asked the hon. member, was the 

number of the deficit for '91-92 $250 million as you told us on 

the eve of the election or was it in your knowledge that it was 

$900 million?  What's the truth of that? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears the Premier 

has forgotten that we have switched roles in this legislature and 

that he is now the Premier and I do the questioning.  A short 10 

months ago it was the other way around but we have a reversal.  

And it's the Premier's election promises that secured the votes 

of Saskatchewan people that we now are examining here in 

committee tonight. 

 

And I'm asking the Premier if this is the number he used, 

because obviously this number is different than what he gave 

earlier.  This is a number that appears to have had some 

research attached to it.  Obviously one would not go on 

province-wide TV and use a number like that loosely when one 

was wanting to be the premier of this province.  You wouldn't 

want to use numbers loosely like that.  So I'm just asking the 

Premier if this is the number that he used that night. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I'll tell the hon. member, you 

sure wouldn't want to use numbers as loosely as your 

administration did through nine years, including on election 

night, and the implication that the debt for '91-92 was only 250.  

It's even shuddering to think it, just to say, only $250 million.  

So you're right about not using it loosely. 

 

But I said to you before the dinner hour, and I repeat again, 

what our position is.  We did the best that we could to calculate 

what the picture was fiscally.  And you and your leader kept on 

taking the position that that number was not right, that debt 

wasn't all that high.  Oh no, we were misstating things.  I can 

cite back to you the letter that your minister of Finance gave to 

me, saying that I was misrepresenting the numbers.  That's 

what he was telling me.  The number that you're referring to, 

the $14 billion, that was a misrepresentation from your point of 

view.  They write to me.  You wrote to me.  You didn't sign the 

letter but you're part of the government that did that. 

 

And then you say -- incredibly, I might add -- to the whole 

public that when we come to office to find out what the real 

true situation is, that somehow we ought not to have been 

surprised?  How illogical is that?  That's totally incredible. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Mr. Chairman, the Premier 

does not want to answer the question.  And I find this kind of 

incredible.  I kind of find this incredible.  The statement made 

on province-wide TV, 10 months ago, seems to cause the 

Premier so much difficulty in saying yes or no.  If he used the 

number 14.2 billion, why not own up to it?  What's the problem 

here?  He keeps wandering off onto other topics.  I think, Mr. 

Chairman, if the Premier can tell me yes, or no, then we can get 

on with the questioning here.  I mean I think it's fundamental 

that, if you say something on province-wide TV, that you'd 

want to own up to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That member is telling me that when 

you say something on province-wide TV you should own up to 

it?  Well where in the world have you people been for the last 

nine years in your government, talking on province-wide TV, 

and owning up to it? 

 

You told the province of Saskatchewan in nine successive 

budgets, and you were off by 200 per cent on average in those 

years.  How about owning up to that?  I said to you before the 

dinner, and I repeat again, the $14 billion figure - 

_ I said in fact just a few moments ago - is the best figure that 

we could figure out was the size of the debt.  You people said 

that I was wrong.  You people said that I was scam-hungry. 

 

You people said that that wasn't as bad.  Your minister, or 

former minister of Finance said it was only $250 million.  And 

the member from Moosomin says that all of that was 

inaccurate.  And here, this member from Thunder Creek, is 

trying to paint out the picture that it was accurate, and that I 

knew it.  And I shouldn't have made the promises.  And his 

member right here from Moosomin says that all that I said was 

inaccurate.  Come on fellows, get your two stories straight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears that the 

Premier now is back in his number of $14.2 billion.  That's 

fine.  I mean it was his words that said that his promises were 

irresponsible, given that high a debt load.  Those aren't my 

words. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, to the Premier, how is it then you say that 

the debt was $14.2 billion -- obviously with some research.  

Your Minister of Finance comes in with 12.8.  Now, Mr. 

Premier, given that you had predicted the debt at 14.2, your 

Finance minister comes in at twelve eight.  How do you square 

the fact that we have had so many tax increases, why we have 

had our health costs go up, why our education costs have gone 

up, our university students are paying more?  Gasoline is up.  

Sales tax is up.  Personal income tax is up. 

 

How is it we've had all of these increases when you said you 

wouldn't?  The Finance minister is over a billion and a half 

dollars low on his estimate of where you pegged the debt at in 

your election campaign.  How do you square all these tax 

increases then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The hon. member still lives in the 

fairy dream-land that he lived in 10 months ago.  He either 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

refuses to acknowledge, or if he acknowledges it, doesn't want 

to admit it publicly, that what he has done is that he has 

brought this province to the verge of bankruptcy.  Nine years, 

sir, has brought this province to the edge of bankruptcy.  Those 

are the facts.  I'd like to have you stand up and deny that. 

 

And this government was elected in an attempt, as I indicated 

in the platform card to the hon. member from Arm River, to 

open up the books and get a proper accounting and to take 

control of the finances of this province in such a way that we 

would not saddle our children and their children with the debt 

as a result of nine years of waste and mismanagement and 

profligacy.  We had to start taking the first steps in this budget 

in doing so. 

 

(1915) 

 

Now let me just repeat.  Your average yearly increase in 

expenditures on average was 6 per cent growth every year in 

expenditures when you were in office.  Our first budget cut that 

by minus 3.  That's a turn around of 9 per cent -- virtually 

unprecedented by any other provincial government standards. 

 

And because of the size of the debt that you racked up in those 

nine glorious years of having fun, because of the size of the 

debt, even with a minus 9 per cent turnaround it was inevitable 

that some of the taxes would have to be implemented.  You put 

on a party for the people of the province of Saskatchewan; we 

have the hangover now and we have to pay for it. 

 

And we have to do it in the most sensible, sensitive way that 

can be done.  I'm not saying that what we've done is perfect 

about this.  There are suggestions for corrections, perhaps 

different taxes or different emphasis on cut-backs is a 

combination that you can have. 

 

But if the member up here is advocating, as he is . . . by the 

way, a very contradictory message.  Before dinner he still 

wants to harmonize which is the biggest tax-grab, by the way, 

in the history of Saskatchewan -- the biggest.  Harmonization, 

he still wants to harmonize.  Let the legislature and the people 

of Saskatchewan be absolutely clear that the Conservatives 

want to harmonize.  That's the biggest tax-grab in the history. 

 

Now if you want to still tax on the one hand and on the other 

hand just turn around a few seconds ago and criticize this 

government for increasing taxes as a result of you putting the 

mountain of debt on us, I tell you you have no credibility.  Why 

don't you just fess up to what you did to this province for nine 

years.  Admit the mistake and them proceed from there and say 

look, your tax measures are not in the right combination, or 

your cut-backs are a little bit too harsh or perhaps not in the 

right combination.  Then we've got an intelligent debate. 

 

But you want to have it the best of both worlds.  You neither 

admit the huge mountain of debt nor do you admit the solutions 

which we try to achieve to tackle that problem.  How in the 

world is this a credible exchange of ideas and debate in the 

legislature on the direction of tax policy and fiscal policy?  

Please, Mr. Member, will the 

Conservatives come to the conclusion that you lost the election 

and you lost it in large measure because you brought this 

province to the verge of bankruptcy.  Will you admit that, and 

if you admit that then we can have a sensible debate as to 

whether or not the solutions we're taking are the right ones or 

not.  Because for sure if we admit that, if and when you ever 

become government again, you will have to follow the same 

course and make the same choices and trade-offs.  But you 

can't continue to live in the dream-land and the 

Alice-in-Wonderland approach to politics that you have been 

adopting for the last nine years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Premier, maybe we've both got some fessing up to do.  But 

tonight I'm asking the questions and you're doing the fessing, 

so let's get on with it.  I just want to remind you, Mr. Premier, a 

few of the comments you made that night on province-wide 

TV. . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  Oh, you bet I did.  I was 

enthralled.  I even took a night off campaigning to watch that. 

 

We'll ease the tax burden for ordinary families and kick-start 

our economy.  A concerted war on poverty, that's what I'm 

committed to.  The debt was 3.2 billion on the Crown 

corporations and now it's 14.2 billion since 1982.  Did you say 

yes?  We have never put politics before people.  Our position is 

that the alternative equivalent employment is available, 

uranium mining will be shut down. 

 

The premium rates, GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

are high.  The premium rates are unacceptable.  I've been 

getting all kinds of notices by farmers where the premiums 

indicate higher than the cash advance.  I think there was about 

4,000 people talking to the member from Rosetown-Elrose 

about that earlier today. 

 

And you were very, very blunt about things that night, Mr. 

Premier.  I mean we squared a lot of stuff.  The other thing that 

I want to say about deficits is this:  from time to time, in a 

resource-based economy such as ours, there may be -- I 

understand the word maybe -- the need for a deficit to meet the 

urgent needs of farmers or working people or whatever the 

crisis.  And finally, the PST (provincial sales tax) is not going 

to be around after October 21. 

 

Well you did keep one promise, Mr. Premier.  Now the fact of 

the matter is you said the provincial deficit was $14.2 billion.  

You obviously made enough promises here to spend several 

billion dollars.  Now which was it, Mr. Premier?  Were you 

sticking by the 14.2 in the face . . . made all those promises in 

the face of that 14.2 -- or were you simply using the 14.2 to try 

and scare people and hope that they would not do an analysis 

of all the promises that you had made that you obviously 

couldn't pay for?  Which was it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It's neither.  Neither of your 

assumptions are accurate, nor are your statements accurate.  

First of all we campaigned and I've given the . . . take a look at 

the program card, please.  I mean again, if we're going to have 

a reasonable attempt at debate, let's begin with some base facts.  

Take a look at the program card which I gave to your 

colleague, the member from Arm River.  You should have it in 

front of you.  I wish I had 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

another one to give to you.  You'll see what our promises are:  

open the books, seek to balance the budget, examine the 

privatizations -- which we're in the process of doing.  Then we 

talked about . . . That's first things first, that was the very first 

thing on the platform card.  I could recite them to you.  Told 

them about the quality of life and the directions we were going 

and all the areas we were heading. 

 

We have gone a long way to accomplishing our promises.  

That's exactly what we're doing.  I don't understand this line of 

questioning which on the one hand says that we knew the $14 

billion figure and somehow couldn't square it; and on the other 

hand, that the $14 billion figure was some sort of a scare tactic.  

I suppose you could argue with both from your point of view 

but again, with the greatest respect, Mr. Member -- and I hold 

you in high regard in this House, too, for whatever it's worth -- 

I think it's not credible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I suppose I 

might be able to put some credibility in what you say if I hadn't 

heard you and your Finance minister in the months since the 

election use at least a half a dozen different deficit figures on 

any given day, use a half a dozen different deficit figures on 

any given day; use a half a dozen different figures as far as 

Crown corporations' debt.  I mean, Mr. Premier, every time that 

you or your Finance minister went to some type of public event 

prior to the Gass Commission coming down, we heard a 

different number.  And they're well documented.  I mean it was 

600 million one time and it was 900 million another time and 

then it was 1.2.  It's well documented and you know it.  And the 

simple fact is that I believe last fall, in your hunger to achieve 

political power, that you were knowing full well what the 

provincial deficit was, still out promising several billion dollars 

in promises to people that you couldn't keep. 

 

And I suppose it really should come to no surprise to people 

when the budget came down that you were going to break those 

promises.  But I think it has come to a lot of shock to a lot of 

people in our province that they have faced such massive tax 

increases, that they've seen their medicare system assaulted.  I 

mean it was one of the things in the leaders' debate that you 

accused the former premier of having a secret agenda on.  Your 

own comments, you were talking about 30 per cent 

co-payments for chiropractic services, 30 per cent co-payments 

for optometric services, raise the drug plan.  I mean you were 

talking about further privatizations.  It's all here, Mr. Premier.  

It was all on province-wide TV, further attacks on Indian and 

Metis people, social issues, health care, education.  I mean you 

were talking about it all, Mr. Premier. 

 

And now, a few short months later, those attacks have occurred 

but they didn't come from a Conservative administration.  They 

came from an NDP administration that said we won't do that.  

And in the very same speech you used deficit numbers that are 

almost identical to what Gass came up with many months later.  

Now some people might say that's a coincidence.  I don't think 

it was a coincidence at all.  I firmly believe what Donald Gass 

said in his report at the end.  He said there was no hidden 

deficit; the numbers were there for anybody to find.  And I 

suspect the Premier's staff at the time went and looked them up 

and found them, to make sure that when you went on 

province-wide TV, in front of all the voters of this province, 

that you used the proper number. But at the same time you 

promised them so much that you could never deliver, knowing 

where the province's finances were.  And that is the part, Mr. 

Premier, that I find reprehensible, and why perhaps our 

dialogue tonight isn't the way you would like it to be. 

 

But I'm saying to you, somehow you're going to have to square 

this with people, that on one hand you knew what the deficit 

was and on the other you could make all these promises 

knowing full well that a few months down the road you would 

tax the living daylights out of them.  And, Mr. Premier, I don't 

think that washes with Saskatchewan taxpayers or 

Saskatchewan voters, because you're the one that's trying to 

have it both ways. 

 

And I need you to tell me tonight, given that you knew that the 

deficit was 14.2, higher than what your Minister of Finance 

even brought in for a forecast on page 61, how you could 

square all of those election promises with Saskatchewan people 

and expect to pay for them without all of the tax increases 

which you've now implemented.  That's what I'd like you to 

square. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will never 

square to the satisfaction of the hon. member opposite; I know 

that.  No I won't even give it a try because it's . . . Look, you 

people couldn't square the budget when you were in 

government, so I doubt, with the greatest of respect for the 

member from Thunder Creek, that I could square it when he's 

in opposition. 

 

I want to make two points very quickly if I can.  First of all, the 

accusation that you say I made about a secret, hidden agenda -- 

that is right.  And I tell you why I based that allegation in the 

election campaign.  Because going into the 1986 general 

election campaign you budgeted for a deficit of $389 million.  

That was going into the campaign.  You remember that budget.  

Were you a member of the cabinet or not at that time? I don't 

know, but none the less you introduced that budget in the 

spring of 1986. 

 

And then the election took place in the fall of 1986. You got 

re-elected. And lo and behold, what did the actual budget 

deficit turn out to be? Not $389 million but 1.2 billion, or an 

error of 216 per cent.  And then will you remember the 1986 

budget and what you did with the 1986 budget?  Remember the 

lotteries tax and the used-car tax, and did they do away with the 

gas tax in that '86 campaign or not?  Aided the gas tax. 

 

You had the secret agenda of coming in with a relatively low 

budget deficit to sneak by the election, then reveal the true 

numbers and then really sock it to the people.  And that's why I 

wrote that letter before the election, this last election, saying 

look, you did this to us in 1986. Surely to goodness responsible 

political debate would dictate that we know what, through an 

independent audit, would be the forecast.  And lo and behold, 

wouldn't you know it?  Wouldn't you know it? 

 

Supposing if you had been re-elected, what would have 

happened?  Your forecast for the election budget was 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

$265 million.  But what did you come in with?  Well what we 

came in with, actually, 851 million, four times the projection.  

Same pattern as '86.  And if you had been the government 

today, you know what you would have been doing?  You 

would have been doing exactly the same thing that you did in 

1986.  You would have just socked it to the people with all 

kinds of new taxes. 

 

So when I said there was a secret agenda, I hope you can 

understand why I said there was a secret agenda, given this 

pattern of behaviour. 

 

But I repeat again, as to the second aspect of your question, the 

so-called promises that we made, the promise we made was 

that we were not going to harmonize the GST (goods and 

services tax).  When people said, where would you find the 

money, we said we would hope to find the money by cutting 

out government waste and government mismanagement and 

trimming the government expenditures.  That's what we said 

we'd try to do. 

 

And we said we'd try to find enough money to redirect 

priorities away from the GigaText investments toward those on 

food banks and on social services, the neediest of our people.  

We said we wanted to do that and we wanted to do those two 

things.  But we said, first things first.  We said we would have 

to open up the books to find out what the true picture was, 

because talking about numbers, we knew from past record that 

your numbers not only did not jibe, but were wildly off the 

mark. 

 

Now that's the sum and the total of the promises and how we 

did it and how we squared the circle. 

 

Now it turns out, when we got to office, that lo and behold, the 

numbers are as I've told you.  And then having come into office 

and done the thing that we said we were going to do first, 

namely open up the books, first things first, and get an 

assessment, we took the responsible actions.  We still found 

money for those in need; still on those on food banks, and too 

many of them, and growing.  We've got to come with the 

proper policies, whether it's job creation or whatever, social 

services programs. 

 

But by golly, we have found money for them and we've said, 

no more GigaTexts.  And we're looking at the other 

privatizations to see what else we can do to uncover some of 

the money which has been spent by you people.  And we have 

done a responsible thing in having cut-backs, minus 9 per cent. 

 

(1930) 

 

And unfortunately, because of the size of the debt, I remind 

you, sir, $750 million on interest charges -- interest charges 

alone.  Third-highest expenditure.  First, still health care; 

second, education; third, interest payments to New York and to 

Zürich and to London -- money which could have been kept 

here at home.  That's where your tax dollars are going, thanks 

to you folks. 
 

Well I tell you, under the circumstances of being put in this 

strait-jacket, I think most people know who caused the 

problem.  And while no one likes a tax increase -- I don't like 

administering it any more than I like paying it, 

and no one likes the cut-backs any more in administering it 

than suffering it -- I know in my heart of hearts that the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan know that we're in a mess 

created as a result of nine years of a government that was 

simply out of control and they know we can't get out it in nine 

months, and they're going to be with us, and they're going to be 

pulling together.  That is the basis of the budget and the 

squaring of the circle of the campaign in October of '91. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well it was a nice 

piece of fiction with a little bit of ancient history, but we're 

dealing with 1992.  And the only secret agenda, Mr. Chairman, 

that I can find in the last little while is the one that the Premier 

perpetrated on Saskatchewan people a short 10 months ago.  

And I say that because I remember very well campaigning on a 

platform of raising taxes, decentralization, strong farm policies 

-- all of which cost money.  And quite frankly, I suspect, Mr. 

Chairman, we're quite easy to shoot at politically. 

 

One does not go out and campaign on raising taxes and find it 

particularly easy.  But at least it was a little more honest, I 

believe, Mr. Chairman, than on one hand saying the provincial 

deficit was $14.2 billion and then promising people massive 

tax cuts, more for Health, Education, Social Services, knowing 

full well that they couldn't be paid for it. 

 

I would like, Mr. Chairman, to have run a campaign based on 

what I've seen in the Premier's budget this spring.  I would 

have loved to have had that as the platform of the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) and put that platform against the one that we 

ran on last October.  I think it would have been an interesting 

match. 

 

So the only dishonesty that has come I think, out of this whole 

conversation, at least in recent history, is the fact that the 

Premier knew about $14.2 billion, admitted it on province-wide 

TV, promised tax cuts and more for everything else, and now 

in office doesn't deliver them. 

 

And if he refuses to square that with Saskatchewan people I 

guess some people watching tonight and as we go on in time, 

people will start to figure out what the charade was all about.  

Because you can't perpetrate that big a switch on people in this 

short a time and not have questions asked. 

 

And if he doesn't want to answer them tonight, so be it.  But I 

can assure him that lots of people are asking how you could 

know about a $14.2 billion deficit, make all those promises, 

and then tax the living hide right off of them a few months 

later. 

 

There's one other point, Mr. Premier, that I think we need to 

discuss along this lines is that the deficit projections that . . . in 

the current account and in the Crown corporations that you 

keep talking about and have talked about with people, used 

many different numbers.  It's also mentioned on page 61 of the 

budget address.  And I'm wondering how you justify taking a 

billion and a half dollars in government guarantees and 

claiming them as debt the way that the Finance minister has 

done? 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer here is 

quite easy, in my judgement.  A government guarantee is as 

much of a debt as an actual borrowing out, going to the bank 

and borrowing the money.  You might say it isn't quite because 

it's contingent.  It's contingent, for example, to give you one 

example . . . as you know, you folks entered into a deal with 

Cargill.  We have a sole government guarantee of $305 million, 

if my memory serves me correctly.  We, the taxpayers, the 

farmers -- $305 million sole guarantee on that loan. 

 

Now surely the member's not suggesting that we should 

pretend that that's somehow an asset.  Heaven forbid.  We want 

to see that thing work obviously for a whole number of 

reasons, especially given the financial commitment that is out 

there, but if in the eventuality it does not work, what is proper 

accounting practice tell you to do? 

 

You have to put aside an accounting for that as a liability, 

contingent or otherwise.  It's got to be there.  That's part of the 

picture of opening up the books and painting the true, complete 

story to the people of Saskatchewan.  That's how we justify it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, in your own CICA 

(Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants) Handbook . . . 

this is the manual that is used by CICA to determine certain 

things.  This was last editorially changed in 1978 when you 

were the attorney general of this province.  And I'll send a copy 

over to the Premier, if I could have a page. 

 

And in that handbook and manual that was used by the Allan 

Blakeney government, it was used by our government, and I 

presume it's still being used by the current government, it gives 

certain criteria for write-downs, measurement of uncertainty, 

accounting treatment, contingencies.  It goes through a number 

of these.  I'll refer the Premier to the page numbered 3290.08, 

.12: 

 

 The amount of a contingent loss should be accrued in the 

financial statements by a charge to income when both of the 

following conditions are met: 

 (a) it is likely that a future event will confirm that an asset 

has been impaired or a liability incurred at the date 

of the financial statements; and 

 (b)  the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. 

 

And then on the preceding page it gives the various categories 

that a particular entity must fit into for certain things to happen.  

Now it appears to me from reading the financial statements 

prepared by your government, Mr. Premier, is that you're 

saying that all of the guaranteed debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan falls into the (a) likely, category which means 

that the investment in the fertilizer plant, the paper mill, bacon 

plant, all of them will be complete and utter failures and 

write-offs for the government of Saskatchewan. 

 

According to the CICA Handbook, the one that was used under 

the Blakeney administration, under our administration, and I 

say to you is probably used today, 

the criteria for taking that type of write-down has been jigged 

by your Finance minister.  And I say it was jigged in order for 

you to cover some more of your electoral tracks in October of 

last year. 

 

Now if these guidelines that were used by your predecessor, 

Mr. Blakeney, on write-downs weren't good enough, I would 

have thought at the time of the Gass Commission that you 

would have said, Mr. Donald Gass, CICA's manual is no good 

any more, wasn't good enough for Mr. Blakeney; it's not good 

enough for me.  When we're doing these write-downs we better 

use a different criteria. 

 

Mr. Premier, given that CICA has very definite 

recommendations, the last time of which were updated under 

an NDP government under Mr. Blakeney, why weren't these 

conditions followed when your Minister of Finance was 

writing down, taking provincial guarantees and assigning them 

over to the debt side when they didn't fit the criteria of your 

own organization?  How do you square that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I've got so many circles here that I've 

squared that . . . Let me just give the member one little 

quotation from the Gass report, page 16: 

 

 In our evaluation of Saskatchewan's current accounting 

practices and financial statements, we have concluded that 

they do not meet the previously-mentioned PSAAC 

objectives and do not provide sufficient information to fully 

understand the Province's financial position and to evaluate 

the Government's financial operations and management.  

They do not report in a convenient and easily understood 

manner the combined position of all government-owned 

entities.  They do not include full information on the financial 

activities of all of the organizations which are owned or 

controlled by the Government.  In some instances (I ask the 

member to really pay attention to these words, in some 

instances) which will be identified later in this report, the 

accounting treatment has resulted in misleading information 

which has served to understate the Province's accumulated 

deficit. 

 

By the way, I could give you those instances identified later in 

the report, but you're off that line of questioning, at least for the 

time being, about you know, how come we knew the debt and 

how come we had to open up the books.  These instances, 

which were not reported: 

 

 . . . resulted in misleading information which has served to 

understate the Province's accumulated (debt). 

 

Served to understate it.  And I could give you many quotations. 

 

 The Commission is of the view that the financial reporting in 

Saskatchewan is among the weakest and least useful in 

Canada from an accountability perspective. 

 

And on it goes.  And so we took Gass and we said, okay we 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

think that's a good report.  I'm not blaming your administration 

with respect to the accounting measures in its totality, but as 

the next plateau of government, the thing to do is to make the 

full reporting changes.  And thus we have. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the province of 

Saskatchewan wasn't on PSAAC (Public Sector Accounting 

and Auditing Committee) standards in 1978 when Allan 

Blakeney's government last brought this document up to snuff.  

It wasn't in place in 1982 when we took power, and it is not in 

place in the province of Saskatchewan today.  And matter of 

fact, any time that the Minister of Finance is pushed these days 

on adopting PSAAC standards, he begins to fudge and hesitate 

and say, well it'll take time and we can't get there.  And the 

simple fact of the matter is that Mr. Gass is talking about a 

whole different method of accounting that isn't in place 

anywhere in Canada.  In the same document, Mr. Premier, page 

3290.18 it says: 

 

 The existence of a contingent loss at the date of the financial 

statements should be disclosed in notes to the financial 

statements when: 

 

 (a) the occurrence of the confirming future event is likely 

but the amount of the loss cannot be reasonably 

estimated; or 

 

 (b) the occurrence of the confirming future event is likely 

and an accrual has been made but there exists an 

exposure to loss in excess of the amount accrued; or 

 

 (c) the occurrence of the confirming future event is not 

determinable. 

 

What you have determined by your statements to cover up your 

electoral tracks is that they are all failures.  And by doing so, if 

any one of those entities in the future returns dividends to the 

province of Saskatchewan, you will be able to use the proceeds 

as a capital gain and say, aren't we good managers; haven't we 

done well? 

 

And if you had followed your own CICA Handbook and 

manual, you would have not been able to make those particular 

financial statements that you made to the people of 

Saskatchewan in your budget address.  And I say the only time 

that you in all honesty can adopt what Mr. Gass has said is 

when you switch your government's accounting methods totally 

to the PSAAC (Public Sector Accounting and Auditing 

Committee) standards.  And when you do that, you will be the 

first in Canada to do so.  But until that time, I think, Mr. 

Premier, you should live by the operating manuals of your own 

departments. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, the fact is that your own manuals, written 

under an NDP government, disagree with what you've done.  

How can you justify taking those write-downs, when a 

government guarantee clearly specifies in here certain criteria 

that have to be met before you can take that write-down? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have indicated 

to the member before and I repeat again, the document he is 

referring, by his own admission, is 1978 or whatever.  The 

document I'm referring to is the Gass Commission document of 

1992, just a few months ago.  We haven't implemented all of 

the recommendations of Gass with respect to accounting; I 

readily admit that.  But we're making strides and doing what I 

think is the right thing in making the proper accounting 

measures and taking proper accounting practices in order to 

make sure that what Gass recommended for future 

governments, including ours, will be the case; namely, where 

the liabilities are, actual and contingent; how the money is 

raised; how the money is spent; and it's open.  And this is part 

of the practice of doing it. 

 

Believe me, you won't believe what I'm saying, what I'm going 

to say, but I'm going to urge you to carefully think about it.  

You know we're not that Machiavellian.  I wish we were that 

clever to have this great, grand design to take all of these 

contingent liabilities and rack up the debt and then make us 

look good.  You know we're just not that politically clever.  

That's too clever by half.  We're just simply trying to follow 

what we can do by way of the Gass Commission reports and by 

what we think is the best direction to head in this area. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I suspect that if you've 

got a tender part of your anatomy in the wringer, because the 

taxpayer is a little bit upset with what you've just done to him, 

you might think of all sorts of ways to try and wiggle out from 

underneath it; and especially after you've made a whole lot of 

promises and you broke them a whole short time later, that 

when that tender part of your anatomy is in the wringer, that 

the public is pressing down hard, then I think I would believe 

just about anything. 

 

And the simple fact is the auditor has already started to twig on 

it.  And I refer the Premier to July 16 of Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations.  And the auditor's onto the first one of 

them.  And he's talking about the Water Corporation, and he 

says: 

 

 We have, in our examination, we have not yet seen sufficient 

or appropriate evidence to support those write-offs, and we're 

discussing that with the appointed auditors. 

 

Well I suspect, Mr. Premier, there's going to be more of them.  

Because the CICA Handbook is very specific in how 

government should handle these types of transactions. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, you have taken a whole lot of write-downs.  

You have brought the debt up to your self-fulfilling prophecy 

of $14.2 billion.  And you've done that to get away from the 

wrath of the taxpayer, because of the promises you and your 

party made a short 10 months ago. 

 

Now I guess, Mr. Premier, given the fact that it's starting to 

unravel, I think it's time, Mr. Chairman, that we had some 

assurances from the Premier tonight in his Estimates that he's 

either going to commit to take this province to a full accrual 

accounting method, to PSAAC standards that Mr. Donald Gass 

talked about, or he's to go back and follow 



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

the rules that have been in place since the Allan Blakeney 

administration in 1978.  And if he goes back and follows those 

rules, then the Minister of Finance is going to have to rewrite 

the budget document because what we have before us will be a 

falsehood. 

 

So you've got a couple of choices here, Mr. Premier.  You can 

either commit to the PSAAC standards, and commit to them 

now, or you can go back and come forward with a true budget 

document.  Because one way or the other, it's your only hope of 

squaring anything -- or drawing a circle around it, in your 

language -- with Saskatchewan voters who you led down the 

garden path a short 10 months ago.  Because you can't have it 

both ways, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the government's 

position has been articulated many times on this matter -- and 

initially it was at the time of the Gass Commission report -- 

that we intend to implement as much of the Gass Commission 

recommendations on accounting and the principles of 

accounting as is possible.  Did we complete it in this first 

budget?  The answer is no, we did not.  We got the Gass report 

in mid-February.  We had to put together the first budget by 

mid-April in order to be ready for presentation in May. 
 

Are we proceeding in this way?  The answer is yes.  I don't 

know if the member wants to continue this part of the debate, 

but I refer you to page 38 of the Gass report talking about 

NewGrade Energy Inc.  This is an enterprise that was involved 

at the time of your government.  And the Gass report reads the 

following quote: 
 

 As at October 31, 1991, the Province has invested 

approximately $232 million in this project and has 

guaranteed $334 million of debt. 
 

That, Mr, Member, is over $550 million.  Through the Crown 

Management Board, the government has already written down 

virtually all of its $233 million. And this write-down is 

reflected in the province's accumulated deficit as reported on 

October 31, 1991. 
 

Now it goes on to say that largely because of a significant 

decrease in oil prices, significant operating losses are being 

recorded by NewGrade.  And here we have a guaranteed debt 

of $334 million.  And this situation which at least at the time of 

Gass, is being reported as such. 
 

Well I guess there's a difference of opinion between you and 

me, you and us, whether or not we tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that we're on the hook for this if it doesn't come 

about, doesn't work out, or whether we don't.  And you are 

apparently critical of us that we are doing it, that we're moving 

in this area, and I disagree with you.  I think that it is a proper 

way to do it and I believe that the Gass report is showing us the 

right way to go. 
 

And if I may say, again, not to be provocative, I would have 

thought that a recently chastened opposition, a chastened 

government now fresh opposition with this kind of a report 

which for sure was not political, would be saying okay, keep 

moving in this direction. In fact you're not doing enough of it.  

And what are your steps?  But you don't seem to be wanting us 

to do that.  You want us to presumably be sticking to 1978 

rules and other 

procedures.  And this is another area where we agree to 

disagree. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, you've got it all wrong, Mr. Premier.  I'll 

try and lay it out for you in simpler terms then.  What I'm 

saying is I have no problem with PSAAC standards and accrual 

accounting.  If that's the way we're going, then we need the 

commitment and we go.  But if you're going to stay and you're 

going to use the CICA Handbook, then we've got to use that 

methodology.  You see, we can't mix and match, Mr. Premier. 

 

And what you have so artfully done, you and your Finance 

minister, in order to cover your electoral tracks is you have 

mixed and matched.  Because if you follow the criteria in this 

pamphlet, your budget's wrong.  If you're going to full PSAAC 

standards, fair ball.  Then make the commitment and do every 

last bit of government accounting from this day forward by 

PSAAC standards.  And I welcome it.  It will be much easier in 

Public Accounts, much easier in Public Accounts for the 

opposition to follow your government -- if you want to go to 

those standards. 

 

But what you have done, Mr. Premier, is you have mixed and 

matched to try and cover your tracks, and that is what is not 

acceptable to the opposition or the taxpayer because you can't 

be taking write-downs in one manner and still operating your 

government on another manner.  That simply isn't good 

enough. 

 

It all goes back to the point that I made earlier, Mr. Chairman, 

to the Premier.  You predict a budget figure during the election 

of one thing and then you say it's different later on.  You bring 

on a whole raft of tax increases that you promised you wouldn't 

do.  So we're always using two sets of numbers here, whatever 

satisfies your political agenda not what satisfies the economic 

agenda or the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What I want from you tonight is some commitment.  If this 

handbook is redundant, it's no longer used, that the criteria for 

write-downs in it is void in the terms of the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose in his GRIP Bill -- he's voided things back to 

January of '91 -- perhaps you could void the CICA Handbook 

back to January 1 of '91 and we can get on with something 

new. 

 

But if it's not void and it's being used today, and I would 

challenge the Premier to prove to me that if he went over there 

this evening that that isn't the manual that will be in use, then 

he better stick to that until he's ready to go to the other method.  

So maybe we should get some commitments from you tonight, 

Mr. Premier, in your Estimates, for the taxpayers of this 

province, exactly which system you're going to use, which 

system the taxpayers can expect to follow in the future, which 

system Public Accounts will be using a month from now, and 

stick by it.  Then we can get down to rejigging your budget 

document so that it fits the appropriate one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the commitment 

I give to the House and to the member is the one that we've 

been giving since Gass and before Gass that we think . . . well 

certainly since Gass.  We like the thrust and the direction of 

Gass, and we want to try to 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

follow as best as we can those accounting principles. 

 

I want to close on this point if I can.  Well at least this is my 

last comment on this guaranteed debt matter.  I refer again 

from Gass, the hon. member to page 44, where the Gass 

Commission talks under the heading about guaranteed debt. 

 

 In recent years, the Province's total amount of guaranteed 

debt has increased rapidly.  The Government has 

demonstrated a growing preference for providing financial 

support to private sector commercial ventures through loan 

guarantees, rather than through equity investments, direct 

loans, or cash grants. 

 

 . . . The recent guarantees appear to have played a critical 

role in attracting various economic diversification ventures to 

Saskatchewan (Gass writes).  However (Note this, Mr. 

Member -- however), they have also exposed the Province to 

financial risks.  By guaranteeing a loan, the Government has 

decided to accept the risk that other (notably, private sector) 

institutions are not prepared to bear alone.  The Government's 

accountability is not only with respect to the magnitude and 

appropriateness of the transaction, but also with respect to the 

risk that the project will not be able to meet its financial 

obligations and that the loan will be called. 

 

I'm just going to close by reading this: 

 

 The largest loans to commercial ventures which the 

Government of Saskatchewan has guaranteed (Mr. Member) 

include $334 million for NewGrade . . . $355 million for 

HARO . . . $261 million for Saferco . . . $51 million for 

Weyerhaeuser . . . The Province also has the following 

significant debt guarantees against program loans: $306 

million . . . Home Improvement Loan Program . . . $38 

million for the Mortgage Guarantee Program. 

 

And these are the words I want you to remember, sir: 

 

 We are concerned about the total amounts of debt guarantees 

which are now in effect and about the ability of the Province 

to meet these guarantees if they are called. 

 

And then it goes on to say in summary and conclusions that 

this risk exposure should be identified. 

 

Now by the way, moving away from the question of accounting 

practices, just, Mr. Chairman, what I have cited here by way of 

the list of loan guarantees speaks to the financial health or ill 

health of the province.  To the member opposite, I again ask 

you.  These are your arrangements -- 334 million, 3-plus, 355 

million-plus, 261 million-plus, 51 million-plus, 306 

million-plus, 38 million.  And that isn't the complete list. 

 

And the member then asks, why are there tax increases?  Why 

did you have to make some cut-backs, the member asks.  It's 

right there for the people of Saskatchewan to see. 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, and Mr. 

Chairman, some of our staff have gone through a number of the 

answers, the quotes . . . or the questions that were posed, and 

an indication that some of the answers haven't been directly . . . 

or given according to the way the questions were presented. 

 

Question 2 dealt with Saskatchewan Executive Council, and we 

asked for a list of all space rented, leased, and owned by the 

department and the purpose for which the space was being 

used. 

 

Now I believe a list was given regarding the space rented and 

leased.  But the understanding we have is that the department 

didn't really indicate the purpose of the space, what it's being 

used for, and who occupies the space and for what purposes. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. 

member wishes to get greater clarification, I'll endeavour to do 

this.  Attached, I hope, at least in the copy that I have before 

me, is additional data and information about space.  Ottawa 

office, for example, $26,000.  SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) office, Regina, storage.  

Regina Legislative Building -- you'll see it, the accommodation 

charges. 

 

And then '92-93: Ottawa office; Legislative Building; trade and 

convention centre; Saskatoon Premier's office charges; 

Roll-o-flex Building, accommodation charges; School Trustees 

Building in Regina; and so forth.  Those are the purposes that 

seem to be set out there.  I would have thought that it had been 

sufficient for the member, but if he wants greater clarification, 

we'll be prepared to provide that to him in writing. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I realize that, Mr. Premier, that yes, it says 

Regina Roll-o-flex Building, but who is leasing the building 

and for what purpose is the space being leased?  Saskatchewan 

School Trustees: does the province lease that building and the 

province provide the building for the school trustees?  Is that 

what's being indicated by the answer, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Actually, Mr. Member, if you will 

look at the top of the third page -- it's the second page on the 

two-page attachment -- you'll see accommodation charges, 

Electoral Office.  These pertain to the Electoral Office.  It's 

storage of ballot boxes and the like. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And the indication then is that both of these 

buildings are being used by the Chief Electoral Officer.  Is that 

the understanding I have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes. The offices are located in the 

School Trustees Building.  There's no change.  We've made no 

change on anything that has existed with the Electoral Office.  

In fact, I think with respect to all of these accommodations, we 

have made no changes at all thus far from what you had, and 

the arrangements that you had.  Not to mislead the member -- 

with the exception of the closure of the P.A. (Prince Albert) 

Premier's office.  Except for the closure of the P.A. Premier's 

office at a 



2948 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

saving of some considerable funds for the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I notice that the Premier indicated that to close the 

P.A. office.  The Saskatoon office, is this a new space or is that 

the same space that was rented by the previous government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- So far, same space. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- On question 1(a), Saskatchewan Executive 

Council, the question was asked, and we asked for titles, 

salaries, job . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . question 1(a). 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 1(a)? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- That's right.  And this is regarding your own staff, 

Mr. Premier.  And what we have here, we do have titles, 

salaries, but we're looking for any indication of the job 

descriptions.  And we look at . . . I believe early in the 

afternoon you indicated some of the job description for one Mr. 

Garry Aldridge, but we have Vonnie Kaufmann, Shelley 

Nelson.  Any other descriptions or any other positions that 

would be filled by these individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again we could 

undertake to provide this written information for you in due 

course.  But I'm advised that over the years -- it doesn't 

necessarily make it right -- but over the years there has never 

been a job description for example, the principal secretary, Mr. 

Pringle.  We call Mr. Aldridge chief of staff, the same 

functions more or less -- communications, media relations, 

media purchasing and the like.  So we could draft those all 

right for you, but they never have been provided.  And we 

simply have taken that and given you the name, the title, which 

carries with it the functions, the salary, and so forth. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I believe this, Mr. Premier, that in a number 

of the Estimates we have been discussing so far, I guess a 

number of ministers have indicated that maybe over the years it 

hasn't always been followed, but certainly we find that a 

number of ministers have provided, where possible, as much as 

they possibly can, listed a job description of the individuals.  

So what we would ask, Mr. Premier, is that any of that that is 

possible, and if you want to do it in writing, certainly that 

would be appropriate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll certainly ask my staff to see if we 

can expand on the job descriptions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, I'm kind of going in random because 

of my questions here all over.  But going to question no. 32, a 

question was posed regarding department manuals, procedure 

manuals, policy manuals.  And I believe all the departments 

have a human resources manual that spells out how prospective 

employees are to be interviewed, on what basis they are 

judged, and how successful candidates are to be selected.  It 

also includes policies and procedures on discipline, promotion, 

use of department equipment and vehicles, and so on.  And we 

were wondering, Mr. Premier, if indeed such manuals exist, if 

the manuals would be provided for the opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The manual does exist, and I 

think it's item number 2 under the key, manuals, in the response 

-- Human Resource Manual, Public Service Commission -- the 

point that you refer to.  So we'll provide a copy to you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I know you have a list here, Mr. Premier.  

Are those available in any public forum, like the library?  But 

certainly if they're . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- They are public documents and you'd 

be entitled to them, but they would have to be gathered from 

various departments and agencies, which may not be an 

overnight task, to put it bluntly.  But in due course you can 

have them, and again feel free to contact either my deputy 

minister or Mr. Wincherauk, but preferably to the deputy 

minister or myself, and we can arrange them.  Do you want all 

of these?  You do?  You're joking, for sure.  Okay.  No, fine.  If 

you want them all, we'll try to make them available for you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- It seems, Mr. Premier, that we don't have enough 

reading material yet. 

 

Mr. Premier, regarding your staff in Saskatchewan Executive 

Council, on question 26, question no. 26, we're looking at a 

question which is looking for . . . a question asking the value of 

business done with any travel agencies since November 1, '91; 

on what basis the agency was selected; what format was used 

to select the agency or travel agency; whether or not there is 

any contractual obligation on the department's part to use the 

agency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm not sure I got the last part of the 

question.  But you will know, of course, that if we use a travel 

agency, which we do, that they get paid from the carrier.  So 

thus the value is not listed there.  But was there a second part of 

the question, or another part that I missed? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Premier, the two 

agencies . . . to date these are the two agencies that you have 

used for travel arrangements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes.  It's the same two firms that we 

used during your term. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And is there a contractual arrangement, or they 

are just chosen at random? Basically what the Premier does, or 

the staff, or the government does, looks at the ability of this 

agency to provide the necessary services without being very 

specific? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer is no, we do not have such 

contractual arrangements yet.  I'm not sure that it's possible to 

do it, although I like the idea because it's a setting of a standard 

against which you can measure success or failure.  But in the 

nine months that we've been around, we've not done it.  We've 

simply continued in the same practice and procedure which 

was the practice of your administration for the last nine years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, regarding committees, question no. 

27.  Now if I understand correctly, we do have Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit advisory council that was appointed since 

November 1? 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2949 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's right. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- The Board of Internal Economy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's right. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- We have the Standards Council of Canada?  Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's right. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And the advisory committee on standards for 

consumers, terms of reference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- . . . terms of reference. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Are there any other agencies, Mr. Premier, that 

have been appointed?  Agencies or I should say committees or 

councils that you have appointed such as . . . Would you have 

appointed a Premier's council on the economy or any other 

councils such as this, Mr. Premier?  The councils that have 

been appointed and the make-up of those councils. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer is we have not made any 

new appointments from the Premier's office, but it is no secret 

that I will be soon -- I hope -- announcing the establishment of, 

for example, the Premier's economic action committee.  

Actually it's Premier's Action Committee on Economic 

Development, or PACE for the acronym. 

 

But we have not . . . I have not had a chance with the 

legislature and the other constitutional matters to go through 

that and get the cabinet's approval of the names, but that will be 

one immediately.  There may be others that will follow, but not 

too many more. 

 

But the economic one is the priority one right now. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I can appreciate the fact that the economic 

council would be one that you would call a priority in view of 

the financial difficulties that this province faces itself in, and 

other provinces.  In fact, there isn't a place in the world that 

doesn't have a problem regarding finances and debt financing. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, as you look at this 

committee on the economy, appointing a committee on the 

economy, what rationale or what format will you be using?  

Will you take into consideration of maybe looking at 

individuals who have a lot of knowledge in the financial field, 

a lot of knowledge in the accounting field, Mr. Premier, rather 

than . . . 

 

It would appear to me that when we look at the budget of this 

province and the deficit we're facing and the relationship to 

other provinces, it would be appropriate certainly to have some 

men and women who may not have a lot of experience in the 

financial field, but it would also be appropriate to have 

individuals who have some fairly sound financial experience to 

sit on your committee.  I take it that you will be appointing 

them so that you can sit down with them and get some advice 

from them.  They will become an advisory to the 

government and to Executive Council.  So what I'm just asking, 

Mr. Premier, if you would indeed look very carefully at the 

type of people you choose and if you have a format that you're 

looking at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- This of course is one of the delays in 

the actual announcement of this body, but let me just tell you 

briefly how I visualize it, envision it, and it'll be set out in 

writing of course and the names then will also be announced. 

 

I'm not looking at necessarily a body whose main function it is 

to be advisory.  It should be advisory but if that's its main 

function we haven't got the time for that.  What we really want 

is a body which is advisory but action oriented, thus the 

acronym PACE, Premier's Action Committee on the Economy. 

 

We think that we have a pretty good handle of where the 

economic opportunities exist.  What we need now is the 

business acumen, the financial acumen, and by the way I think 

as well some trade union acumen involved as well, in the hopes 

of building a nice consensus of directed activities for the 

pursuit of economic projects, and doing it immediately and 

meeting regularly and announcing our objectives and seeing 

whether we're succeeding or not succeeding. 

 

But what we also want to do, and I'll finish off on this, is we 

want to preface this or at least put it out at about the same time 

that we would put out an economic blueprint.  Now we've put 

out a blueprint, as you know, on wellness in health care.  For 

good or for bad, it sets out a direction. 

 

What we intend to do in economic activity is to set up a 

blueprint and stick with it for the next three, four, five, six 

years with PACE as an advisory, action-oriented, economic 

pursuit body which will assist the Minister of Economic 

Development and the Premier and the Minister of Finance in 

helping us grow out of this deficit and of course provide jobs 

for people. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, another question I have here and it's 

regarding the . . . Since the October 21 election, there have 

been a number of individuals that have been released from 

government, released from Executive Council, and in many 

cases, many of these individuals have been released with cause 

and I believe that a number of individuals have also taken the 

government to court or are in court proceedings.  I'm not sure 

how many.  What I'm wondering is how many lawsuits is the 

government currently engaged in regarding claims of unjust 

dismissal or other litigation related to termination of 

employment with the Government of Saskatchewan or its 

Crown corporations, boards, commissions, or other agencies? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We will have to check to provide you 

a complete . . . because I think your question is all 

encompassing but maybe it isn't.  If it isn't then I can give you 

the answer.  With respect to the Executive Council, the 

Premier's Executive Council, there is only one outstanding 

lawsuit.  That pertains to the employment contract and 

relationships with Mr. Stan Sojonky. 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, you're right, Mr. Premier. The question is 

all-encompassing because it affects every part of government.  

And I'll, just for the sake of the department, read the question 

again so the department can get it.  How many lawsuits . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What question number? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- This isn't on a question that . . . this isn't a global 

question so it isn't something you've had a chance to really 

gather before.  How many lawsuits is the government currently 

engaged in regarding claims of unjust dismissal or other 

litigation related to termination of employment with the 

Government of Saskatchewan or its Crown corporations, 

boards, commissions, or other agencies? 

 

And what we're asking, Mr. Premier . . . And we'll certainly 

give the department time to pull this information together; we 

don't expect that it will all be at their fingertips when we talk 

about all the commissions, the Crowns, and government 

agencies. And so we'd ask, Mr. Premier, for that information. 

 

And I'll finish by reading the rest of . . . a second question here 

just so we've got all the information and don't have to be 

coming back.  Mr. Premier, also will you undertake to have a 

list of all such legal action since November 1, '91, including the 

names of the parties to the litigation, the date on which the 

action was started, an itemized list of costs associated with 

each action, and the current status of each action including, if 

resolved, the final settlement. 

 

I know there are individuals out there, Mr. Premier, who are in 

the process of going through, in many cases, court action, 

because they feel they were unjustly treated.  I'm thinking also 

of the director of Whitespruce.  And so no doubt a number of 

these individuals' names will appear before us.  And we'll give 

the department and your office the opportunity to respond to 

those questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We'll undertake to provide that 

information to the member. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, you talked about the 

fact that certainly if this province is going to be able to get its 

debt under control, one of the main things that is going to have 

to be done, certainly going to be have to be worked with, is 

building a more sound economy. 

 

And we talked this afternoon about the fact of the difficulties 

that we have faced within the province regarding the 

agricultural sector.  And we've gone through the scenario of the 

problems that many producers will be facing because of 

changes to the GRIP.  But changes to the GRIP for people who 

are unemployed don't really mean anything.  And I look back 

to the economic forecast, I believe, the economic review 

statement made by the Minister of Finance in December of 

1991, where the minister says: 

 

 Saskatchewan's manufacturing sector is small but the 

construction of a second heavy oil upgrader, a fertilizer plant 

and a pulp mill will help support 

economic growth in 1991 as well as offer opportunities for 

more growth in future when these new facilities come on 

stream or reach full capacity production. 

 

And then we also see that your commission, the Gass 

Commission, when they presented their report to you, indicated 

that in the case of Saskferco: 

 

 . . .  we identified the Province's investment in the Saskferco 

fertilizer plant and the privatization of the Prairie Malt plant 

as transactions where clear business and public-policy 

objectives were documented as part of the decision to 

proceed: 

 

Now just the other day on the news, Mr. Premier, I believe a 

spokesperson for Saskferco indicated that they are just in the 

process of starting to run the plant -- I believe will be 

producing fertilizer this fall -- and he left us with the indication 

that there is already quite a demand on the market-place for 

fertilizer products, and would indicate to me that, as the Gass 

Commission has indicated, that this certainly is a plant that in 

the long run is going to be very beneficial to not only the 

economy in the province but also to both large urban centres of 

Regina and Moose Jaw, as we see a number of people 

employed in that plant from these two large centres.  And it's 

going to create . . . or have a fairly significant impact on the 

employment factor in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, I've been listening very carefully.  On a 

number of occasions you have, if you will, reprimanded the 

former government for some of the decisions they made 

regarding economic activity.  There's no doubt that I think in a 

lot of ways the ability to establish construction plans or the 

abilities to establish some kind of manufacturing depends on 

two climates: a climatic condition where a government allows a 

business to operate without totally hindering its ability and 

placing limits on its ability as to what it can do; the second 

thing, Mr. Premier, in some cases, is governments working 

hand in hand with the private sector to develop and to build on 

our economy and to help some of the private sector to develop 

and build and put forward their ideas. 

 

And we can look back over the last nine years, Mr. Premier, 

and we see a lot of small businesses that have grown up.  

They've been helped, Mr. Premier, by the government; they've 

been encouraged, they've been helped by local people who 

have invested in community bonds.  And what I would like to 

know, Mr. Premier, is what ideas or what kind of vision do you 

have for the province to work with small businesses or larger 

businesses as we have seen over the last few years.  Yes, we 

can point to the ones that haven't done well.  We can point to 

businesses where there weren't sound financial business 

decisions being made. But there have been a lot of investments 

made, Mr. Premier, as well, where sound businesses have got 

on their feet, and we see employment right across this 

province. But we're going to need more.  We're going to need 

more value added processing in this province, especially a 

province where we produce so much of the raw material. 

 

What vision does the Premier have in light of this and in light 

of the unemployment situation we face in this 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I definitely share 

the member's concerns about job creation.  This is one of the 

great challenges facing this part of the world and facing our 

province.  I can tell the hon. member that of necessity, if not by 

perhaps general approach, we are not into the matter of 

attracting industry by way of what I call megabucks for 

megaprojects. 

 

The member opposite will recall, if he will remember, the 

response I just gave the member from Thunder Creek about the 

number of loan guarantees which are out there.  And our 

financial position doesn't allow us to attract industry in those 

numbers, that fashion, that kind of a commitment.  And 

therefore we will not be entering into that form of economic 

development that we saw in the 1980s. 

 

Rather we believe that our strengths are based in small 

entrepreneurs, in the co-operative sector.  We believe that our 

vision is based in community.  We believe that our vision is 

based on being practical.  We believe that economic 

development can take place pursuant to an economic game 

plan, not one that hopscotches back and forth over every so 

often every so few months, but over a longer period of time, 

one that we stick with.  We'll have our successes and our 

failures, no doubt.  And that we will be as much of a helping 

hand as we can to the business and the co-operative sector. 

 

At the heart of it, I guess, is our vision of a mixed economy.  

And I do think that there are some good signs.  I don't pretend 

to say that the turnaround is on full steam, but we do have 

some encouraging statistics -- housing starts for the first six 

months are up by about 60 per cent compared to the same 

period in 1991.  The employment rate figures are not quite 

always indicative because sometimes out-migration may give 

answers there, but none the less, unemployment does remain at 

a level lower than other parts of the country. 

 

You will know that IPSCO has made an expansion, basically 

the result of a sensitive change in tax policy.  The expanded 

activities of Saskoil as a result of the legislative changes that 

were introduced and, I gather, enacted -- those are some of the 

indicators of some positive things which are taking place. 

 

I close by saying to the hon. member, and this really is good 

news, I'm advised by our economic people that economic 

activity in rural Saskatchewan -- I'm not talking about farm 

gate, which of course remains a major worry for all of us -- but 

in the non-farm-gate areas, directly farm-gate areas, that as of 

August 12, 1992, the most recent reporting date that we have, 

there's something like 270 active projects, economic projects, 

Mr. Member -- 270 outside of Regina, Saskatoon, and the 10 

cities.  There are another 91 projects, additional, in the 10 

cities.  In total, 40 per cent of economic projects are rural, or at 

least outside of these areas which we have talked about. 

 

As I say, I don't think this is a total and complete answer, but 

there are some silver linings which we can now see.  And I 

think that once we table our white paper on 

economic development, establish our PACE, our Premier's 

action committee on economic activity, hear your thoughts and 

ideas and those of others, and with a lot of luck, we should be 

in good shape. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, I'm sorry, I missed the number.  You 

had indicated a number of activities that have taken place, 

some in the city and some outside of the city.  I'm wondering if 

you could share that number.  Are these new activities or new 

businesses that have started up since November 1991, or are 

these businesses that have just started up through '91, say 

1990?  And if you could, Mr. Premier, would you let us know 

which businesses you're talking about.  Could you give us a list 

of these businesses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I cannot give you the list of the 

businesses for obvious reasons, since a lot of these are tied into 

financial arrangements with SEDCO and Economic 

Development, but I can give you the numbers in total.  There 

are, as of August 12, 1992, 270 active projects outside of 

Regina, Saskatoon, and the 10 cities.  There are 91 additional 

projects in the 10 cities.  In total, 40 per cent of the active 

economic projects are rural. 

 

And some of these are very small, but they provide for 

employment.  There are custom car cleaning operations, 

pheasant hatcheries, welders, auto glass repair, retail, motel 

lounges, oilfield service.  Here's one which is interesting, 

manufacturing of mustard sauces and salad-dressing which has 

I guess one full-time person.  And on it goes. 

 

And we try to keep an inventory of these.  And it's that kind of 

activity in rural Saskatchewan which I think holds some 

prospect for some meaningful growth opportunities for us. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  As I listened to you 

going through the list of small businesses, and certainly I don't 

think it matters how large the business is, I think it's important, 

if a person has an idea, if it's a family putting together an idea 

and deciding that they're going to put an idea that they've used 

in the home and to form a business around it, such as the 

individuals who started making sandwiches . . . And there was . 

. . I believe there was one where a lady who decided doing 

perogies.  And a lot of good ideas have gone forward.  And I 

see the Premier's being doing well.  He's been feeding on lots 

of perogies. 

 

But, Mr. Premier, you also talked about the job force and the 

labour force.  And there again, labour statistics may not always 

reflect what is taking place in our province or the problems that 

we're facing, whether it's in our province or another province or 

in all of Canada. 

 

But I just want to bring to your attention, the other day in 

question period the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade talked about the increase in the number of people 

working from, I believe it was July of '92 from June of '92, an 

increase of some 5,000 individuals.  And yet when you take a 

look at the numbers, it's still 14,000 people less than from July 

1991. 

 

And no doubt we can look at the unemployed people in this 

province -- 5,000 more than there were in July of 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

1991.  And I suppose if we looked across the country, we 

would find that other regions of the country have the same type 

of problems. 

 

(2030) 

 

So as my further question . . . my previous question was 

indicating, I think, I believe, Mr. Premier, it is imperative that 

as governments we create climates.  And you talked about the 

climate you had been creating, that allows IPSCO to expand its 

milling capacity, Mr. Premier. 

 

And a lot of times, what people are looking for is the ability to 

work in a fair and competitive market-driven environment.  I 

believe, Mr. Premier, what can become very detrimental, and 

certainly any regressive labour legislation you referred to 

would create a very negative impact for a lot of small 

businesses in this province. 

 

So I think, Mr. Premier, as much as we would like to see the 

figures higher, we would like to encourage you and your 

government to sit down and look very positively at wealth 

creation, if you will, or any kind of job creation, or any 

individual that is willing to put forward an idea, and give them 

the same opportunity that you would give, say, a large 

company.  Because I think it's imperative that we work with 

not only the large businesses, Mr. Premier, but our small 

businesses as well, to generate the economic activity in our 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I totally agree with . . . I shouldn't say 

totally, but almost, almost totally agree with the member in 

what he says.  I think that the job creation really is in small 

business and you know, in my experience it doesn't much 

matter what a government does by way of putting down a 

thumb on some entrepreneurial idea.  People can't be 

suppressed too badly and our objective is not to do that.  Our 

objective is to make sure that there are jobs, that there are good 

paying jobs, that workers are treated fairly, that the jobs are 

meaningful, and we want to try and work in a co-operative 

environment where government, business, and labour together 

are goal setting for economic projects and we can progress.  

And I think the best approach of course is in the area of small 

business, and that's our direction as I was saying in response to 

one of your earlier questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Premier, a while back you were 

discussing the issue of harmonization of the sales tax.  And 

certainly we can sit here and discuss the philosophical 

differences and viewpoints that we all have, whether we should 

have harmonized or whether we should have gone the route the 

present government has to not harmonize the provincial sales 

tax and indeed add to the E&H (education and health) tax just 

to expand it.  But I believe, Mr. Premier, when you look at 

small businesses, and in a lot of cases a number of businesses 

across, in fact all of the businesses across this province, are 

facing added financial difficulty.  Since the election of October 

21, Mr. Premier, they've seen increases in power rates; they've 

seen increases in telephone rates; they've seen increases in their 

natural gas rates, Mr. Premier.  And even today, as we saw in 

question period my colleague, the member from Wilkie, just 

noted a number of large businesses facing difficulty and in 

some cases possibly 

closing the doors.  And part of the problem they're facing is the 

increases they're facing and direct taxation that they have no 

control over. 

 

Certainly the economic activity in our province is . . . the 

financial problems we're facing, not only the provincial 

government but businesses, plays a major role as well as to 

how well businesses do.  And I'm wondering if the government 

is willing to at least review some of the difficulties small 

businesses face, looking into the cost of their power and their 

telephone and their gas.  And another question I would have 

while you are on your feet: I wonder if the Premier could 

update us on what is happening with the Saska Pasta plant in 

Swift Current. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm not sure I can update about Saska 

Pasta.  Have Economic Development Estimates been up yet, 

Mr. Chairman?  In any event, I'll try to find out.  If not the 

minister can answer. 

 

But the question is about the question of utility rates and this, 

Mr. Chairman, I can only say the following.  We want to make 

sure that our utility rates reflect the cost of the utilities, the cost 

of doing business, but not to the point where it obviously kills 

the small-business people who are struggling to keep a profit 

line which looks black.  It's not an easy task.  But I don't think 

that it helps very much for us to subsidize in what I would 

describe falsely low rates for utilities, only at the end of the day 

to have the Crown corporation deeply in debt, in red, and then 

having the small-business people having to pay the piper at 

some later date.  There has to be an appropriate balance. 

 

I would close by saying to the hon. member that we've taken 

into account even in this horrendously difficult fiscal picture 

that we find ourselves in, we try to take into account the 

interest of small business.  The small business corporate 

income tax was reduced from 10 to 9 per cent July 1.  To 

improve the manufacturing and processing industry we have 

direct agents phase out which will be a saving of some 

considerable millions to the manufacturing and processing 

industry. 

 

Other areas of change relate to video lotteries, liquor pricing 

practices and and so forth which we hope will help out our 

hotel and other industries.  So we're doing what we can in this 

very first budget to stimulate the small-business community. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, the other day in question period . . . 

and I'm going to raise a concern regarding the agricultural 

industry.  This one won't be on GRIP.  But what I . . . I guess 

we'll have to speak louder; it's hard to . . . I can see the . . . 

 

The Chair: -- If I might, there are many other conversations 

taking place in the Chamber.  That's fine, but members should 

do so quietly so that the main business of the committee can 

proceed uninterrupted. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can appreciate some 

of the difficulty even the Premier is having, and I haven't 

turned my hearing aid up that loud yet. 

 

Mr. Premier, the other day in question period . . . or it 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

wasn't in question period.  It was a statement made by the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade and as I 

indicated just a moment ago, I've got a question in agriculture 

that this one isn't dealing with GRIP. 

 

But one of the problems that is facing our farm community as 

well and was alluded to by the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade . . . And the minister got up and made 

a statement in this House and asked the House to join with him, 

opposition members included, to lobby the federal government 

to extend the cash advance for grain producers, cash advance 

on grain and to extend it for grain producers.  As you may or 

may not know, Mr. Premier, I believe it was last year or the 

year before the federal government set a cap on it  And also at 

the end of the crop year your cash advance is due.  If you didn't 

have enough quota available, sometimes you can end up in a 

position where you're short and you've got your cash advance 

due.  You have the grain in the bin, but the quotas weren't 

open. 

 

What we're also wondering, Mr. Premier, it's all fine and dandy 

for us to go and ask Ottawa to extend the cash advance and to 

extend it into the new crop year so producers can indeed 

deliver the product they have on hand, to pay off that cash 

advance without having a penalty on it, but we would also like 

to know what your feeling is and your viewpoint is regarding 

the livestock cash advance in this province where the 

government, your government, Mr. Premier, has now put a 

significant interest regarding the livestock cash advance. 

 

And to the livestock industry of this province, the livestock 

industry that are facing . . . have had a couple blows, first of all, 

the feed grains program. Although we will acknowledge the 

fact that the Minister of Agriculture did sit . . . either he sat 

down but at least did reverse government decision and 

extended it for a year to allow a process of consultation.  What 

we're asking is if the government would also reconsider their 

stand on the livestock cash advance to help the livestock sector 

of our province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again I think the 

member makes a very good point.  The livestock sector of our 

economy is very important.  And you know that we have 

entered into discussions with aspects of the livestock industry 

with respect to FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) and 

the like, and there have been some changes announced. 

 

May I just make this point.  We are endeavouring -- and I want 

to underline the word endeavouring -- to have a six-month 

reporting statement made to the legislature, or at least to the 

public, on how we're making out in the year '92-93.  We quite 

don't know the form and the nature of this, but it's one of the 

recommendations of the Gass report. And we will at that time 

be assessing the impact of the budget -- its cuts, its tax 

increases -- on various people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And while I'm not holding out much hope of change in many 

areas -- we have made some adjustments already -- we 

certainly are going to be looking at all of the implications of 

our budget whether it's rural Saskatchewan or urban 

Saskatchewan, keeping in mind 

our overall objective which is to stick within that $517 million 

projected deficit which is going to be a tough target to reach. 

 

So I would simply say that our hope is mid-course adjustments 

or reports perhaps and possible adjustments by about 

November. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Premier, you're talking of trying to keep 

within your $517 million projected deficit target for this year.  

I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you wouldn't have taken and 

transferred a fair bit of the debt from the Crowns to the 

Consolidated Fund and increased the debt in the Consolidated 

Fund for the year 1991, if you wouldn't have left yourself in a 

better position to, even within the next two or three years, 

balance your budget rather than transferring so much debt to 

the Consolidated Fund and building up that Consolidated Fund 

rather than just leaving it and working at the Consolidated 

Fund level where it was. 

 

As the auditor had indicated, he has difficulty even in his office 

trying to establish whether or not sound business and 

accounting practices were done, where funds were taken from 

the Water Corporation, transferred to the Consolidated Fund, 

and then written off as non-recoverable. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Premier, some of these funds would 

have just . . . especially the long-term, amortized debt would 

have been allowed to continue to be recovered as much as 

possible in the Crowns, it would have then simplified the 

process to meet the budgetary projections that you had put 

down for the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well of course the hon. member will 

know what I say is genuine when I say we would love to have 

done that, because no government wants to be in a position that 

we find ourselves in.  But the reality of the matter is, as in my 

discussion and exchange with the member from Thunder 

Creek, this was the position of the Gass report and the direction 

which we're heading.  So that was the decision that we took.  

Again I repeat, we'll see in November where our adjustment or 

what our situation looks like and make the appropriate 

adjustments at that time if we can. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, on question 33 that was given 

to your officials earlier, Mr. Premier, you were asked some 

financial figures dealing with various law firms, legal actions, 

that type of thing.  There's a couple of questions I want to ask.  

The law firm of Olive Waller & Waller, obviously one very 

friendly to the government, I see here has a sum of $4,030, and 

the thing beside is MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

benefit package. 

 

Now my understanding of MLA benefits and anything 

associated with them are dealt with by the members of this 

legislature and only the members and the officers of this 

legislature, and not outside NDP law firms.  And I find it 

strange that we would be expending money in that area without 

members of this legislature so directing or so wishing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Actually I think the member has 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

not a totally valid point, but none the less a partially valid 

point.  What we endeavoured to do here as part of our package 

for the reform of the Legislative Assembly  

_- I'm talking as a government because we campaigned on that 

and as you know, we had many white papers issued before the 

election campaign on reform -- is the question of what the 

MLA benefits packages ought to look like and how they look 

with respect to the legal, statutory requirements now, in order 

to advise the government and to assist us in the overall package 

of legal . . . sorry, not legal, but of legislative reforms. 

 

This is not anything which is imposed or otherwise.  This will 

be done, if it is done, only if the Board of Internal Economy 

decides to take whatever courses of action it does.  But what it 

does or what it implies is advice to us with respect to the 

aspects of the MLA benefit package, to government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Are you saying, Mr. Premier, that that type of 

information and guidance is not available from the officers of 

the Assembly, the Legislative Law Clerk, others here who have 

long experience in MLA benefit packages, that we need to pay 

$4,000 to an NDP law firm to advise the government on 

something that should not be presupposed in the Board of 

Internal Economy? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, I think that my answer to the 

member would be that these are not watertight compartments 

which are mutually exclusive.  I don't think that the 

government is denied the right to obtain information as it may 

require, legal information and advice, any more obviously than 

say the Board of Internal Economy is.  It's a question of both 

and if it is desired.  And in our case here, we felt that this was a 

matter which needed to be looked at from a legal point of view 

and that was the reason for the engagement. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm wondering if the Premier would be 

willing to share that information with all MLAs, seeing as it 

may affect all of us in some way.  Would the officers of this 

Assembly perhaps be provided with that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, the answer is 

this.  The member has to understand, as I'm sure he does, that 

any changes will only be effected if and when the Board of 

Internal Economy suggests changes should be made.  

Individual members on all sides, back bench and on all sides, 

all MLAs will be free to decide on issues if and when they arise 

if they would want to arise.  And we will only act on the Board 

of Internal Economy's recommendation.  This is in effect 

internal information for us, for the government, on . . . I'm not 

even quite sure what the opinion was all about, but on the 

matter.  I know it was related to the part of reform, legislative 

reform. 

 

So I think we have the right to obtain such advice if and when 

necessary, but without being at all pre-emptory of your role as 

a member of the House, to set in concert with your colleagues 

here, the MLAs' benefits package. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Mr. Premier, I think we 

have spent $4,030.50 of the taxpayers' money on something 

that obviously has traditionally been under the 

purview of the officers of the Assembly and its members.  And 

I consider anything that is done with public money in that 

regard should become the property of the officers of this 

Assembly and the members. 

 

And I seriously believe, sir, that if you are talking about an 

open and accountable government where you have spent that 

kind of taxpayers' money on a study that obviously may have 

some effect on this Assembly, that you should be prepared to 

table that study with the officers and the members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again it's the question that is slightly 

misdirected, Mr. Member, in my judgement.  I'm not saying it's 

offensively or aggressively. 

 

Nothing has effect until the Board of Internal Economy should 

so decide.  The Board of Internal Economy will be making its 

decision on whatever information it seeks to command for 

itself, legal opinions or no legal opinions.  So there's nothing 

here that we can do to bind you.  This is a question of us, as 

part of our reform package, the legislative reform package, a 

consideration of a variety of things, this being but one of them. 

 

This is a government initiative.  It's not exclusively a 

government initiative.  As I said, it's not water-tight 

compartments.  They are not mutually incompatible or 

mutually exclusive.  They're complementary.  And as I say, we 

have a right, we believe, to do that, if we're serious about 

reform to sort of know what is doable, what's not doable. 

 

But in terms of MLA benefits, that is going to be decided by 

this Chamber upon the debate and the recommendation of the 

Board of Internal Economy.  I give you that assurance.  And 

you don't need my assurance.  That's the way it works. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, will there be more money 

spent with Olive, Waller & Waller on examining the benefits of 

MLAs in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We have no plans and we've made no 

contractual engagements with them for additional studies.  I 

don't want to close the door for the future but I don't see 

anything like that coming up. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can assure you, Mr. Premier, that it'll 

be something that we will watch very closely that . . . 

 

Now on . . . There's another item here.  And that deals with that 

piece of legislation that we dealt with in December that took 

away the contractual rights of civil servants.  And I see the 

same law firm, the same friends of the government, here in for 

just about 20 grand.  And I would like to know how many of 

the outstanding contracts that fell under that particular piece of 

legislation have been settled by the law firm, and so we know 

what sort of value for our buck that we're getting vis-a-vis per 

settlement type of thing from your friends in Olive, Waller & 

Waller. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: --  Well actually, they should be your 

friends too because they're saving the people of Saskatchewan 

a lot of money in their advice to us on this matter of the 

contracts which your government entered 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

into, contracts which were quite frankly, in our judgement, 

quite unconscionable.  And so therefore they should be your 

friends as well. 

 

But in any event, without being argumentative or too debating 

oriented -- but the member will understand I have to get these 

small little peripheral comments off from time to time -- what I 

want to say to the hon. member is that I indicated to the 

member from Moosomin a short while ago that we would 

undertake to provide in writing for you, a complete status 

report on any outstanding legal actions with respect to 

dismissals.  I don't want to be held to this, make this caveat, but 

I believe it's something in the order of 10 or 11 or 12, 

somewhere like that. 

 

In any event we'll provide the information.  And when you get 

it in writing, as soon as we can collect it, that'll give you your 

answer. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Perhaps you didn't understand, Mr. Premier. I 

don't want the outstanding ones; I want to know how many 

have been settled.  I want to know how many of the contracts 

this firm has gone out and settled on your behalf. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We'll undertake to provide that as 

well. 

 

The Chair: -- The members are agreed to a recess.  The 

committee will reconvene at 9 p.m. 

 

The committee recessed for a period of time. 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's a pleasure 

to have this opportunity to pose some questions to the Premier 

regarding the Executive Council Estimates. 

 

Mr. Premier, it is my understanding that we're in the closing 

days of this legislative session that's been rife with partisan 

conflict.  Indeed, some observers say that everything which 

could possibly happen in a session has happened in this one. 

 

Given the political game playing and what many have termed 

the sand-box politics of this House, the people of this province 

more than ever, I believe, are expecting democratic reform.  

Mr. Chairman, this leads me to ask the Premier why we have 

yet to see his long-promised committee on democratic reform 

or his code of ethics for public officials and MLAs. 

 

I'm wondering if indeed the people of the province will be able 

to have some indication how committed you are, sir, to 

democratic reform when our session has almost ended and 

there's still no sign of this committee and there still is no sign 

of a code of ethics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member raises an objective with which I totally share her 

concerns. 

 

But to answer your question specifically, the code of ethics, the 

total package, will take place in, we hope, the forthcoming 

session. 

I want to make two points if I can in further explanation of my 

comments.  And I don't want to rile anybody up, but as you will 

know, I thought we had agreed to a pretty good set of reformed 

rules in the House which, for example, permitted members' 

statements and things of that nature to take place, as a 

beginning of reform.  Those have been shelved.  I hope that we 

can, after the session is finished, with the consent of 

everybody, put them back on the table.  So there were some 

modest gains. 

 

Our biggest problem is that we simply did not have the time 

this session to do it.  And to be very frank with you, the 

preoccupation of the government from about November 1 to, 

well, almost now, but for sure from November to about 

February, was simply getting a handle on the immediate reins, 

the Executive Council and cabinet appointments.  Our next 

preoccupation was getting the Gass Commission report, and 

then our next total preoccupation and the caucus's was getting 

the budget prepared. 

 

The budget is normally, as the member will know, a six-month 

operation to do it properly.  We did not have the time to do it.  

In the mean time, we did introduce a lot of legislation -- a lot of 

legislation.  The question of conflict of interest, filing of 

reports, codes of ethics, that needs a lot of time and thought 

and care, which is now being undertaken, and above all, 

consultation with the members of this House. 

 

So I am hoping that we will sometime in the fall, early fall or 

winter months, have a package to present to you and to the 

committee and to hear from the public if you so choose, tear it 

apart, and make suggestions for corrections, amendments, and 

the like.  We are very committed to the reform of the Chamber. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Premier, I concur that you had an enormous amount to 

undertake in taking over and forming a new government, but it 

seems to me as though the foundation that should be laid is one 

that begins with democratic reform.  I think the people of the 

province want to know, in fact, that their government, their 

elected officials, are going to be subjected to a mechanism by 

which conflict of interest can be measured, that there will be a 

code of ethics, that there will be consideration of 

anti-corruption legislation, that in fact they can look forward to 

such things as set budget dates and the like, that there could be 

more predictability. 

 

And I would like to have seen this as a priority, primarily 

because I see it as one of the things that should be a first step, 

not something that is done later on and added on.  What we 

have had so often expressed is from people a sense of misuse 

and abuse of the system by their politicians.  And yourself, 

you've commented on many, many occasions that people feel 

very cynical.  In part the reason they feel cynical is because 

they don't trust what their politicians say.  And I think the time 

has come for us to say that perhaps the agenda for this 

legislative session was far too ambitious and far more time 

should have been spent with something like democratic reform. 

 

You are not required to comment on my comments and I 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

shan't go into rules and procedures and the great 

disappointment I had at changing history in the province where 

everything had been reached in unanimous agreement rather 

than majority rule.  And that's in part why some of the, I think, 

important and significant changes that affected myself are now 

gone by the wayside, and I hope that they will be brought back. 

I truly do. 

 

Last December, Mr. Premier, I asked you why you had not yet 

created a committee to review order in council appointments 

made by the Executive Council.  At that time your government 

had already made many appointments, indeed had dismissed a 

significant number of civil servants, often for unknown 

reasons.  Now despite the NDP caucus's approval for creating 

an all-party committee to review these appointments, you have 

not done anything to set up this committee at this time and you 

still have yet to do so. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'm wondering how the people of the province can 

be given a sense of assurance that you are committed to 

democratic reform and that you are committed to getting rid of 

patronage when your record to date demonstrates little 

commitment to your own party's promises to give the public 

and this Assembly better tools to prevent you from using 

patronage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the member raises some good 

points and I'm not sure that I'll be able to satisfy her question 

totally.  But I will try by saying that in some way we have to 

measure whether or not we have been somewhat successful by 

our record as compared to the record of the previous 

administration.  One might jokingly or seriously dismiss that 

by saying that's not very much of a yardstick because, if I may 

be permitted, almost anybody could be better. 

 

But I think that -- leaving that little comment aside, caustic 

comment aside -- our record with respect to the question of 

patronage in government contracts, political hiring, the 

open-the-books process which itself was basically 

revolutionary, is like night and day from the last nine years. 

 

Have we gone where we need to go?  The answer is no.  I think 

the member is dead right on that; we have a long way yet to go.  

But what we have done is quite, I think, remarkable.  And I'll 

spare you, unless you want, the specific matters that I point to, 

to contrast. 

 

I want to make two points.  We are headed in this way.  

Number one, we want to amend The Provincial Auditor Act for 

earlier and improved accountability and access to the books.  

Secondly, we have amendments to The Financial 

Administration Act which have been passed requiring, 

compelling, early release of Public Accounts.  Thirdly, we are 

working on a code of ethical conduct for MLAs which will be 

tabled to an all-party committee for review and study.  

Something has to be initiated.  We want to initiate it and then 

the members can tear it apart, accept it, reject it, or amend it. 

 

We are also working on a members of the Legislative 

Assembly conflict of interests Act.  I might add that in the 

mean time I have put out some directives dealing with the 

conduct of cabinet ministers in a few areas of lesser 

importance, but none the less still important, the acceptance of 

goods and services and gifts, that kind of thing.  But it's got to 

be made open and legislated.  We hope to establish a special 

select committee on democratic reform to look at these 

initiatives which I'm talking about. 

 

I could discuss the question of the Human Rights Code, and I 

think that's part of the democratic reform because our idea here 

is to have a Human Rights Commission which will be basically 

reporting to the legislature -- am I right, Mr. Deputy? -- rather 

than reporting to a government minister, like the Ombudsman. 

 

Now other ideas which you have -- and I do know that you 

have ideas because you've spoken about them and written about 

them -- would be very welcome and when we get the 

committee and the documentation ready, we want those inputs.  

And even if we didn't want them, we'd get them. 

 

So you ask, how will we know?  I guess the real answer is 

whether or not, by the end of the next session, there will have 

been enacted a series of these reforms.  I firmly believe that 

there will be enacted a series of reforms.  In fact that's a 

commitment that we make; it is a top priority. 

 

I don't want to debate with you unless you want to pursue it, 

whether or not this should have been the first priority, or the 

finances.  I wish we could have done both.  I just look back at it 

now.  We have had too much on our plate as a government, we 

really have had.  I think we've tried to chew off too much too 

quickly, and we've not been able to digest some of the things 

we've initiated.  The number one priority in our judgement was, 

and still remains, the question of financial accountability and 

bringing the deficit . . . economic development, and we may 

want to talk about that in the right way. 

 

One last point, and it's a small debating point, but it's also a 

factual point.  This isn't the first time that rules in the 

legislature have been changed so-called unilaterally.  Rules 

have been changed in this Assembly unilaterally before.  They 

were changed for sure, I recall, in 1970 when I sat in 

opposition, actually about where you're seated.  At that time 

there was an all-party committee.  And the rules were changed 

in effect by the government not accepting the committee's 

reports. 

 

I think we have to strike a balance always between the 

government's right to govern and the legislature's ability to 

govern its own proceedings.  But at some point or other, at the 

end of the day, the government is held accountable for what it 

does or doesn't do.  We all are, but the government ultimately 

is held accountable. 

 

This is one of the problems of an OC (order in council) 

appointments reviews committee.  It's a great idea, but you 

have to right away start to delineate in what areas are the OCs 

going to be reviewed.  Are they going to be reviewed on, for 

example, the appointment of senior personnel, like deputies?  

Or are they going to be reviewed in the areas of order in 

council appointments to boards, agencies, and commissions, or 

everything? 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

I think boards, agencies, and commissions, we've made a small 

step forward there too.  We have a . . . What's the name of the 

panel, the internal panel, the appointments . . . public 

appointments secretariat.  And people are applying for various 

appointments.  And I think if you take a look at the number of 

OC appointments that we have made, they reflect a great 

cross-section of people who are not necessarily of any political 

persuasion. 

 

But do we extend that to order in council appointments, that 

top 1 per cent of the civil service -- if the top's the right word to 

use -- who are the direct advisors and the most immediate 

managers in senior personnel to the government, I don't think 

that that is odd.  Well I don't want to be definitive about, but I 

don't quite see how we do that without sacrificing the 

government's right to govern. 

 

So these are not easy questions I would submit.  And I think 

we're better off being committed to the objective.  I hereby 

repeat my commitment, taking more time . . . And I think the 

real test will be, not a year from today, because I hope we're 

not sitting in the summer a year from today, but the test will be 

at the end of the next full, complete session. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I'm particularly 

pleased that you gave a commitment.  And I do want to make 

one thing clear.  I'm not saying that democratic reform is 

something that should have taken precedence over dealing with 

the economic issues of the province.  But I do think that they're 

integral enough, related enough, in fact interdependent enough, 

that they should have been done at the same time. 

 

And I shall probably please you by saying that I shall leave for 

another evening or discussion, rather than Estimates, talking to 

you about rules and procedures and things that transpired in the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, in the last month, your 

government finally appointed a new Chief Electoral Officer.  

And I must commend the Executive Council on advertising this 

position.  This civil servant will continue to be an official of the 

Executive Council rather than an independent officer 

answerable to this Assembly.  Why did you not make an effort 

to give this office more autonomy?  I'm very curious about it. 

 

And if I may, I will ask a second question in connection with 

this.  We not only have had an opportunity at this juncture to 

have a more independent officer, but I really do believe and 

have made mention on several occasions the need for an 

objective body to examine the electoral boundaries of this 

province in perhaps a 10-year projection, something that would 

be very much removed from the governing party of the day.  I'd 

like you to comment on both of those if you would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The appointment of Mr. Kuziak as the 

Chief Electoral Officer, which was advertised and was on an 

open competition and we had many very good applicants, I 

think was a very good choice as a person.  However it is not 

correct to say that in doing it the way we have done it, namely 

by way of appointing this individual to the current structure 

and mechanism, is the way that 

we are committed to keeping the office. 

 

(2115) 

 

We think the notion, and I recall when I was in opposition 

early, the notion of a more independent Chief Electoral Officer 

is a very good one, one which would report to the Legislative 

Assembly.  What we'd like to do is to get the thoughts of Mr. 

Kuziak and others -- I'm not even sure that he's even arrived on 

the job, on the scene yet -- to advise and to recommend as to 

the form and the nature and do a little bit of a survey of what 

happens in other jurisdictions. 

 

As for the boundaries, the electoral boundaries, and again I 

don't mean this in any argumentative sense, but the first 

independent Electoral Boundaries Commission was established 

in 1972 or 3.  Prior to that time, in the history of the province 

of Saskatchewan, it was always done by a committee of cabinet 

or politicians or back-room people. 

 

And we appointed a chief justice, and I think it was the 

president of the University of Regina, and I think it was the 

Clerk of the Assembly, Mr. Barnhart, who was there, and 

boundaries were set always in that category.  Now my 

predecessor, the member from Estevan, did the same thing. 

 

One of the problems, however, as I see it on boundaries, since I 

think we have left behind the days when three or four people in 

the back rooms can draw the boundaries, one of the problems, 

however, remains as to the mandates that you give to this 

independent body in drawing the boundaries.  And without 

going into history, and the member knows this full well, so I 

won't take much more time of the Assembly, the last 

boundaries Bill which was submitted by the former 

administration to an independent body, set guidelines with 

respect to levels of tolerance between rural and urban, and 

numbers of urban seats and rural seats which prompted the 

legal actions and the subsequent decisions and the like. 

 

That's always a problem.  That's a problem going to be for us 

too.  And whether the Chief Electoral Officer's an independent 

officer or however it works out, somebody is going to have to 

put in legislation what the rules are going to be. 

 

Now let me close by saying, the ideal rule is rep by pop -- 

representation should be based on population.  But in 

Saskatchewan, we have to break that rule because by the 

changing demographics of rep by pop, we find ourselves in a 

situation where there's a growing urban representation, perhaps 

to the detriment of the rural.  It's the question of the balance 

and where the balance is drawn.  And this is always a matter, 

unfortunately, of some subjectivity and therefore some high 

political debate.  I don't know how we get around that, but we 

intend to try to do it as best as we can.  And there is another 

census coming up, I think -- is it next year? -- which requires 

us to do this and to table the appropriate legislation to reflect 

rep by pop, and have an independent group of men and women 

draw the new boundaries.  You'll be able to judge then whether 

or not we are doing it as fairly as we are committed to trying to 

do. 



2958 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I actually do 

have some ideas on a derivation of rep by pop that I think 

would be quite valuable for the province, and there's a 

considerable amount of information about such a proposal.  So 

I'm more than willing to send it to your office. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, in April of this year the Provincial 

Auditor submitted his special report to this Assembly, and this 

report contained a long list of examples where Crown 

corporations and departments, even including Executive 

Council, received services and employees from other agencies 

without paying for them.  These, what I deem unscrupulous 

actions, as we all know, not only undermine the sense of proper 

process, but they do make a mockery of public accountability.  

What policies have you put in place to prevent the recurrence 

of similar, unapproved, unaccounted for raids of the public 

purse in future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I want to first of all begin by saying 

that I agree with the hon. member's description of the practice 

which she describes, and that practice as set out by the 

Provincial Auditor.  And as an example . . . And I really don't 

want to . . . Time doesn't permit because of my commitments in 

P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) and the like . . . Perhaps the 

Leader of the Opposition will want to get in some questions.  

So I don't want to rehash on a political basis totally, but just to 

give you the example of what did take place, in the 1991-92 

blue book, the amount set aside for the department of the 

Executive Council was, according to the blue book if you 

check it, 5.85 million, and it was 67 person-years.  That's what 

PY means.  Then, when the provincial special auditor's report 

came out, the true number was not 5.85 million, but 8.73 

million, and not 67 person-years, but 97 person-years, a 

substantial increase with a variety of secondments and the like. 

 

Now there may have been good reason for the former 

administration doing this.  I don't know.  Sometimes in the rush 

of moving into government you tend to sort of say, I'll grab this 

person because he or she can handle a project for me, or I've 

got a little bit of a GRIP dispute so how am I going to bring 

somebody over from Finance to settle it.  You need a little bit 

of that flexibility to do it.  But I think in this context, this is 

what we do not want.  None of us want this because it's not 

accountable.  The question then is, what do we do?  And there 

is only one answer to what we do.  We simply take the auditor's 

recommendation and we go down the list.  And we have a list 

here of where we're at in those recommendations.  And very 

quickly skimming the paper which I have provided here before 

me, we have agreed to virtually all of the Provincial Auditor's 

recommendations, 15 of the 18, Mr. Clark advises me.  And I 

could take the time of the House to tell you what they are but 

they are set out. 

 

So we have taken steps to follow these and the check that what 

I say is true, of course, will be the Provincial Auditor himself.  

Because when he audits our department of Executive Council 

or any other department, and having followed the transcripts of 

what I'm saying here, if it turns out not to be the case, we know 

from what he did in the '91-92 blue book we'll hear about it for 

'92-93.  So the implementation is simply to implement it.  It's a 

matter of 

will, and we've taken those steps. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier. I'm to take it then 

that you're believing that the way of having a check and 

balance in this system is to wait until the Provincial Auditor's 

report comes out?  Or is this something that you see as 

imperative enough to have someone charged with overseeing 

this kind of policy -- in other words that damage can be 

prevented, instead of being analysed in a sort of after-the-fact 

autopsy. 

 

I'm wondering if you have established within Executive 

Council an official or officials who are going to be responsible 

for ensuring that public monies are not going to be wasted 

because one agency has decided to pay for, you know, 

employees, or they're not paying for employees as the case may 

be, who actually are working for them; that goods and services 

are not following proper process or submitting to proper 

authority. 

 

I guess what I'm wanting is to not have to wait until the 

Provincial Auditor's report comes out, and that I think that it's 

important for the public to have some assurance that we're not 

leaving the fox in charge of the chickens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes.  The answer is, it is important, 

and the specific answer to your question is, for the Executive 

Council, my department, the deputy minister, Mr. Clark, has 

designated Don Wincherauk who is seated behind us, in his 

official capacity as the administrator of operations, to monitor. 

 

And on little things like ministerial expense accounts, for 

example, they can get ministers into lots of trouble.  I have 

taken the position that . . . Mr. Clark really has, but on my 

authority and support, that Wincherauk's role is to examine 

everything that comes through and if there's anything improper 

or otherwise it goes bouncing back. 

 

And we're trying to do the same thing on the Crown 

Management Board side.  What we're trying to do on the 

Crown Management Board side by analogy is to make the 

Crown Management Board kind of the equivalent to our 

Treasury Board on the ordinary operation side so that Crown 

corporations have the freedom to operate as Crown 

corporations in the commercial and other activity, but they do it 

without a situation where the right hand doesn't know what the 

left hand is doing.  But the system is not fully into place.  We 

have named people there too to do the kind of examining. 

 

However, the checks and balances, I would also submit to the 

member, are complex.  Question period, newspaper stories, 

defences and explanations, Provincial Auditor's report, which is 

the autopsy -- very colourful way of describing it -- all of this is 

part and parcel of the approach my directives, people 

designated, put together.   We hope to put into place a matrix 

where this is eliminated. 

 

And we have for sure made significant reductions.  I would 

hope we have eliminated it, but we've certainly made 

significant improvements in this in the nine months we've been 

around. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, in April of 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

this year after the publishing of an article in the Regina Leader-

Post, there was really a great deal of uproar over the perks that 

two well-known former NDP officials were receiving at 

SaskPower.  And it appears that Mr. Messer and Ms. Carole 

Bryant, whose NDP credentials don't really need to be recited 

here, were given cars and generous office renovations as well 

as lucrative expense accounts. 

 

And I would like to ask you, Mr. Premier, whether you knew 

that these officials were receiving these perks before that date, 

and if so, why it took six months before they were finally dealt 

with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the answer is that I did not know 

personally, but that's not an answer in politics.  At the end of 

the day the buck stops somewhere, and it stops at the Premier 

and the cabinet.  And that's the way it works.  But I did not 

know personally. 

 

But I do want to say this -- that the cars were engaged in 

pursuance of the existing policy for car allowances and car 

leasing.  In fact, in an explanation provided to us subsequently 

by Mr. Messer, I think it was actually a saving in the way that 

they did it.  The car, a Lexus, of course rings all kinds of bells 

and whistles and does put off a bad image, in my judgement.  

But it was done totally within the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation guidelines as they had heretofore been. 

 

Quite frankly, at the time that this came to light in April, we 

hadn't gotten around to the point centrally through the Crown 

Management Board people of taking a look at these generous 

car allowances in order to make some adjustments and 

changes. 

 

So what Mr. Messer did was, pursuing the manuals and the 

guidelines, took his decisions and got the cars.  Everything is 

going along swimmingly until it's reported in the press, which 

is when I find out about it, and then the remedial action is taken 

for the change in the programs and the policies.  That is the 

way it took place. 

 

So again, we are involved, but this is not a new policy.  In fact 

that policy has been thrown out the window and it is a 

brand-new policy which is a much reduced car allowance 

policy for our senior personnel.  That's the explanation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- By the way, it was reduced by 50 per 

cent and . . . 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, there's been a lot 

of concern in the last couple of weeks about the 

constitutionality of certain pieces of legislation of your 

government.  And as you're well aware, I, along with many 

others, were in Melfort today with people who are deeply 

concerned about one piece of legislation, the GRIP legislation. 

 

I have a question for you, and I really wish to have an 

understanding of this: why have you not used The 

Constitutional Questions Act of the province of Saskatchewan 

and referred this very, very contentious 

piece of legislation to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal for its 

opinion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The answer is, in my judgement, a 

simple answer on a complex issue.  If the government has a 

doubt, a reasonable doubt, then an argument can be made that a 

piece of legislation should be referred to the Court of Appeal 

for a constitutional reference.  But what a government must not 

do is pass off what might be described as a political hot potato 

onto this Court of Appeal. 

 

Our opinions, which the Minister of Justice has indicated to the 

House and I have reviewed personally, both in-house opinions 

and external opinions say that what the government has 

proposed and enacted and Royal Assent was given to today is 

constitutional.  In my judgement, as a consequence by my 

theory of responsible government, you take your action and 

you pay your price for it, for good or for bad.  And we have 

taken a position. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There were 4,000 people in Melfort that 

didn't agree with you, Roy.  Did they Berny? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now the hon. member from Rosthern 

is back in the House and I'm sure he'll want to get in and have 

his questions when his appropriate time comes. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, can he say that?  You 

can't give out the presence or absence of members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- But that is the reason why we have 

made the . . . yes, I'm sorry, I withdraw . . .  is in the House and 

wants to take part . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Members should not refer to the 

presence or absence of other members in the House.  Also, 

members should not interrupt other members when they're on 

their feet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I apologize 

to the hon. member.  I meant nothing by it. 

 

That was the decision that we took based on the 

constitutionality.  So the two issues here involved: public 

policy which you may agree or disagree with, and secondly, is 

it constitutional?  If it is, the government proceeds.  It acts. 

 

(2130) 

 

And we are satisfied on both counts.  Not totally on the policy.  

I've said that changes to GRIP '92 are not the final answer.  

Quite obviously.  But we think they're an improvement from 

'91.  Now that's our decision.  Opposition has mounted a case 

against it, but reference of this issue I think is simply 

delegating it upwards or delegating it somewhere, where it 

should remain here. 

 

I would also say that at the same time, since decisions were 

already made with respect to the farmers' economic matters -- 

planning what they were going to seed and the like -- all that 

this does is just continue the uncertainty. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Chairman, in the last 



2960 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

six months, the people of this province have witnessed a 

number of turn-abouts as far as policy is concerned.  Your 

government's brought forward, for example, a comment about 

what would happen to highways, and they seem to have gone 

from blacktop to gravel to blacktop. 

 

And the individuals throughout the province have seen the 

changes to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, first of all believing 

that it would be decimated and then seeing some kind of 

resurrection, although albeit a very thinly disguised version of 

the one previous. 

 

They've seen the FeedGAP program disappear, and now 

miraculously it's reappeared in a different form, and again 

albeit with a different title. 

 

I'd like to ask you, please, sir, how much all of this indecision 

has actually cost the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  

Were studies actually done that produced some analysis on 

each of these matters before the initial decisions were reversed?  

And if so, how much did these studies cost?  To whom were 

they distributed?  And were additional studies produced that 

eventually led to the policy flip-flops on the likes of FeedGAP 

or gravel highways or Saskatchewan Pension Plan for that 

matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In the instances that the member, the 

hon. member raises, the process has been a process which I 

think is a thoroughly democratic one.  You introduce a budget, 

then there is a fall-out from that budget.  You then see whether 

or not you can make adjustments to the budget to take into 

account, if the complaints are legitimate, the complaints. 

 

In a particular instance, let's say the pension plan aspect, 

various suggestions were made for changes which would -- 

how should I put it -- at least save aspects of the former 

pension plan.  These were then forwarded to Treasury Board 

and the Department of Finance, in concert with the appropriate 

ministry.  They're analysed by the internal analysts.  They are 

debated.  They are then referred to Treasury Board, which is a 

committee of cabinet.  A recommendation is made by Treasury 

Board to the cabinet and then it is either accepted or rejected. 

 

Now the overall and overarching policy is a policy of trying to 

stick at the end of the day to the $517 million projected deficit 

which we have set out for the '92-93 budget.  We are in such a 

financial strait-jacket in this province, and given the economic 

uncertainties and other problems, we have to be careful to 

maintain the expenditure ceilings that we have set for 

ourselves. 

 

Now maybe we can shuffle some of the chips on the board, 

rejiggle them around, but at the end of the day it is my hope 

that we come in at 517 or less, because the consequences of not 

doing so could be very drastic in terms of our borrowing, in 

terms of our credit rating, in terms of the objective of getting 

out of the financial morass that we're in.  So you take that into 

consideration. 
 

And it's a question of whether or not one tries to be responsive.  

And I would admit, as I've admitted to the member opposite a 

few moments ago, that in the period from the Gass 

Commission, mid-February, to the period when the budget was 

more or less put to bed, mid-April, 

which is only 60 to 75 days, this was too rushed a time.  I hope 

never to have to be in a position to put together a budget in that 

compressed period of time. 

 

We are now starting the budgetary process for '93-94.  We 

hope, as I have indicated to one of my colleagues from the 

official opposition, to have a mid-course report, perhaps a 

mid-course adjustment if necessary, based on what the 

revenues are doing and what the expenditures are doing. 

 

But for the overall, long-term health of this province, we've got 

to try to maintain the 517 million and make adjustments for 

economic and social and compassionate reasons as mounted by 

the opposition and by groups, as best as we can. 

 

That's the process, and whatever the cost is, is the cost 

occasioned by the fact that men and women are working for the 

civil service whose job it is to do these things when requested 

by government to do so. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Premier, am I to take it 

then that what you're saying is that all of these changes that 

have occurred in policy have really been at no extra cost at all, 

other than the fact that the people of the province have been 

faced with what appears to be indecision, what appears to be 

sort of a schizophrenic approach to things.  So that what we 

have are hundreds upon hundreds upon hundreds of people 

who were enrolled in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, who 

were in great distress, contacting my office and I'm sure the 

offices of most of your colleagues in this legislature, being in 

great distress. 

 

And I guess part of what I'm wanting to understand here is 

what you're saying is this has not had a financial cost to the 

province although my sense is with the way people feel about a 

government, the way they feel about perhaps a sense of a lack 

of direction, or the way they may feel about a lack of hope in 

the province, may lead them to not want to stay here, may not 

want to invest here, might not want to believe in future kinds of 

programs that may be brought about by your government.  So 

you can correct me if I'm wrong, but I'm hearing you say that 

this really didn't have an impact on anyone except the longer 

hours that your civil servants had to put in.  Am I correct in that 

analysis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well essentially what the member 

says at the end is correct.  We will know of course at the end of 

the '92-93 budget when the accounts are all in whether or not 

we're at 517 million, higher or lower.  And as I've said, 

something which we will part of democratic reform by the way, 

we'll be giving a mid-course report to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hopefully -- we don't quite know the form of it yet because it's 

never been done, this is a major reform -- we'll be saying at the 

end of six months, look, we're on target or off target, here's 

where our problem areas are.  What we have done in the 

adjustments is take into account overall objectives.  And I 

would say the hon. member that listening to people doesn't 

show a schizophrenic behaviour; what it shows is, I think, a 

responsive government. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2961 

And with the greatest of respect to all the members, we can't be 

whip-sawed both ways.  We can't be whip-sawed on the 

arguments that you do nothing because you don't listen and you 

don't consult and you close your ears, and then when we do 

listen and we make changes, to be criticized that we make 

changes.  I think in government it's a question of all these 

choices and acting as pragmatically as we can and that's the 

basis of it. 

 

And I would say, as I mentioned to the one of the hon. 

members in the official opposition some time ago, that there 

are some signs that things may be turning around in some 

areas.  We obviously have a large farm gate problem which I 

think requires the help of the federal government in some 

substantial numbers and fairly quickly.  But notwithstanding 

that, we do have some signs of economic activity even in rural 

Saskatchewan which is -- I'm not overstating it -- but is a little 

bit of a light at the end of the tunnel. 

 

I'm told by our economic development people -- I'll just give 

these numbers one more time -- that as of August 12, 1992 

EDT, Economic Development and Trade reports that there 

were 270 active projects, economic projects, some new, some 

extensions, some expansions, outside of the cities of Regina, 

Saskatoon and the 10 cities, and another 91 projects in the 10 

cities.  Of all the active economic projects, 40 per cent in the 

rural areas -- rural meaning outside of these big cities 

configuration. 

 

And while I am unable to give you the names of the 

corporations and the companies involved, some very 

fascinating matters.  Some are new, some are old; archery 

making supplies, pheasant hatchery.  I mentioned one here 

which struck me as interesting -- manufacturing of mustard 

sauces and salad-dressings.  Some are the traditional ones that 

you might believe, the opening of a hair salon, the opening of a 

bakery in small communities.  All of these have taken place 

since November 1 and they are creating jobs. 

 

Now as I say, I don't say that's the answer and that we've turned 

the corner totally, but we are headed in the right direction and 

there is cause to be optimistic, I think, by these kinds of 

figures.  So maybe it is a slight overstatement to indicate that 

there is desire to leave the province, or hopelessness.  I don't 

think so.  I think people are really committed to this province, 

and I do think that the best climate conditioner is to show a 

government which is trying to fiscally ride this tiger down that 

we've inherited, that we're on now, to try to ride it down so that 

we can provide more room for economic activity. 

 

By the way, I also said -- I might as well get this off my chest 

-- I also said to the member from Moosomin, I think you were 

here at the time, that we'd be putting forward an economic 

development blueprint as we did in health care.  You can 

accept it or reject it, criticize it.  We welcome your comments.  

And also we're going to establish a Premier's Action 

Committee on Economic Development, PACE, very shortly, as 

additional momentum, additional thrusts to keep the 

momentum going. 

 

I think these are all very exciting.  They're not spectacular; 

they're not the big fertilizer plants at Belle Plaine, or any of 

those big projects, but they are real jobs for real people in small 

communities, and they are being done by the people 

themselves without taxpayers' bucks, free enterprise doing 

what it can do -- free enterprise. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I hope you 

haven't misunderstood what I stated when I made comment 

about the approach that's been used on these flip-flops, okay.  I 

actually think that government deserves some recognition and 

applause when what it has done is to recognize when it's done 

something that perhaps was not in the best interests of the 

province, i.e., the FeedGAP program, and chooses to rectify 

that.  And I would like to see more recognition when a 

government has stated, I don't think that this is what we should 

have done and therefore we're going to do X. 

 

My concern is this, and that is when it appears as though for 

budgetary purposes that all of a sudden a pen's gone through 

and arbitrary decisions are made and therefore FeedGAP is 

gone, or Saskatchewan Pension Plan is gone, and people aren't 

looking at the repercussions of these kinds of things and 

therefore that's why the flip-flop has to take place.  And I'm 

equally concerned when something that is very similar to 

FeedGAP is brought back with a different kind of name, but all 

of a sudden we look at where the resources have come from 

and we no longer have an ag development fund that's worth 

anything in this province as far as research and development is 

concerned in agriculture.  I have those kinds of concerns 

because I think it's going to have a deleterious effect, not only 

on the credibility of governing in this province, but on the 

kinds of things that are going to be necessary to get us back on 

track. 

 

Now I know that you've been kept for some time, and I only 

have two or three questions left, if I may, rather than having 

you . . . Do you care to comment on that or . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- A brief comment.  I do want to repeat 

this.  It seems like ancient history, but it would put the debate 

which, if I might say so, is a very good debate, into proper 

context from my point of view.  We were told by our 

Department of Finance people that if we did nothing in '92-93 

on the revenue side and on the expenditure side, from the way 

we inherited the books of the province, that the debt for the end 

of '92-93 would, on projections  

_- I mean, who could tell -- be $1.2 billion for that one year 

alone.  And then we were told, and I believe this advice, the 

ramifications with respect to credit rating, money, capacity to 

do things, would have been . . . well eroded is putting it mildly.  

It would have evaporated.  So since $1.2 billion was not an 

option, we then had to find what was the option.  And the only 

other option was a deficit, which even at 517 million is not my 

preferred choice by a long shot. 

 

(2145) 

 

And what we tried to do first was to tackle expenditures.  I 

make this point. On average for the last nine years, on average, 

each year expenditures grew by 6 per cent in the last nine 

years.  This year, our expenditures were reduced by minus 3 

per cent, which is a turnaround of 9 per cent in 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

one year.  And at that we were left short.  We then had to go to 

the tax side, the revenue side, in order to come up, even as it is, 

with a deficit figure of 517 million, which by all accounts none 

of us would be very happy with. 

 

Now you can shuffle -- not you, but one can shuffle -- what 

taxes should or shouldn't be placed, or what cuts should or 

shouldn't be placed, but I tell you that when your first 

expenditure is health care, yearly, your second expenditure 

highest is education, your third is interest on the public debt at 

$750 million, and your fourth is social services at $450 million, 

that's four-fifths of the provincial budget.  No provincial 

government's got, say, a department of defence to chop as a 

peace dividend.  The options just are not there.  Gass has 

written about it, everybody else has written about it. 

 

Now you ask, how does the debate take place.  Now what 

happens is we spent, I think it was, about seven days in cabinet, 

endless hours, debating studies prepared for us internally by 

officials on the impact of eliminating FeedGAP.  At the end of 

the day you have to make a decision. Given the financial 

circumstances, whatever decision you make is going to be a 

tough one. 

 

When we make the decision, and it didn't work out or hasn't 

worked out because it's had a negative economic impact or the 

people don't want to accept it, then you have to try to readjust 

it, which is what we're trying to do, but again  

_- I'll close on this point; sorry to be so long-winded -- within 

the overarching guidelines of the 517 million. Because if we 

allow that to balloon up, then we're right back to the 1.2 billion, 

and if we're right back to 1.2 billion, and I tell you it doesn't 

matter who the premier, the next premier, or the next political 

party is going to govern the province of Saskatchewan, it will 

not matter.  We will simply never have the financial capacity to 

stimulate business, or putting it very bluntly, support the social 

programs which I hold dearly and I'm sure you do too -- most 

members do -- and we simply will not have the capacity.  We 

had to take the choices, had to take choices. 

 

By the way, I said I was going to close on that comment, but I 

really should close on one last comment.  The other party of the 

strategy, the vision is trying to get out of this deficit by wealth 

creation.  Thus my modest pointing to the numbers about the 

activity in rural Saskatchewan.  With a lot of luck, a lot of hard 

work, and a lot of Saskatchewan ingenuity, I think we can see 

some light at the end of the tunnel in the next year or two.  But 

those are the hard numbers. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Premier.  I do hope that I 

understand that you have used the term PACE, what is ever 

forthcoming.  I hope that that's reflective of what I've requested 

on several occasions to be a Saskatchewan economic 

development authority that would not have politicians as its 

core.  Maybe we'd have some significant economic 

development if we didn't have politicians involved. 

 

Prior to the campaign and during the campaign and even 

shortly after the election, I recall that you had indicated that 

you would not carry out any witch-hunts in the civil service.  

And I do have a lot of concerns.  One of the things 

that I've raised several times in this legislature is about how 

credible an employer Saskatchewan can be, how credible the 

province is perceived as far as a signatory on contracts, etc.  

And unfortunately, the way in which the civil service was 

handled is something that I've had some concerns about. 

 

Late last year we saw a minister fire many in the civil service 

and actually take away their common law rights, all on the 

premise that every single one of those civil service employees 

had a George Hill type of contract.  And I think that the public 

was misled and I think actually the way in which civil servants 

were painted was unconscionable. 

 

Earlier this year, the Minister of Community Services fired 

about 20 people from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation), at least one of whom was replaced 

with a campaign worker.  Another NDP party VP was 

appointed as director of occupational health and safety by the 

same minister. And all of these actions are taken with one 

individual, by one individual. 

 

I'm wondering what kind of message you think that that sends 

out to people.  First of all, a civil service that I think longed for 

a return to a sense of being able to be professional and then 

being faced with the fact that their rights were taken away.  We 

now see other people in the province feeling that they don't 

have a right to go into courts as well. 

 

And I'm wondering if you would just comment please to those 

people who have called me, many of whom, sir, were hired 

under Premier Blakeney and in fact to quote one gentleman: all 

I have left to show for my 25-year career is a box in my 

basement.  And I think they deserve some comment because 

you were very articulate in stating that this was something you 

would not do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Again, two or three points if I can in 

response.  We've been through this debate but I have to respond 

because you raise it in my Estimates.  I guess we have a 

fundamental disagreement here about the contract Crown 

employments legislation which we introduced. 

 

You used the phrase common law premise.  I believe that the 

common law premise in the private sector on unjust dismissal 

or dismissal with cause -- well without cause, with cause is a 

different issue but without cause -- roughly would have 

approximated, depending upon the length of service, something 

in the neighbourhood of 12 to 18 months compensation for 

people, perhaps even not that much. 

 

What we found when we came to office were contracts which 

belied the common law premises.  I don't think the Court of 

Appeal of Saskatchewan -- I'm not a lawyer for these purposes 

and I haven't cited the law lately -- but I don't think the Court 

of Appeal of Saskatchewan, Madam Member, in the recent 

history, I don't think in fact I will say, ever, I could be 

corrected wrong but just off the top of my head, I don't think 

the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan has given more than 18 

months to any unjust dismissal.  That's the common law in the 

private sector. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

If I'm in the private sector and I get fired unjustly and I've got 

to go and I've got to sue, depending upon my lengths of 

service, that's where I'm at.  The contracts that was entered into 

by the former government belied that common law premise.  

There was a common law premise, the so-called sanctity of 

contract.  If the contract was not injurious one could support it . 

. . or unconscionable. 

 

I think contracts of employment which give the civil service a 

fatter advantage by a long measure than what you get out there 

in the private enterprise world are unconscionable.  Now we 

either lived with them and paid them out enormous sums or we 

established a principle which said, by law, when you join the 

Government of Saskatchewan you're going to get the common 

law premise in case of unjust dismissal. 

 

Now as I say, we've debated this and we find disagreements on 

it, but that's the basis of the policy decision and the rationale 

that we took.  The Public Service Commission chair was hired 

after open competition.  Again I think a very positive step in 

terms of the reform, and we are very committed to a Public 

Service Commission being the arbiter, the protector, the shield, 

the sword, for an independent, professional civil service which 

exists.  There is no other way that a government can function.  I 

do not believe in Jacksonian democracy.  I do not believe in the 

American notion that if we're in, our people are in, and when 

they're in, their people are in. 

 

In the United States what happens when the President of the 

United States leaves, every shred of paper and every person 

goes with that president and there is no corporate memory.  

That's American Jacksonian democracy.  I never believed in it.  

I didn't believe it in 1982 when my predecessors started on a 

spate of firings which are unparalleled in the history of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But having said that, I do believe that at key positions in the 

civil service, the advisors must be advisors who understand the 

philosophy and the direction of the new government.  And I 

also believe that there are many competent New Democrats, as 

there are many competent Conservatives and Liberals who, as 

long as they are committed to the common cause of benefitting 

the people of the province, the purse of the province, the policy 

of the province, could and should be hired. 

 

It's the idea that happens in the press.  I'm now going to pick on 

the press. I don't know if they're watching; doesn't matter.  But 

the idea that the moment you hire one New Democrat, that is 

patronage.  Jack Messer is a New Democrat; it's patronage; he 

can't do the Power Corporation job.  By the way, we 

contributed to that attitude when we were in opposition 

ourselves, perhaps unfairly now that the roles are reversed.  

There can be people of all persuasions serving and doing so on 

an independent civil service. 

 

Now the last comment I make is in a mode -- I hate to use the 

word mode -- but in the current mode of reduction that we're in, 

there will be long-time civil servants, I hope few, through 

seniority and the like will be protected, who will be affected as 

we reduce government.  If they're not, 

then we're not reducing government which we have to do by 

virtue of the budget.  So we try to do it as sensitively as we can. 

 

We haven't been perfect.  We have hurt people, wrongly hurt 

them.  Apart from apologies, hopefully courts and remedies by 

way of settlements will settle and solve them. But I think we've 

done a pretty good job for any government in transition by any 

yardstick which is measurable in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Premier, I actually agree with the 

majority of what you've said.  I guess I don't agree with the 

latter part because I'm someone in whom a lot of people have 

chosen to confide.  And there are many people who truly wish 

that they had been handled in a very, very different way.  And 

your government has in fact made victims out of people who 

did not negotiate many of their contracts.  Some of these 

individuals were told, this is the contract.  And they had to sign 

that contract.  And I guess what I find so distasteful is the fact 

that these individuals were painted by your government to 

somehow be people who were ripping off the public.  And 

that's the part that I'm saying is unconscionable. 

 

I don't disagree with anything that you were talking about.  I 

don't think that people should have overly lucrative packages.  I 

don't think that people should think that they're somehow 

different from those in the private sector.  I don't think that it's 

unreasonable for people, whether they be a New Democratic 

government or otherwise, to hire people, whether they be New 

Democrats or anybody, as long as they're competent. 

 

I agree with you in all of those things.  I just want this 

comment to be made on behalf of people who felt that they 

were treated very, very badly.  And in fact, the way that they 

were treated is something that has sullied the reputation of 

Saskatchewan.  And a lot of these individuals were the ones -- 

by the way -- the ones who were saying that they were waiting 

for an NDP government to return so that there would be a more 

professional civil service.  And they have not found that, and I 

think that that's a tragedy. 

 

Do you wish to comment?  Because I have one final question 

for you.  Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You raise an important issue.  I have 

to comment on this.  And again, I've done something which I 

shouldn't be doing very often because they're not my fans of 

great note -- the Star-Phoenix.  But in the November 20, 1991 

edition of the Star-Phoenix, in an editorial on this problem, this 

topic, rich severance packages, I don't think that I could have 

put it any better. 

 

 The government does plan to pass (I'm reading now from the 

editorial) a law changing the contracts of senior 

administrators in government departments and Crown 

corporations with good reason.  The former administration 

made sure that its hand-picked buddies would be well 

compensated if they were released from the high-powered 

positions.  Taxpayers can't afford such a hefty bill.  The new 

government has every right to do what it is doing to reduce 

this financial 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

burden. 

 

And let me just say in terms of the financial burden, that if we 

had left it the way the contracts were, and had settled out, 

theoretically, on all of them, that burden would have been $13 

million.  Now that is a very huge burden. 

 

Now your argument is, does everybody have to be caught in 

the net?  The answer is no, not everybody has to be caught in 

the net.  And this was not the policy or the intent of our 

operation, to catch everybody in the net.  All we wanted to do 

was to restore the common law -- fair and just compensation.  

That's my answer. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, 

after speaking with a wide variety of people across the 

province, as you do frequently, I'm sure, people are concerned 

about what future awaits, not only themselves, but their 

families, their neighbours, who are considering leaving.  

There's a great deal of uncertainty about where Saskatchewan 

is going.  And I've been struck by the many people with whom 

I have spoken who have stated that they really don't understand 

what the vision is of your government. 

 

They're confused about what your government's vision is for 

social services.  They're concerned, and these are individuals 

who are in the social work field, I'm talking about.  Those 

involved in economic development said that they're waiting to 

see an overall economic development strategy for the province, 

and I appreciate your comments tonight about some directions 

you're taking in that. 

 

Others in education are waiting to see what the government is 

going to do as far as universities and community colleges and 

the like.  And still others in health care are quite disappointed 

with what they see as a lack of substance in the wellness plan, 

although a concurrence with the view that there need to be 

substantive changes in health care. 

 

(2200) 

 

Many people are very worried about what might happen.  And 

they want to know whether there's anything more to your 

economic strategy than more taxes.  They want to know how 

you intend to prepare us for the future. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, you have commented on different occasions 

in the Assembly about your many years in this House, that you 

have 25 years experience prior to becoming Premier.  You've 

had many years as Leader of the Opposition, and all the 

person-years of experience in Executive Council, why are the 

people of our province still saying that they don't know where 

the province is going, that they don't understand this. 

 

And I'm wondering how it is and when it is that you will be 

conveying to the people of the province what the vision of your 

New Democratic government is, and how they can then feel 

more satisfied that they can lay some of their concerns to rest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I say to the hon. member with 

the greatest of respect, that I do not accept the 

fundamental premise of the question which is that there are so 

many people who don't know which way they're going.  It may 

very well be true but I do not accept that premise. 

 

I believe that the people of the province of Saskatchewan know 

what we have inherited.  And they know that we didn't create 

it, and they know that it took nine years to get here, and they 

know that in nine months we can't get them out. 

 

If I was to sum up the vision which I have summed up in 

speeches after speeches to chambers of commerce and 

everywhere I go, I put it in two words: we're rebuilding 

Saskatchewan.  And we have basically three cornerstones to 

doing that: number one -- fiscal integrity and independence; 

number two -- job creation and the preservation of rural 

Saskatchewan.  There are two dimensions of that, there's the 

federal component and the local component, we've talked 

about.  And number three -- improving the quality of life, 

occasioned by the initiative that we've taken on the wellness 

model. 

 

Now the wellness model may not be a perfect paper.  That it is 

a radical, new step, bold step in health care, I don't think 

anybody can deny.  Tommy Douglas always said, said to me, 

said before he died, that the first step in medicare was to 

remove the financial barrier between the provider and the 

recipient.  He said the most important next step was the 

reorganization and the restructuring of Saskatchewan's health 

care system into a new direction.  We're trying that with the 

wellness. 

 

In some ways we're in uncharted territory.  This is going to be 

unsettling because we are comfortable with our ways.  But we 

think, at the end of the day, we are going to have a better health 

care system based on wellness, based on something which can 

be the basis of a pioneering approach perhaps for other 

provinces. 

 

I can talk about education and treaty land entitlements and 

environment matters, the business that we started off talking 

about.  All of this is an agenda to reform the parliament, reform 

the legislature.  But the essence of it is rebuilding 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Unless we can get our financial house into order, and I think 

people in Saskatchewan know that, there isn't going to be any 

rebuilding.  We have to get the financial house in order, and I 

think we've taken a big, giant step in that direction. 

 

I think most people, they don't like the taxes.  I don't like 

paying them, as I say, any more than I like imposing them.  But 

I think they understand where we're at, and I do believe that 

they are supportive of the government. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'd just like to thank the Premier for 

responding to my questions this evening, and his officials.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm not quite sure 

where to start, Mr. Premier, with respect to several things that I 

would like you to address and knowing that it's relatively late 

in the evening.  Your last comments are a good place to begin. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

You said your objective is for fiscal independence, jobs, the 

revitalization of rural Saskatchewan, and the quality of life 

particularly on the wellness model.  And you put them in those 

three areas.  With great political respect, you may have those as 

your objectives, but as you can imagine, we probably have 

some difference on how you get there.  I want to touch on some 

things and get into some of the differences because I'm not so 

sure that your plan is working. 

 

In fact I'm quite sure it's not working and it's causing great 

harm, great problems in confidence.  The lack of confidence is 

evident everywhere.  The pain is severe; the pain is deep.  The 

crisis, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, is deepening.  It is 

not only deepening from last fall when you campaigned to fix 

it, but it is deepening by the hour as we speak as a result of 

serious climatic conditions, but most particularly, Mr. Premier, 

as a result of the fact that you have changed the rules.  And 

they have serious, serious consequences on rural people.  And 

we saw that today. 

 

And I'm sure your cabinet colleagues, the member from 

Melfort and the member from Rosetown have informed you 

about several thousand people who got together today to say 

that they absolutely, fundamentally, and sincerely -- people that 

voted for you -- disagree with what you're doing in terms of 

ripping away the protection for agricultural people. 

 

And for several reasons.  And I'll just quickly summarize those 

and then I want to get into specifics.  Number one, we find -- 

and people found out today -- that the coverage and the 

protection for people who signed contracts in Saskatchewan is 

less than in Alberta or Manitoba.  Saskatchewan has always 

been part of a national program.  And under the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance for farmers, they join the national program.  It's 

tripartite -- it's farmers, it's the province, it's the federal 

government 

 

And lo and behold, we find that the protection in Saskatchewan 

is now significantly less than it is in Manitoba or Alberta.  And 

they can't justify . . . they don't know how you can justify that.  

Why would you do this to farmers in the middle of a crisis. 

That's very, very important. 

 

And secondly, what they don't understand is when they sign the 

contracts and you decided to change them, why you decided 

that you had to make the legislation so miserable and so tough 

that they couldn't even go to the courts to protect their rights.  

And they don't understand that.  They want '91 GRIP for '92.  

They want the same coverage as their neighbours in Alberta 

and in Manitoba.  And they want access to the courts because 

they don't believe they've been treated fairly.  Other people get 

access to the courts, but Saskatchewan farmers have been 

denied that. 

 

Now we had thousands and thousands of people come out 

today.  Some of your MLAs were there, lots of farmers from 

across all of northern Saskatchewan.  And tonight as you know, 

it gets worse and worse.  And all your advisors knew that in the 

event of drought or frost, you had a 

serious, serious problem in the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

So that lack of confidence is going to show up, the sales are 

going to show up, the lack of income, and now the lack of 

protection.  And all they did . . . they weren't even asking for a 

subsidy.  One fellow stood up and said, we don't want 

subsidies, we just want the insurance contract that we bought 

and paid for.  But they couldn't have that. 

 

So they felt very, very disappointed in that the new 

administration that they voted for has denied them access to a 

contract they bought and paid for.  They knew they could get 

150 to $250 an acre locked in.  They could buy it -- bought and 

paid for as you can in Alberta and as you can in Manitoba.  

And it's gone, and only in Saskatchewan.  They said why 

would they treat us that way when the real farm crisis is here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So they don't understand this Bill that was proclaimed today.  

They don't understand why you've made the Bill so 

mean-spirited so that they can't even protect their own rights 

and take the government to court.  And they don't understand 

why, in the midst of a crisis, in the midst now of drought and 

then on top of that frost -- and we saw acres of acres of green 

canola that is obviously going to be hurt, thousands . . . 

probably hundreds of millions if not a billion dollars worth of 

problem, and it gets worse hourly.  If it's a clear night tonight, 

you've even compounded it. 

 

They don't understand that.  And I don't understand it.  For 

somebody who went and talked to a lot of rural people last fall 

and stood up and said, I'm going to be for farmers; I'm here to 

protect you, give you the cost of production, more money from 

Ottawa, lower your premiums, give you help . . . They don't 

understand that and I don't understand it. 

 

And the public doesn't understand.  They say, well why would 

you abandon us?  These people are in desperate straits.  They're 

going broke.  The foreclosures are up.  Towns and villages are 

dying.  Businesses are closing.  And it's going to get worse 

through this winter.  Because they bought and paid for a 

contract and you took it away.  And you substituted something 

else that, as you know, is very unpopular.  It may be 

unconstitutional.  It may violate the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  He's used every trick in the book to pass it in this 

legislature.  You finally cut off debate.  They don't understand 

that either. 

 

So the questions that I have are the general question of why 

you would do this to farmers and to rural people when they 

really needed confidence, and you talked earlier about 

confidence in the economy and confidence in your new 

administration -- they really need confidence, if they could 

have security, suffering from drought and $2 wheat and all the 

problems they've faced over the last decade -- why you would 

take this away from them. 
 

And secondly, why you would do it in a Bill like this.  And I 

want to ask you, and I've asked the Minister of Agriculture and 

he wouldn't answer directly.  The Attorney General may or 

may not want to answer.  But in the Bill, which you said you've 

looked at and you got good legal advice, why in this Bill did 

you think it was necessary to put in section 10.1 that goes on to 

say: 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown or a Crown agent based on any 

cause of action arising from, resulting from or incidental to . 

. . (what you've done). 

 

Why, if you're so confident that you've done the right thing for 

farmers and you think that it is really the proper thing to do, 

would you have in here in clause 10.2: 

 

 Every cause of action against the Crown or a Crown agent 

arising from, resulting from, or incidental to anything 

mentioned in clauses (1)(a) to (d) is extinguished. 

 

Why would you put that in here?  If you're so confident that 

your legal advice inside and outside is accurate, why have you 

said to the farmers, well actually we're not that confident; we 

think we're going to get sued and we probably are going to be, 

you know, pretty vulnerable here.  We'll just put in a clause 

that says that we can't be sued.  And you can't do anything 

about it.  Why would you put that in there, if you're so 

confident that you're right and doing the right thing in section 

5, which you go on to say that you voided the contract and it 

wasn't there and pretend it wasn't there and we'll go on, which I 

can understand you might want to do.  I don't like it. And they 

signed a contract but you said the contract was void, it wasn't 

even in existence.  Fair enough.  But then afterwards, knowing 

that you were on shaky ground, you put in section 10.1 and you 

say, well I don't know, but maybe they'll sue us.  We better 

hide behind this legislation.  Why is that there? 

 

Now when you finish explaining that, you may understand why 

we say, if you think you're so right, why don't you pull that part 

of the Bill, if you're so confident that it's accurate?  Or if you 

still think that you have confidence in it, why don't you refer it, 

make a reference to the Court of Appeal, and then we'll all 

know, and the thousands and thousands and thousands of 

farmers that were out there today, plus tens of thousands of 

them that have their contracts violated and perhaps the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms, their rights and freedoms violated, 

could say well at least he has a reference; he's being fair.  

Because sincerely there is a real, real financial crisis and it's as 

large as we've seen since the 1930s. 

 

So here we are, less coverage than they do in neighbouring 

provinces, contracts broken -- and you admit that yourself, and 

I can give you the quotes where you say, and you're worried 

about their rights.  And you say that's the valid part of the PC 

argument.  You then bring in a Bill that takes away their rights 

to even get access to the government so you say, but the 

government is beyond the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

And then you say, well I don't have to refer it because we think 

we're absolutely valid and we're safe and it's a good piece of 

legislation. 

 

You put all that together and you're an experienced enough 

politician to know you've got yourself an unbelievable story in 

coffee row or on the main street any place in Saskatchewan, or 

for that matter any place in rural North America.  They don't 

believe it.  They said, 

well is he doing this because he has a deficit?  How much is 

this crop insurance going to cost?  Is it all that bad?  And today 

we heard it's maybe 23, $24 million and the feds put up $40 

million and the farmer can get . . . top up his insurance.  And 

we've had Estimates here that it could range in something . . . 

it's less than one-half of one per cent of your budget, which is 

about $5 billion. 

 

So from a very honest and sincere point of view, you know that 

there are people who are in serious financial problems.  It is a 

crisis and it's fair to say, as well, you campaigned to help fix 

the crisis and you would be there. 

 

(2215) 

 

They've got less coverage under your administration.  They've 

got, frankly, an ugly piece of legislation.  You have, and I've 

got legal authority or legal advice and views here that say that 

very serious concerns about constitutional rights and violating 

the charter of rights of individuals, and then they have no place 

to turn. 

 

So again I would have to ask, one, why you treat farmers this 

way.  Number two, why this section in the Bill?  Number three, 

why won't you refer that so that we all know what it means?  

And that doesn't cost you, if you're really confident that it's 

there.  And give the people some sense of hope, some sense of 

hope that in fact they can have, and stay in touch with, the 

Minister of Agriculture and a new Premier who has some 

compassion for individuals. 

 

Because what we see here in this legislation is not compassion, 

it's hard-nosed legal whereas's, a bunch of whereas's in the 

front that deal with the constitution, and retroactively rewriting 

history, and then a bunch of legislation that says, well I guess 

we're probably a little vulnerable here so we'll protect 

ourselves. 

 

So why treat the rural people this way, which is much worse 

than in neighbouring provinces.  Why this Bill?  Why the way 

you've got it?  And why not the reference to clear it up and let 

people know that you're not afraid of your legislation.  Let's 

start there, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we have heard 

the Leader of the Opposition on this point quite frequently, and 

I don't mean to start off that way by diminishing the sincerity 

with which he feels the arguments.  However, I start off this 

way by saying that we have here clearly a difference of 

approach and a difference of policy. 

 

There is a farm crisis. There is no doubt about that.  The farm 

crisis was evident in September, October of 1991 where I think 

if the Leader of the Opposition was to admit, the people of 

Saskatchewan simply in the farm gate rejected '91 GRIP.  They 

wanted change. 
 

I mean who knows in an election what prompts votes to be cast 

in a certain direction.  But I know at the farm rallies that I 

attended, they wanted change. They felt that GRIP was too 

complex, it was not too market-oriented.  There were all kinds 

of pamphlets out there -- you call them contracts -- 40, 50,000 

of them, subject to interpretations by individuals.  And they 

wanted change. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

And when we were elected in pursuit of that promise that we 

would seek change, we did what we thought was the logical 

thing.  We didn't set up our own political advisory committee. 

We went to the same advisory committee which you set up, sir, 

with the exception of adding three people who did not change 

the thrust of the recommendations, still headed by people like 

Barry Senft.  This committee came across with its set of 

recommendations, which recommendations are incorporated in 

the legislation, and they all agreed to that, including SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities).  I note 

your member from Morse keeps on using the SARM argument 

because I see him from time to time on television and the radio 

debating this.  They all agreed to this, and we introduced the 

legislation on this basis. 

 

And we did the legislation because, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, there had to be put into place a set of . . . a 

framework, a framework, a starting point from which the 

questions of rights and obligations could or could not be 

determined.  And that starting point pertains to the sections 

which you are referring to, that is the legal advice which we 

have obtained and that's the legal advice upon which we 

proceed. 

 

You say, if you're so confident about the Bill, why not pull that 

section or this section?  What will happen with the Bill, if it's 

challenged, ultimately will be decided by the courts.  I can only 

tell you what the Minister of Justice has advised me and the 

cabinet.  And I have had a chance to study both of these 

opinions myself, for whatever that's worth, to satisfy myself 

that the Bill is constitutional and that it is valid and it is within 

the jurisdiction of the province of Saskatchewan in its every 

component. 

 

You may not have a legal opinion that shares that point of 

view.  That's the legal officers, both internal and external's 

opinion.  We are implementing the policy changes 

recommended by the advisory committee.  You may not share 

that view.  We did, based on the consultation.  This group had 

300 submissions, this advisory committee -- 300 submission -- 

oral, written submissions, which led to these suggested 

changes.  And that's where the changes were implemented and 

put on that basis. 

 

So the question of referring to the section or the Bill or any 

variation of that, apart from having the unfortunate side-effect 

of delay at this stage in the game and further confusion, which I 

think certainly doesn't help people who are worried about their 

farm situation, is undesirable, but this is a matter of shirking 

responsibility.  If we had doubt from within our own legal 

advice and advisors as to the constitutionality, we might very 

well refer it, but we don't and we take our responsibilities. 

 

Let me close by saying this:  we also have another difference, 

which the Leader of the Opposition and I have debated in 

question period, and we may as well talk about this . . . well it 

depends on what he wants to pursue, but I'll just get my point 

of view out.  I believe that the third line of defence is exactly 

set up to take into account the kinds of things that the folks in 

Melfort and in other parts of Saskatchewan or Alberta are 

worried about, where there's been lots of snow and lots of frost 

as well.  The third 

line of defence definition in 1990 talked about unforeseen 

circumstances of this nature. 

 

The second line of defence and the GRIP was contemplated in 

an entirely different situation.  What you are doing, for 

whatever reasons, are blending the two. 

 

What we need to do, I submit in a non-partisan fashion, is to 

work to improvements to GRIP -- which I would argue were 

flawed to begin with because they're not based on cost of 

production and I would admit we have not succeeded in 

changing in 1992 -- but work for changes to make GRIP as the 

second line of defence more responsive along those roles. 

 

But what we also need to do is to have the federal government 

come onside with its treasury to defend the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  As they defend the cod fishermen, 

they should defend the farmers in unforeseen circumstances of 

this nature.  I believe that that is the proper constitutional 

position. 

 

More importantly, I believe it's the proper fiscal position to 

take.  I think it's the right thing to do and I think that we've got 

to do it in the position from the starting point that this is the 

responsibility of Ottawa's to try to fix up.  I mean it's closed, 

but I take my chair and invite obviously your comments or 

rebuttal. 

 

I would close by saying that we intend fully to sit down with 

the federal officials -- in fact those negotiations are beginning I 

think tomorrow and Wednesday -- on the crop disaster, third 

line of defence arguments to see what if anything can be 

arranged, given the hurt that has taken place already, and 

Heaven forbid, the additional hurt which may take place 

tonight, over the next few nights. 

 

But in our judgement there is the clear delineation, and the mix 

and match which has been so much a part of the official 

opposition's attack here I think is not correct, not logical.  It 

burdens unfairly the province of Saskatchewan, and by the 

way, the farmers who are the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The solution is for the Leader of the Opposition to join us in 

our submission to the federal people to come up with the 

monies required to look at that particular difficult situation in 

not only Melfort but other circumstances. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Premier, that argument is so full of 

holes it's unbelievable.  If a rural municipality came in to you 

and said, I'm not paying my taxes because I've got a disaster, 

then you say, all right, well I'll pick up your tab, guess what the 

neighbouring municipality would do.  Well I guess we got a 

problem so you'll pick up our tab.  And another one and 

another one and another one. 

 

Are you going to treat municipalities like that?  So if you've got 

an RM (rural municipality) that's near Nipawin or Carrot River 

or Melfort or The Battlefords or Turtleford and it's got a severe 

problem, they don't have to collect their taxes?  If they've got a 

problem, you're going to pick up the difference?  That's what 

you're saying about a national crop insurance program or a 

third line of defence. 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Any Finance minister from Manitoba or Alberta or B.C. 

(British Columbia) then worth their salt would say, well let's 

get out of GRIP, let's back out of it, because the feds will come 

in and pick up the tab. 

 

You've got more experience than that or else you don't think 

that the average person that was in Melfort today has any sense 

of logic.  You can't do that alone.  Any federal minister worth 

his salt, or federal cabinet or provincial cabinet wouldn't let that 

happen. 

 

There is no justification for what you've just said.  If there's a 

third line of defence it goes across Canada, shared equally 

among farmers.  Crop insurance in Manitoba, Alberta an 

Saskatchewan is for weather problems.  And you know that and 

I know that.  You have opted out of a national program. Only 

Saskatchewan people have been stuck with the problem and 

that's clear. 

 

So you can't expect Dick Johnston, or a Finance minister from 

Ontario or some place else to let you opt out and the feds pick 

it up and not them.  And they sit there and say, well gosh, that 

was nice.  That doesn't wash.  It isn't valid at all. 

 

Secondly, other jurisdictions don't have this, frankly ugly piece 

of legislation where you cancelled contracts.  You've 

retroactively done that, which you think is fine, and then you've 

got this awful part here which even the Legislative Law Clerk 

says is unconstitutional.  It violates the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. 

 

You've isolated yourself a long ways from being normal in 

terms of crop insurance across Canada.  And now farmers are 

asking me, well how do we challenge him.  He's removed our 

right to challenge him.  What do we do now?  You've kept 

saying, well it will be fixed up in the courts.  So what do they 

start all over again?  So we've got a serious farm crisis here and 

you've changed the law with your huge majority and you have 

no way out of it. 

 

And the farmers are now figuring that out.  You won't change 

your mind.  You won't refer it and you know that you can't get 

the kind of program that you had before.  So you're in a 

difficult situation, because how does a federal minister respond 

to you?  How does the federal cabinet respond when one 

province alone decides to opt out of a program?  That's the 

problem. 

 

So the third line of defence argument doesn't make any sense at 

all.  You have first line where farmers do what they can, 

second line where you co-operate with the national program 

and the third line is the federal government under emergencies, 

which is across Canada, and that, assuming provinces agree to 

help participate and co-operate and so forth. 

 

So would you just explain this a little further.  How do you 

expect to have a federal treasury just stick up for Saskatchewan 

because the Saskatchewan government decides to pull out of a 

program?  Do you think the feds can easily just back-fill for 

your decision without consequences in other jurisdictions?  

How do you expect them to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

first cause of the problem, with the greatest respect to the 

former premier, was the way in which you negotiated the 

cost-sharing arrangements with respect to agriculture support 

programs.  That is our very first problem -- and I might say 

without being too argumentative but perhaps argumentative -- 

symptomatic of not only agricultural programs but the whole 

plethora of commercial transactions that you entered into. So 

much so that today the provincial share right here out of the tax 

pockets of the farmers in Melfort on agriculture has risen from 

zero per cent on these kinds of programs, to 41 per cent, and 

the federal government's share from 100 per cent has fallen to 

59 per cent. 

 

And that is somehow justified in the face of the fact that the 

produce of agriculture from this part of the world feeds the 

people in Montreal and Toronto and Ottawa and Vancouver, 

and it is cheap food or inexpensive food, and as part of the quid 

pro quo the Ottawa government couldn't come through with 

their heretofore until 1988, 100 per cent of the responsibilities.  

That was the arrangement which was negotiated by your 

administration, sir. 

 

And now you argue -- that's the package of the off-load -- now 

you argue that not only should we maintain that burden on top 

of all the other burdens that we face financially, but we should 

add to that burden.  That we should add to that burden.  Well 

frankly, I don't accept that as the approach that should be taken 

in this regard because for a province which is so dependent on 

agriculture, this is a mug's game. 

 

We will end up sharing so much of the cost, in the words of my 

colleague the Minister of Agriculture, it will be like giving 

ourselves a blood transfusion in the one arm while we're 

hemorrhaging on the other arm. 

 

(2230) 

 

To get the tax money out of our provincial coffers means going 

back to the farmers in Melfort, and if they haven't got it, we 

haven't got it, and I can't contribute.  You couldn't contribute, 

sir, if you were the premier of the province of Saskatchewan at 

this time. 

 

And the reality is, and the reality is that all of the first 

ministers, including the Prime Minister, have acknowledged 

this point.  In March 1925, 1992 the first ministers met in 

Toronto.  I raised this issue and there's a communiqué issued.  

I've given a copy. I can find perhaps a copy and still forward it 

to the member if not tonight, a later night. 

 

All first ministers said that in recognition of provinces like 

Saskatchewan's whose economy is dependent upon agriculture, 

to ask them in this hurting economy to contribute more to 

federal-provincial cost sharing was wrong.  They all said that. 

 

In fact the way the original memorandum was set up it was 

Saskatchewan, and the Premier of Manitoba, Premier Filmon 

said hold it; strike Saskatchewan, I'll put my name into that.  

There's a principle here involved that simply says you can't go 

back asking where you cannot ask. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

But the other answer is as well, I mean they've done it in the 

Newfoundland situation for the cod fishermen.  The federal 

government didn't come to the Government of Newfoundland 

using your RM analogy and say to Mr. Wells, we want you to 

pony up 41 per cent for the fact that the cod stock, through 

some unforeseen natural disaster, has run out. 

 

Why should they say to the farmers of Saskatchewan, because 

there's a frost or an early snow, or for Alberta for that matter, 

and unforeseen, we're going to get you to pony up, even though 

you're on the verge of bankruptcy.  They don't do it for 

Newfoundland.  They shouldn't do it for the province of 

Saskatchewan or for the province of Alberta, or for the 

province of Manitoba.  That's the rationale. 

 

And I simply say, if you want to negotiate a situation which for 

ever sinks the province into an absolutely impossible abyss . . . 

an abyss, a financial abyss -- financial abyss.  I mean the 

member from Morse keeps on saying about the farmers, where 

am I going to get the money?  You criticize me when we raise 

the taxes.  Where do you want me to go?  If I can't tax the 

farmers, where do I go? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.). 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, AECL.  This is the level of the 

Conservative approach.  The AECL deal.  Another $50 million 

sweetheart deal, like the Weyerhaeusers, and like the Cargills, 

and like every . . . and the Crown Lifes, and every other $2.9 

billion that you blew on your large corporation friends.  That's 

where the money went, and not to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  Why didn't you pony up the money to the 

farmers then, instead of giving it to the big multinationals?  

Where were your principles then? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And when you were in Melfort, and 

when you were in Melfort did you tell them about the $2.9 

billion that you gave to your big corporation friends?  Did you 

tell them that?  Did you tell them that you bankrupted the 

province by giving that amount of cash?  I bet you you didn't.  I 

bet you you didn't tell them about the money that you gave to 

Weyerhaeuser and to Cargill and the like. 

 

And you come to the legislature and say, now having given this 

money to these people, to these needy Cargills -- that's what 

you did -- to the needy Cargills, and you get up in the House 

now and say to the farmers of Saskatchewan . . . Believe me, 

Mr. Former Premier, that's why you're sitting with a lonely 

band of 10 in this position.  I say to you, sir, I say to you, sir . . 

. First of all I apologize for losing my temper; I really do.  But I 

say to you this, sir: the answer has got to be in having a 

co-operative and workable relationship between the federal . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It isn't.  You're right, it isn't.  I 

acknowledge it isn't.  I don't know whether it's our fault or 

whether it's the federal government's fault, or whether it's a 

combination of both faults.  I acknowledge your point there.  

There's no doubt about that. 

But I say to you, at least I have backing me, at least I have 

backing me the principle of the 10 provincial governments and 

the Prime Minister saying that this question of disasters should 

not be looked at to provinces whose agricultural economies are 

hurt by them. 

 

Now why are you advocating the federal government cause?  

I'm going to sit down and give you a chance for rebuttal, 

obviously, but to say this:  I don't think Mr. Mazankowski, with 

the greatest of respect, notwithstanding your rhetorical 

eloquence, I don't think he needs your support to tell us about 

his so-called problems.  You're a Saskatchewan politician.  

What I need, what we need, is the Saskatchewan people 

standing together to approach Mr. Mazankowski together.  We 

don't need another voice for Mr. Mazankowski in this House.  

We need help from a government which has a AAA credit 

rating and we need help from a national treasury, a treasury 

which is paid by the taxpayers of all this country who have 

benefitted from the work of our producers.  That's the the quid 

pro quo.  That's what we need. 

 

And we'll do the best that we can in the face of the fact that 

we're now picking up 41 per cent of the costs -- 41 per cent of 

the costs.  But to say, as you do, sir, that we have no right, 

notwithstanding what they did, the federal government did in 

Newfoundland, or what they do as part of the national 

responsibilities, that we have no right is, I say, sir, not the right 

way to proceed.  And my pitch to you, in as non-partisan terms 

as I can, as a person that's contributed a lot to the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . yes, a person who's contributed a lot to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I disagree with your ideology, and 

I have, but you've contributed a lot.  We don't need this kind of 

political division.  What we need is us saying this is third line 

of defence.  Let us unite in coming to the defence of the 

farmers.  Let us not divide on political grounds which, if I may 

say so, unfortunately has been the case taken by the official 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, it was a pleasure to watch the 

NDP Premier lose his temper a little bit as a result of some 

pointed questions that he has to address.  And I'll go back to go 

to the pointed questions, and the Crop Insurance minister can 

respond if he likes.  The question is simply this: how do you 

expect to get money into the hands of farmers when you break 

a contract with the national government?  How do you expect 

the Minister of Finance from Alberta and the Minister of 

Finance from Manitoba to let you do this?  Don't you think 

they'll want more money too?  You didn't address that.  You 

didn't talk about it at all. 

 

Then you start to talk about fish in Newfoundland.  You should 

better confine your arguments to the province of Saskatchewan 

and the people here.  The fishermen in Newfoundland can't fish 

cod for two years.  They got a serious problem there.  They 

can't fish.  It's like not being able to farm or grow durum wheat 

or spring wheat for two years.  And they got $500 million.  We 

get that every year.  We got $14 billion from the federal 

government, as you know.  More than any jurisdiction 

anywhere at any time has come into the province of 

Saskatchewan to help 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

farmers. 

 

That's why they signed up for GRIP '91.  It's not perfect but 

they knew if they grew canola and they grew wheat and they 

grew lentils and they grew speciality crops and barley, they 

could be guaranteed 2, 3, $400 an acre.  And you took it away 

from them. 

 

And you say, well Saskatchewan shouldn't contribute, we're 

only into agriculture.  The program costs per capita in 

Saskatchewan is $160.  In Ontario, it's 4.  And you've 

complained about that.  And he says, he does.  The program 

benefit in Saskatchewan is $1,090 per person.  The program 

benefit in Ontario is $27. 

 

So you have just turned down in the neighbourhood of $1,000 

per capita because you decided not to co-operate and not to 

participate.  And you figured it out.  You said, oh this is really 

something.  We won't participate; we'll renegotiate.  And 

number one, the feds will change a national program just for 

Saskatchewan; and number two, for $160, you're turning down 

$1,090. 

 

And you won't do that for farmers.  And you won't do that for 

all kinds of people.  And he says, well how can I afford to do 

that.  You know as well as I do, SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) is a separate company, based on 

insurance and probabilities.  Crop Insurance has been running 

independently for a long time.  And with its changes, it's at a 

20-year average.  Some years there's a frost, some years there 

isn't.  Some years it collects money, other years it pays out. 

 

And you're saying no, we have to balance the budget this year 

on Crop Insurance.  It's a multibillion-dollar, separate 

company, and you are putting all of these lives in jeopardy 

because you say I have to haul the money in from crop 

insurance and put it in the treasury here.  That's what you're 

telling farmers; they say I'm not buying that.  Number one, we 

contribute.  We normally contribute 25 per cent in crop 

insurance.  And we contributed more on the understanding the 

feds will kick in more.  And the kind of benefit we get here is 

over $1,000 a person for $160 investment.  And you say that's 

too much?  It's too much for the people of Saskatchewan?  It's a 

tremendous return -- 5, 600 per cent on their money, 700 per 

cent.  Ontario only charged costs and four and they only get 

$27. 

 

Let me also say, Mr. McKnight is a federal minister, sits on the 

federal treasury, warned you: don't mess with '91 GRIP like 

you're doing because I don't agree with it.  In the event of frost 

or drought you have got a disaster on your hands, and I'm not 

picking up the difference.  And he told you that. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture whispers from his seat saying 

that, oh he told you this and . . . I'll tell what he told you: he 

says . . . He said it today and he said it again:  If you change 

GRIP like this so there's no coverage in drought or frost, I'm 

not back-filling for you, because every other jurisdiction would 

ask to do the same, then what would the national treasury do? 

 

And the people on the advisory committee, the SARM, didn't 

agree with it.  The Minister of Agriculture speaks from his seat 

again.  And I quote from the SARM so that 

you've got it on the record one more time.  After the committee 

report had been drafted, the SARM voiced five major concerns 

with the recommendations of the report.  And by written letter 

as well as a meeting with the minister February 13, 1992, that 

point the five concerns the SARM were added to the GRIP 

review committee report.  So you had them. 

 

The SARM, which is the broadest-based group in 

Saskatchewan agriculture, that got 4 or 5,000 people to meet 

today, warned you, the federal minister warned you, farmers 

warned you.  And what did you get to do . . . and they said, 

these concerns were time limitations; give us another year to 

work through this; don't cut us off when we are in a crisis.  And 

that's what you've done -- cut them off in a crisis. 

 

Number two, lack of broad-based producer input and 

significant change violates the contract.  The bankability of the 

program -- you can't take your program to the bank.  And the 

bankers know it and the credit union people know it.  They 

didn't like it.  Native people were in to see us and said, that's a 

violation of treaties, for Heaven's sakes.  On our land we can't 

use treaty land as collateral, with GRIP we could.  And you 

took that away. 

 

And you were warned by the SARM, you were warned by the 

federal Minister of Agriculture, warned by farmers.  And 

maybe you don't have much time for the members of the 

legislature warning you, but the public warned you.  And today 

you have a serious, serious rural financial crisis on your hands.  

And the federal government told you it is not going to back-fill 

for your stubborness and warned you.  And these people could 

be out not only hundreds of millions of dollars, but in the 

neighbourhood of a billion dollars-plus. 

 

And you know it.  As I sit here tonight, that could happen.  And 

today . . . my colleague says, you know, isn't it interesting 

today not one word in Melfort about moral hazard?  Nobody 

mentioned it.  The Minister of Agriculture didn't mention it, 

nobody else mentioned it.  And all the way to Melfort people 

are growing lentils, not because of your program, it's because 

they need the money and they're drought resistant.  And they're 

worth more than wheat.  Anything, anything at all. 

 

And you stand up here and say that you are . . . well that's why 

I ask you what you leave the farmers to do?  What are they 

going to do?  They're going to be out all kinds of money.  

Talked to a farmer today, has 2,500 acres of canola and he's 

going to plough it up.  That's his life, that's his whole farm life.  

People in the community don't know what to do. 

 

The stubble crops between here and Melfort aren't worth feed.  

They're going to be bailing some of them that they're swathing.  

The stubble crops are not . . . well, and even Professor Furtan 

told our caucus and has told you and others, if there is a 

drought or a frost in this 1992 NDP GRIP, I don't want to be 

anywhere near it.  And you can't find him to defend it today.  

Go find him and he'll tell you, under a drought it is absolutely 

disaster.  And you stand in here and say, well we're doing this, 

it's going to be good for the farmer and good for the public, 

good for the community; we'll balance the budget with it, take 

the 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

money out of crop insurance.  That's what you're saying.  

You'll have to take it out of crop insurance -- because you can't 

have any other interpretation. 

 

(2245) 

 

If in fact you're doing this to save money, you means that Crop 

Insurance money is now going to be allocated to the 

Consolidated Fund, or you're going to have to use it here 

because you won't let that company stand as an independent 

insurance company.  It's a multibillion-dollar operation.  It's no 

rinky-dink, inexperienced operation, runs on 20-year actuarials.  

And it is sound, 20 years.  Over 20 years, it goes in cycles. 

 

So you're boxed in, and I'm worried for Saskatchewan people.  

I don't know what they're going to do. 

 

The Premier says, I bet -- I bet. Another member says it's the 

$15 billion debt.  Okay. Well look, you campaigned on it, you 

campaigned on the 14 or $15 billion debt, and you said it's 

terrible, we'll fix it.  We'll first of all cut taxes, and then we'll 

do all these other great things for people -- more for farmers, 

raise the cost of production. 

 

But I'll tell you tonight, we have a serious, serious problem in 

Saskatchewan, and it ain't going to go away.  It's here tonight 

and it's going to be here six months from now and it's going to 

be here years and years from now because they have nothing to 

go back on.  And they know if there's a national program and 

third line of defence, it is national and it can't all come to 

Saskatchewan.  And you know the provincial government is 

boxed in, boxed in so deep they don't know what to do. 

 

So the public today sees $800 million deficit last year, $517 

million this year, credit rating going down, severe drought and 

frost across the province of Saskatchewan, the lack of 

confidence and you're saying, well the wellness model and jobs 

and the quality of life and this independence is going to do it 

all.  And they're saying, it's not ringing too well. 

 

So I just left, as your cabinet colleague from Melfort did and 

others. Your Minister of Agriculture and the federal minister 

was there, thousands of people who don't like it a bit.  They 

want to know, what do they do? 

 

Let me give you a specific.  With this piece of legislation that 

you have here in GRIP, how do the farmers, how do the 

farmers take it any further?  What are they supposed to do?  

Would you recommend the farmers . . . how do they take it to 

the Court of Appeal?  How do they get into the Supreme 

Court?  Where do they get the money for it?  How do they do 

it? 

 

You've said this will be settled in the courts.  The Attorney 

General said it's going to be settled in the courts, the Minister 

of Agriculture said it's going to be settled in the courts.  How 

do they settle this in the courts and how do they get their 

money out of the courts? 

 

You're a lawyer, you've been Attorney General, you're now the 

Premier responsible for this Bill, maybe you could get into that.  

How does a farmer use the courts to get his money back 

because you've said, your minister 

said, the Attorney General said, this can be settled in the 

courts?  How do they do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think nothing is 

more graphically illustrative of the differences between myself 

and the Leader of the Opposition than his last little speech here. 

 

First of all I do want to say that I do believe he is genuinely 

concerned and interested about the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

and I would withdraw any suggestion to the contrary.  I do 

believe that you have the interest of the farmers at heart as I'd 

like you to think that we do too.  But we do have differences as 

to approach here. 

 

Let me give you the answer to the question if I can in a 

moment.  But I want to repeat very briefly the history of this.  

You make the allegation that these changes to GRIP were made 

somehow as if we had pulled them out of the air.  That is not 

correct.  You know that's not correct.  We took the advice from 

the advisory committee.  I've made that point with 300 

submissions.  We took the advice of the people who were there, 

Mr. Stabler and Mr. Hartley Furtan.  We made these . . . but 

now the member from Morse says well now he's not talking 

about it.  Well I don't know how that helps the debate.  The 

reality is that we didn't pull them out of the air.  We took them 

in the consultation and the advice of the farming community.  

That's point number one. 

 

Point number two.  The former premier says, the Leader of the 

Opposition says, you know that Mr. McKnight says he's 

warned you he's not going to act in these circumstances.  He 

warned you.  Well he may very well have warned us.  I'm not 

admitting for the moment that he did or he didn't but I think 

that's almost a red herring.  Even assuming what you say is 

right, I say the Minister of Agriculture Canada has no right to 

subvert the framework of the safety net analysis that he and 

you, sir, were a party to writing.  And I have a copy of that 

report of ministers of Agriculture, June 30, 1990, and it said the 

following, the three lines of defence: 

 

 The first line of defence is primarily the farmer's 

responsibility; 

 

The second line is this: 

 

 Second line programs are intended to smooth out fluctuations 

in net revenue arising from both production and marketing 

risks which are largely beyond the control of the farmers. 

 

That is GRIP, second line.  Nobody can argue against that.  

And then there is the third line: 

 

 Third line programs are intended to raise net revenue above 

some threshold level (above some threshold level) in the face 

of events which go beyond the scope of first and second line 

programs. 

 

Now what is happening out there with the frost or the snow, are 

circumstances which are beyond the scope of first and second 

line programs.  Well 1988 crop . . . well crop . . . 1988 they, in 

this report . . . well hold it.  In 198 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

 . . . I have a copy of an example that they used themselves in 

the 1988 program as a third line of defence on drought.  You 

were the premier and the minister of Agriculture under third 

line of example . . . They used that as an example of third line 

of defence. 

 

And when you get up in the legislature and tell me that the 

federal Minister of Agriculture says I warned you, 

notwithstanding what I have put out to all the farmers and all 

the governments, I've warned you, I'm not going to honour this, 

I say I'm not buying it.  He doesn't have the right to do that.  He 

doesn't . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You don't have the right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- What do you mean I don't have the 

right to do this?  We campaigned on making the changes to 

GRIP and we did it on these bases.  And we have the right to 

rely on the words of you, sir, and the federal Minister of 

Agriculture on the third line of defence. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What weasel words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well the member says weasel words.  

Did you or not author this?  Am I misreading it?  You can 

correct me if I did or not. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . correct you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You doggone right you'd give it a try 

to correct it.  You know full well that third line of defence is 

exactly in that position and that's exactly where we're at now 

on crop disaster.  That's why I wrote to the Prime Minister on 

July 17.  That's why we had that motion asking them to pony 

up the balance of the third line of defence, which by the way 

you people voted against and which you argued against.  All of 

this, and the farmers are in serious trouble.  They are in serious 

trouble.  There's no doubt about that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And what are you going to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the member says, what do you 

do?  Well I tell you what you don't do.  You don't hear in the 

legislature of Saskatchewan the echo of Mr. McKnight telling 

us why the federal government can't do something.  What you 

hear in the legislature is the voice of the Leader of the 

Opposition with the Premier of Saskatchewan saying, Mr. 

McKnight, you must do something, as the rules that you wrote 

said you would do something. 

 

Whose side are you on?  You're telling me that a AAA federal 

government acting for the cod fishermen in circumstances, 

quote, in the words of third line of defence which go beyond 

the scope of first and second line programs, a commitment that 

they made, that that doesn't apply here. 

 

And you're giving me that argument.  You're giving that 

argument.  You asked me what to do; I ask you what do you 

do.  Did you tell, Mr. . . . Did you ask Mr. McKnight about 

living up to the commitments on third line of defence or not?  

Did you ask?  Have you written to Mr. McKnight?  Have you 

written to Mr. Mulroney? 

An Hon. Member: -- I was with him today.  Where were you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Did you ask?  Have you written to Mr. 

McKnight?  Have you written to Mr. Mulroney?  Have you 

sent . . . What did you tell the farmers?  You didn't tell the 

farmers at all what you said to Mr. McKnight, because what 

you do is defend Mr. McKnight lock, stock and barrel, 101 per 

cent of the time.  Ten times out of ten if the choice is between 

this legislature and the farmers, you'll pick Ottawa, not the 

legislature in this province.  That's what you'll do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's why you've got us in the 41 per 

cent jackpot financing it.  And now you want us to finance it 

more, but when I say us, I don't mean us in the front bench, I 

mean us the people of Saskatchewan.  Us the people of 

Saskatchewan.  All of us as taxpayers. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's real good, real good. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, well, the member says real good . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's really popular. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Really popular.  Well I'll tell you one 

thing.  I don't agree with your assessment about Melfort.  I 

think the people in Melfort . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You weren't there.  How would you 

know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I wasn't there.  That's right.  I 

was doing Estimates.  I wasn't there, but I've had ministers 

there.  I've got the reports.  I'm going to get the full report.  And 

we were there talking to them and listening to them and we 

appeared there.  And I say the people of Melfort want the 

governments everywhere to come up and honour the 

commitments that they made in 1990, including the third line 

of defence.  That's what the people of Melfort want.  They don't 

want political speeches which cleverly or not so cleverly 

simply meld the two together as if they didn't exist.  They don't 

want that. 

 

So all I'm saying to you, sir, is that we have a difference.  I start 

off my rebuttal remarks to you last.  We have a difference as to 

what the obligation is.  The fact that there is a crisis out there I 

understand. 

 

The question is who and how is the help to be engineered.  And 

I am saying to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

there is this in my judgement, a situation which calls upon this 

House to be acting unanimously in asking on the federal 

government for support. 

 

And in any event, we're going to down to ask for support on the 

third line of defence, Mr. McKnight notwithstanding.  Those 

were the rules and we expect them to be honoured by the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well the principals for the 1991 third line of 

defence initiatives include this, and this is the last 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

point.  Third line of defence be funded by the federal 

government conditional on industry and provincial government 

commitments to address other initiatives and help industry 

adjust to the long term.  Now do you think that includes 

breaking a contract with the federal government and the 

farmers? 

 

I mean we've been in here . . . You're the person responsible for 

the problem, not the federal government and not the farmers.  

Farmers signed the contract; federal government signed the 

contract.  Federal government says, if you change this contract, 

I wouldn't recommend it, but if you want to go . . . you're a 

newly elected government, go ahead, but you're not going to 

have good coverage.  And you're not consistent with third line 

of defence which says you do your part.  So you've got yourself 

and the people of Saskatchewan into a serious problem. 

 

And now my concern is I don't know how you're going to get 

out from under it.  I hope your officials do well.  I encourage 

them to go down, co-operate with the feds.  Hopefully you'll 

come up with $25 million, they come up with $40 million, and 

you can top up the farmers' income.  But it's nowhere close to 

'91 GRIP.  That's why the farmers, when we asked them today 

put up your hand, what would you like, '91 GRIP, they put up 

their hand.  Because they could bank on it.  They knew what it 

meant. 

 

This was a significant change for them.  They had confidence.  

They could invest in it.  And people said, well it wasn't perfect 

and you had to change it.  Well you can change it, but you 

knew very well that you gutted the program.  And the excuse 

you used was, well we can save money from crop insurance.  

So you've taken money from farmers and the Crop Insurance 

Corporation to fiddle around in here with your books because 

you promised tax cuts and you got caught.  That's it; you got 

caught. 

 

You said, well there'd be no PST, $14.5 billion, but we'll 

promise you 2 or 300 million in tax cuts and we'll balance the 

books anyway, and guess what happened?  You got caught.  

Now the farmers . . . and he says, he says, I got caught?  Well 

you promised something you couldn't deliver and now you 

wouldn't have a hope of having the same success leading 

people on. 

 

Call a by-election, he says, call some by-elections in Estevan. 

Call some by-elections.  Imagine, that's what he has in his 

mind. It's all a political game for you.  It's all a political game.  

And the Premier says that agriculture is just a game for me.  

No, I'm saying that's what you said about me and agriculture.  

Agriculture's been part of my life since I can remember, all 

right? 

 

Well he tries to make light of the fact that there is a significant 

crisis in Saskatchewan and he's responsible for it and he doesn't 

know what to do.  I hope you are successful in Ottawa.  But the 

problem is even if you are successful, even accepting the 

federal offer, you're going to be a lot short of '91 GRIP 

protection, and the good Lord knows that we need it.  The 

province of Saskatchewan needs it. 

 

And on top of that you have 

violated the very principles that initiate third line of defence 

because you have broken the contract, you have broken the 

contract.  You have not participated, you have not co-operated, 

you have not lived up to your share of the agreement. 

 

And as a result no federal Finance minister is going to say, oh 

well Saskatchewan is doing really well.  They have violated the 

contract. They broke it. We'll just back-fill for Saskatchewan, 

that nice little new NDP government that's broken 

harmonization contract, that's broken upgrader contracts, it's 

broken AECL contracts, they've broken GRIP and farmer 

contracts. Oh they're nice guys, we'll just back-fill for them. 

 

You think you're going to do that?  You think the feds are 

going to come up and put several hundred million more into 

this province because you broke this contract and you've got 

this ugly piece of legislation where you've even violated their 

rights under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms under the 

Constitution?  You don't have any chance of winning on that. 

 

Then he says, without my support.  Well this is your Bill.  I 

fought this Bill tooth and nail.  It's a bad Bill.  You cut out . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . he says I never went to Ottawa.  I 

brought $14 billion lobbying Ottawa into Saskatchewan.  

You've got nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing.  They're 14 

billion better off than they were without $14 billion.  And now 

you've cancelled the program.  You've cancelled the program 

when you said you were going to get the cost of production and 

you were going to get more.  You've got less.  You've got less, 

and you've got them suing you.  Now you've hid in the 

legislature so they can't sue you.  Or they can't sue. 

 

(2300) 

 

I asked you, how would they get at you in court?  You didn't 

even answer that.  I asked you, you know, why this section 

10.1?  You didn't answer that.  No you didn't.  You say, well 

they kind of told us we had to have it in here.  For what?  For 

what?  What's it in here for?  To protect you from what?  It's to 

protect you from farmers.  Right?  This Bill is about farmers.  

You have taken away their contract and then in section 10.1 

you protect yourself from farmers in case they go after you on 

the contract that saves their farm.  Holy smokes. 

 

This is in the first few months of your administration.  And 

you've got people suffering the worst crisis they've seen since 

the '30s and you campaigned to do better.  Well they're waiting.  

They're waiting.  Their taxes have gone up, their gasoline has 

gone up, you've taken away their rural roads, you're closing 

hospitals, you've taken away their pension plan, you're 

charging them more on deductibles, their bills are up and up 

and up, and their taxes are up, and their programs are cut.  And 

now what have you got? 

 

And you said, well vote NDP and we'll really help you out.  

And we'll get more money from Ottawa and we'll reduce your 

premiums and it'll all be good and economic diversification.  

You can't find any examples, Mr. Premier, of successes.  

You've done the opposite to what you got elected on -- that's 

the problem -- the opposite.  And if you've had some successes, 

it's been building on things that were here before. 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

You're going to do bonds.  Well, well, well, wasn't that nice?  

You're going to do bonds.  You're going to allow Saskoil to 

expand with some offshore money.  Good idea.  Weyerhaeuser 

expands in Big River, $2 million.  Nice idea.  Saferco's going 

to make . . . Saskferco's going to make a lot of money; farmers 

can work there.  Probably you'll make 20 per cent on your 

money.  Imagine -- diversification. 

 

Anything that you've done so far has either been negative that 

you've tried, or if it has been positive, it's things that are 

already there.  The expansion of IPSCO: we harmonized, and 

harmonization's a lot better for IPSCO than what you gave and 

that's a fact.  And you go expand out there in the Pelly riding, 

alfalfa plant, community bonds.  Community bonds are a great 

idea; I like them.  Using local equity, that works.  Co-operative 

capitalism; good idea. 

 

But we have, sir, a crisis in Saskatchewan right now and I don't 

know how you're going to fix it.  I don't know how you're 

going to fix it.  I don't even know how you and I collectively 

could convince the federal government that when you break a 

contract, you deserve more money in Saskatchewan than the 

provinces in Alberta . . . the people in Alberta and Manitoba.  

How do I do that?  How do we do that? 

 

Particularly when the contract that you broke returned $1,090 

for every $160 we put into it.  That's a pretty good deal.  And it 

had confidence.  Credit unions liked it, banks liked it, and you 

broke that agreement.  Now we've got nothing.  We've got your 

officials going down to Ottawa and they're going to say well, 

maybe we'll get this.  And I hope you do.  I hope you come up 

with $25 million.  The feds come up with 40.  And the farmers 

can take it out after harvest.  I hope.  And that's still short.  But 

it would be better. 

 

Maybe the rally today in Melfort would cause you and your 

officials to even go that far.  And I hope that you will do it.  

And the members say, well isn't that a great deal -- $6 an acre.  

Try it on canola.  Try it on canola.  Try it on barley.  Try it on 

peas and beans.  Try it on lentils.  If you've got a thousand 

acres in, you can run up 15, 20, $25,000 pretty quickly, 

particularly when it's all froze out.  They don't even understand 

it.  And that's in addition . . .  That's . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . No, I'll tell you you don't understand it.  You couldn't 

understand it or you wouldn't vote for this. 

 

People had an opportunity to lock in $200 an acre and more.  

And you took it away.  And you took it away.  Because you 

said, farmers have moral problems.  The NDP said, farmers 

have moral problems -- moral hazard.  They grow lentils and 

beans and they grow all kinds of other crops, and you're going 

to blame them.  Well imagine, lentils are up this year and it's all 

because of your program.  Get out of here.  Farmers know that 

you're an absolute fraud. 

 

And anybody that can sit there and chirp from their seats and 

say that you are defending agriculture in rural communities . . .  

You said that you would look at decentralization and help rural 

communities.  You 

promised that.  You just pull the rug out from under rural 

people.  And now you're severely caught.  The people of 

Saskatchewan are caught with your administration.  And you 

got trapped in this and you can't get out. 

 

And frankly, I don't know what you're going to do.  I don't 

know how you get out of this.  Because farmers need help and 

rural communities need help and you are stuck because you 

have this unprecedented piece of legislation -- unprecedented. 

 

The members opposite say and go to New York and borrow 

another billion to buy potash mines that weren't worth it.  And 

you paid way too much for them.  Phoney book values.  I 

mean, boy did they ever take you for a ride.  Yes.  Did they 

ever take you for a ride. 

 

Yes, and then the Gass quotation.  I can read the Gass 

quotations as well as you can.  Big phoney book values.  Big 

phoney book values. 

 

Well the Premier doesn't really have time for the crisis.  But I'll 

tell you, when your own legislative Law Clerk says that you're 

unconstitutional, it's serious.  It's serious.  Well I'll read it to 

you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  It's an opinion.  Well the 

NDP Premier says that the views of the legislative Law Clerk . 

. . the views of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk are not a 

legal opinion. 

 

Well they are hired by the Legislative Assembly to give us 

their advice.  And what does he say?  Has he ever said that 

laws here have been unconstitutional to the point that they 

violate your rights under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms? 

 

 I have carefully reviewed the provisions of Bill 87 with 

respect to the extinguishment of causes of action and the 

institution or continuation of such actions before the courts, 

and, in my opinion, these provisions -- specifically (the 

following) . . . are contrary to the guaranteed legal rights 

which Canadians are "not to be deprived thereof . . ." 

 

He's a lawyer. He practices law for a living in judging it and 

designing it, and then in his opinion this violates Canadians' 

rights under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And you've 

introduced this because you're afraid to help farmers. 

 

And you want me to join you in Ottawa and say, well I've taken 

away the farmers' rights, I've taken away their contracts, I 

might have even violated the constitutional rights because the 

way I've addressed the contracts. But you join me and maybe 

we can get more money for Saskatchewan despite the fact that 

the Alberta treasurer and the Manitoba treasurer and Finance 

minister will be all over us. 

 

Well you, sir, have said in the newspaper you're worried about 

rights.  What did you mean if you were worried about rights?  I 

can get you the exact quote.  You were worried about rights of 

individuals.  What does that mean?  You must be concerned, 

and if you're worried about rights, why have you got this 

section in the Bill that takes away their rights?  Just let them 

sue you.  Maybe you were wrong. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

Is it that awful to say, well maybe I made a mistake in the 

contracts.  They have a right to sue.  Give them their day in 

court.  They can take their money.  If the government wins, it 

wins.  If the farmer wins, fair enough.  But you didn't even 

have the courage to do that.  I quote you: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Now here's the new NDP Premier saying that's the merit of the 

PC argument, people's fundamental rights.  And that's what I 

come back to in this Bill, Mr. Premier.  Why did you take away 

their rights in this Bill?  Because a lawyer said you had to do 

it?  Where's your political will?  Where's your sensitivity to 

people who are suffering from a crisis tonight?  Why did you 

take away not only their contractual rights, but their legal rights 

and violated their rights under the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms? 

 

And you admit you're worried about their rights and you did it 

anyway.  And you want me to join you, give you this support.  

We'll go to Ottawa despite this legislation, and we'll get it all 

fixed because McKnight and Mr. Mazankowski wants to give 

Saskatchewan and the NDPers a bunch more money because 

we have violated the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

According to the Law Clerk here, Legislative Counsel, 

according to your own concern that you violated rights, your 

Attorney General and your Minister of Agriculture and 

yourself said, this will likely be settled in the courts. 

 

And I'm supposed to join you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well he says I'm not supposed to.  You asked me to join you 

under these circumstances where you broke the contracts on 

third line of defence, where you broke the contracts for crop 

insurance and then . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well he says 

I asked you to come once. 

 

You failed.  I know you're going to fail because you've got this 

awful attitude about helping people.  Look at this.  . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . My record of helping people?  How 

about the pension plan?  How about the pension plan for 

helping people?  How about crop insurance for helping people?  

How about $125 deductible for helping people versus your 

380?  Okay.  How about the diversification for helping people?  

How about helping people against 22 per cent interest rates?  

How about helping seniors with a heritage program, seniors 

heritage program?  How about helping those?  How about 

building Wascana Rehab?  How about building new hospitals, 

nursing homes, hospitals? 

 

And he says, how about 14, $15 billion.  You campaigned, that 

was it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he comes back to 

that, you campaigned on that and you said you could fix it and 

help people.  Do you know what?  You couldn't perform that 

magic and you've been caught.  You've been caught . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well it's exactly what you said it 

was.  Yes, 14.2 billion, 14.2 billion, yes and Gass says the 

same thing, yes, same thing. 

 

Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No that's what you 

paid for it, you were way over book value.  You made up the 

book value.  You campaigned on, you can do all these things 

and help people and you didn't do a thing.  You couldn't live up 

to it and you're in the . . . I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, isn't it 

interesting that we finally got the Premier into the 

conversation.  Finally.  Finally he's into the conversation. 

 

Look, there's a crisis on tonight.  There was 4 or 5,000 farmers 

that told us that they want 1991 GRIP or equivalent . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you just stand up and defend 

yours.  That's what we're talking about here tonight.  What are 

you going to do for farmers?  What are you going to do for 

rural people and farmers who are going to be out hundreds of 

millions, if not billions, of dollars?  What are you going to do 

about it?  And that's a fact.  It's a crisis worse than last fall, and 

all the rhetoric and all the promises that you've broken have 

made it worse.  You've raised the taxes, cut their services, 

closed rural facilities, ripped up their roads, cancelled the 

pension plan, charged them more for health care, cancelled 

senior citizens heritage program, cancelled the rural gas 

program, cancelled their agricultural programs. And you said 

I'm here to help them.  Well maybe you could start all over 

again.  Mr. Premier, what are you going to do to help rural 

people in this very, very serious crisis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, if there was ever any 

reason to justify why the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have reduced the Progressive Conservative party 

to the rump that it is, and have left it at its popular support in 

single-digit numbers provincially, even at this moment, it is 

that last speech. 

 

Believe me, Mr. Former Premier, I respect you as a person and 

in your office, and I am therefore going to bite my tongue and 

not get into -- notwithstanding my chirping from the desk -- the 

litany of stories about how you helped people and farmers.  I'm 

going to avoid that because I don't think that that helps 

anybody at all; I really don't.  But I do want to simply say in 

passing that that kind of a demonstration, this kind of a speech 

which you've just delivered to the House --  by the way, so well 

practised and rehearsed -- is why you are in this position that 

you're in. 

 

Now you ask, how are we going to help the farmers of 

Saskatchewan?  I am saying, we have to help the farmers of 

Saskatchewan by convincing the federal government that the 

federal government has a responsibility to help them just as 

much as it does for other producers and other Canadians in 

difficulties in other areas.  I'm saying we help the farmers of 

Saskatchewan by convincing the federal government that the 

three lines of defence, the policy that you were part of setting 

out, is still valid, and this is a case for validity.  I say we 

approach the Prime Minister, as we have on July 17 and 

numerous circumstances, indicating that we take that policy 

and approach. 

 

I'm not even asking you to join us in this situation any more.  

I'm not.  You didn't in November, even before the GRIP 

legislation was introduced.  You voted against the third line of 

defence.  You take a different point of view.  You're totally 

entitled to do that.  So I'm not even making that suggestion.  I 

don't think I can count on your support. 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

What I can count on is speeches from you about some sort of a 

box that we are in -- we are in. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, the Bill.  That is it.  That is all 

that you're interested in.  Not that we as the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan are in, not because you negotiated 

the dilemma that you negotiated for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That is beyond your concern, sir. 

 

Well look, all I can tell you is this is our policy.  We're going to 

continue in this regard.  We hope to get everybody's support, 

including yours.  We listened to the farmers in Melfort.  We 

will take their concerns very seriously into consideration, do 

what we can on a federal basis to produce this matter, and we'll 

see how we can get our way out of this crisis. 

 

It's too bad that a man with your experience and obvious ability 

in this area is not prepared to assist for whatever reasons in 

your mind are there.  I think that's a tragedy, sir, which doesn't 

speak to the government problem but to you.  And I can make 

no more comment than that.  Obviously we agree to disagree 

on the substance and the approach of this issue. 

 

(2315) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Premier, you didn't respond.  What 

are you going to do now when people are going to be . . . you're 

going to go to Ottawa.  How do you think that they're going to 

come up with a lot more money for Saskatchewan . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And you told me that.  They're not 

going to do it 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Maybe you know something that I don't. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I know that you've broken the contract, 

and that violates any agreement on third line of defence . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . A better plan?  The Premier says, 

this is a better plan.  Five thousand farmers today said they 

don't want your better plan.  They don't want any part of it.  

They want 1991 GRIP -- 1991 GRIP, that's what they want.  

That's what they want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They did.  

This Bill violates a contract so you have boxed the farmers in. 

They can't get the money from Ottawa, not the money that they 

are entitled to.  That's the problem.  You have caused the 

problem.  You have broken this contract.  You've broken the 

contract. 

 

Did Manitoba break the contract?  No.  Did Alberta break the 

contract?  No.  Did NDP in Ontario break the contract?  No.  Is 

this a national program?  Of course it is.  Only in Saskatchewan 

is it broken.  You're being sued in Saskatchewan.  Only you 

brought in this law change.  There it is.  And then your 

Minister of Agriculture has the audacity to send this out to 

farmers.  Listen to this: you've cut their budget, you've cut their 

programs, and you've cut their health care, and cut their roads, 

and cut your agriculture funding, agriculture development fund 

funding, and he says . . . This is to "Dear (Mr.) Producer" 

from the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan: 

 

 The province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, has 

taken on a dramatically increased role in providing income 

support to farmers. 

 

End of quote.  For Heaven's sakes, he says he's paying more for 

farmers.  He isn't paying more to farmers. He's paying less to 

farmers.  And he writes them and says on your behalf he's 

helping them out.  Well they showed up today not because they 

think they're getting more from you, they're getting less. 

 

So we have this piece of legislation that is historic.  The way 

you rammed it through is historic.  We've got a crisis that is 

worse than last fall.  We've got farmers' rights being taken 

away.  They can't even sue you. 

 

You violate their rights under the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  You've got the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk 

here say that it's wrong, you've got lawyers saying it's wrong, 

you've got yourself admitting that you're worried about rights, 

but you do it anyway.  You say farmers should go to court, but 

you don't tell them how to do that.  You've taken away their 

rights. 

 

And now you say, well if I would only join you and go to 

Ottawa, we can get enough money to go . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh, now he doesn't want me to go to Ottawa.  

Undermining everything.  Fourteen billion dollars wasn't bad 

so far -- 14 billion.  You've got zero.  No money, no money . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well a lot better than without $14 

billion.  Isn't that the fact?  Isn't that a fact?  And he says that's 

why I'm sitting over here. 

 

You promised to do more.  You promised to do more.  He says, 

let it drop.  The farmers don't want it to drop.  The farmers are 

in trouble.  And they expect you in this Legislative Assembly 

to deal with them.  We have no plan, no direction.  You say, 

well if only the Leader of the Opposition would run down to 

Ottawa with us, maybe we could get some co-operation; we'll 

get some money.  He's sorry he mentioned it.  Yes, well I bet.  

Now he doesn't want me down there.  Now he doesn't want me 

down there. 

 

Well then what is your plan?  You're going to go now and 

convince them that they can only give money to Saskatchewan 

and not Alberta and Manitoba.  And they can compensate . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well sure they do.  They got '91 

GRIP plus they're going to get third line of defence.  Oh yes.  

But they get 1991 GRIP plus third line of defence. 

 

In Saskatchewan, if you're lucky to get third line of defence, 

you're not getting '91 GRIP.  He still doesn't understand it.  If 

you get third line of defence across Canada, Saskatchewan is 

still out what you get in Alberta and Manitoba.  If you are 

lucky enough to get it, you're still having a problem in 

Saskatchewan.  You've boxed the people in.  They can't now 

compete with Alberta and Manitoba because of the mistakes 

you've made.  That's the point.  They can't compete. 

 

So you have no plan.  You have no idea what you're going 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

to do.  And on top of that you've reneged on all your promises 

not only to make life easier for them, but to add more and more 

and more and more tax burden onto farmers and rural people -- 

take the rug right out from under them. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, do you have any idea how you can convince a 

federal Finance minister to pony up more money only for 

Saskatchewan when you have broken the contract with the 

federal government?  How is he going to do that and not give 

the same amount of money to Alberta and Manitoba?  Could 

you address that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I did not say that it 

should be only for Saskatchewan.  I said a third line of defence 

program should be a national program.  It's part of the third line 

of defence.  I hope that they include Alberta who are also 

suffering, or Manitoba.  That's what I hope. 

 

And I have the first ministers' agreement.  I want to push it; I 

want to advance it.  We'll do the best we can.  Our officials are 

there.  And we hope that we have even some support from you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I'm sure all the farmers in Saskatchewan 

will appreciate what they've heard from you tonight.  And they 

all will have copies of the Bill that takes away their rights.  

And they know that what they thought they were getting when 

they supported you was not valid and turned out to be hollow, 

absolutely hollow.  And we heard some people say today -- 

maybe it was some of your MLAs, maybe it wasn't -- that well, 

in three years they'll forget.  In three years they're not going to 

forget.  They're going to remember and they're going to 

remember and they're going to remember.  Because it's 

absolutely, absolutely a crisis out there in rural Saskatchewan, 

deeper and worse than you ever thought, compared to last fall. 

 

And what you do once in a while in here is get upset with me 

and say, well that's why you're on this side of the House and 

I'm on that side of the House.  Well I don't think that's enough.  

Well my speeches are enough.  I'll tell you, these people are in 

real trouble and you have the responsibility, a moral 

responsibility to go for it, to back them up and do whatever . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well how am I supposed to stand 

up.  If you had complete freedom in here, non-partisan freedom 

to vote in this legislature, your people wouldn't vote for this 

Bill.  They wouldn't vote for this Bill. 

 

And let me just tell you why -- one more reason why. One 

more reason why.  Farmers signed their GRIP contract.  And 

do you know what they did when they signed it?  They went to 

their banker because it was bankable, and their credit union, 

and they signed contracts to say I'll pay for my farm; I'll rent 

this quarter; I'll buy this swather; and I'll do that.  And tens of 

thousands of them signed new contracts based on GRIP 1991. 

 

And they assumed any normal government would honour the 

fact that they have contracts too.  So you come along and 

retroactively you change it.  You don't give them the time.  

Give them a year; work their way through 

it.  No, you said it's void. 

 

Well the problem, as you can imagine as a lawyer, how do they 

void the contracts they signed on the basis of an agreement 

between the federal government and the provincial 

government?  They had obligations to their credit unions, 

obligations to banks, obligations to machinery dealers, 

obligations to neighbours, obligations to ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan).  And they can't void 

those. 

 

There isn't any court in the country wouldn't say, well that 

seems unfair to me.  Tens of thousands of people signed a 

contract. They always sign contracts with Crop Insurance, 

knowing Crop Insurance didn't break their word. 

 

And you take that to the bank.  And with '91 GRIP, it was 

bankable.  It means they have guaranteed income, they can pay 

some debts, they can make decisions, they can bring in a new 

budget. 

 

And you changed that, and you force it through and then you 

can't be sued.  And that's an agriculture policy?  Well I mean 

we could, I'm sure, go here till 6 o'clock in the morning and for 

the next month.  And I don't know why you let yourself get into 

this.  I don't see any political gain for you.  I don't see any 

economic gain, certainly none for the farmers and rural people. 

It's absolute folly.  It might be just the silliest piece of 

agriculture legislation policy that I've ever seen, maybe ever.  It 

goes exactly the wrong way.  And for the little bit of money 

you're going to save out of this multibillion-dollar corporation 

that has 2, 300 million at a crack in it is beyond me. 

 

So we'll certainly agree to disagree on that, Mr. Premier, 

because you've got -- we have, we have, collectively, this 

Legislative Assembly and the people elected here have -- a 

serious, serious financial crisis in rural Saskatchewan.  It's 

going to affect a lot of people that we didn't think it was going 

to affect. 

 

And I don't know how you're going to address it.  We can talk 

about how you're going to address it, but I cannot conceive 

how the federal government can give one province more than 

others on a per capita basis.  I can't conceive how they would 

do that and not have Finance ministers across the country say, 

me too, me too, me too, me too, particularly when the province 

backs away.  Now that's really difficult to comprehend. 

 

Now I want you, just for the record, so that I can totally 

understand this . . . I obviously believe in putting the two tax 

systems together, federally and provincially.  I believe 

harmonization is efficiencies and your own officials and your 

deputy minister will tell you that.  It saves about 5 million a 

year.  Clearly it's a big benefit for every farmer and every small 

business and every big business in Saskatchewan and I think 

you'd acknowledge that.  They become sales tax free, federally 

and provincially.  You get it all back. 

 

Third, it significantly contributes to you moving towards a 

balanced budget some day in '93, 4, 5, 6 or whatever.  And as 

your own Estimates will point out, it's a new revenue; '92-93 is 

$181 million and then it grows from 



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

there, maybe a couple of hundred million dollars.  It's built in; 

it's strong. 

 

Fourth, it helps international trade dispute problems.  Could 

you just take a minute or two and describe to me why, now 

looking at it, with the support of business community, farming 

communities, chambers of commerce, and others, in an 

internationally competitive world, why harmonization, 

harmonization itself, is not as good as your plan where you are 

taxing obviously all items in the province because you've raised 

the provincial sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent, which is a 14.5 per 

cent increase.  You raised that and you've raised other taxes, 

surtaxes, and you've raised fees, and you've raised gasoline tax, 

and you've raised taxes all across the board, plus health care.  

You call them I don't know whatever they might be, user fees, 

utilization fees, costs of deductibles.  But it's significant 

increases.  And seniors, you removed their heritage program. 

 

Why do you think, from a business and economic point of 

view, why do you think the removal of harmonization is so 

much better than what you're doing by increasing taxes on 

everybody?  Plus, Mr. Premier, if you remember, the utilities -- 

increasing the utilities so high when they've got huge profits 

and huge retained earnings. 

 

Why is it better to take harmonization and not do it, and 

increase power rates by 30 per cent, or telephone rates by 15 

per cent, taxes up, provincial sales tax up, the PST on all items.  

And as you know, the PST that you removed was on certain 

items.  But why is that such a good plan for industrial 

economic development for farmers, for small business, and for 

the paper industry, the potash industry, the coal industry, and 

all of those? 

 

Maybe you could just briefly tell us, from an economic point of 

view, why your plan is better than the harmonization plan. 

 

(2330) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will give this 

explanation one more, yet-again time.  I will do so, however, 

by a small preface.  I tell the Leader of the Opposition he's 

entitled in Estimates to go any direction he wants, of course.  

But I will simply tell him that I'm not interested in debating the 

old battles and your old policies for some form of vindication 

that you might feel about this. 

 

And you ask me bluntly, why do I think it's better.  And I'll tell 

you bluntly why I think it's better.  Because the people of 

Saskatchewan on October 21 said it was better.  They voted for 

our position and not for yours.  And I note that the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan still believes in increasing 

the largest single tax grab in the history of Saskatchewan on 

harmonization -- even this date.  That's an interesting position. 

 

I do not believe that we should put the provincial tax on top of 

the federal GST, and by so doing cover a whole series of 

categories of items which are untaxed, whether it's books, or 

clothing, or restaurant meals.  I do not believe in that.  I believe 

that harms the economy. 

I believe that what we should be doing to stimulate the 

economy is through selective tax rebates and selective tax 

incentives, much like we did with the indirect agents' rebate, 

which prompted the IPSCO expansion as an example.  And to 

work for fair taxation based on concepts of ability to pay -- 

that's what I believe in. 

 

I believe the GST has got to be revised and rechanged and 

renegotiated.  That's why I believe it.  And I'm not alone, sir.  

Not only do I believe that but nine other premiers and perhaps 

even Premier Bourassa of Quebec, also believe it.  

Conservative premiers believe it; NDP premiers believe it; 

Liberal premiers believe it.  Every premier believes it.  I 

believe it.  That's my position. 

 

Now you don't believe that.  That's the big battle of October 

1991 like GRIP of 1991 is.  I understand how you would feel 

this.  I understand how you would feel this given the results of 

October.  But look, that has been decided by the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and for those economic reasons and 

as I say, it's tough because I think that . . . well in my 

judgement, it's up to you whatever you Conservatives do, but to 

hook yourselves into the massive tax increase again after the 

election, is . . . talk about boxing yourself in, that's a box-in. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I appreciate the fact that you say that you 

won on this but the problem we're into and you didn't explain 

here is that then after you promised not to increase taxes, in 

fact decrease them, you increased taxes and you didn't tell 

people that.  September 21, 1991 and I quote, these are Star-

Phoenix and Leader-Post and others: The NDP Premier says he 

would cut (I guess this is before you're premier, September 21), 

Romanow says he would cut, not increase taxes.  The party has 

also promised to abolish the provincial flat tax.  But we're not 

going back to taxing people. 

 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald.  This is the NDP leader: Creating 

more jobs will also stimulate revenue without raising taxes.  

And it goes on in the Star-Phoenix: The NDP leader says he 

would cut, not increase taxes.  We're not going back to taxing 

people -- in Moose Jaw again.  And on and on, and I could give 

you all kinds of quotes. 

 

And all I'm asking is why do you think all these tax increases 

that you've implemented, that still leave you with huge 

problems, are not as good as a harmonized system that 

simplifies it?  One tax, save 5 million a year and industry that 

creates jobs.  And you just said one of your principles . . . when 

we started this tonight you said one of your principles was jobs 

and economic activity.  Clearly, clearly, if farmers and 

businesses and others can be sales tax free in a province like 

Saskatchewan that can compete with Americans, they can 

compete with anybody, the Germans, the French, the Chinese. 

 

And so that's what people are asking.  I'm sure that they ask 

you, they ask others.  Well hey, you pulled it off.  Gosh.  I 

promised that I wouldn't raise taxes and remove the PST.  It 

was on hamburgers; it's on books.  But then you raised taxes on 

everything else.  You go to Canadian Tire, you buy anything, 

taxes are up there.  You go downtown to a department store, 

you buy anything, taxes are up. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

So I just . . . I guess, I mean it's more than just a political 

campaign.  Do you have some studies and some economic 

analysis that would show the people of Saskatchewan that all 

your tax increases are smarter than the harmonized system 

which would remove all the sales tax for farmers and 

businesses and the potash industry and the oil industry and the 

coal industry and the pulp and the paper industry, natural gas 

industry here in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

If you don't have any, well fair enough, we'll leave it to 

politics.  If you have any economic analysis to show that your 

taxation system is better, could you provide us with that?  And 

I would think you'd have some because you were quick to say 

when you changed your mind on harmonization it cost all these 

jobs.  You must have some indication how your system costs 

less in terms of harm or does more good and helps business or 

helps somebody.  And if you've got any of that, would you be 

prepared to table it?  And if you can't table it tonight, would 

you offer to table it, or could I get you to show me some sort of 

economic analysis that your new taxes, utilities and all 

included, are smarter and better for the Saskatchewan economy 

than putting the two systems together? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, what I'm going to do is 

I'm going to ask the page to deliver yet again what exactly we 

promised because . . . I'll get this really distributed, Mr. 

Chairman, and maybe one of these days some of the members 

of the opposition will actually read it and actually believe the 

words, all these promises they allege we make, we didn't make.  

There it is, you can just take it for the record.  I've given the 

answer about our differences and that's the position I take.  I 

don't think I can answer anything better than what I have in this 

regard. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, you and I were in a debate on 

live television and you didn't have the weasel words in there.  

You said look, we're going to reduce the PST, we can balance 

the budget, and we're not going to raise taxes.  And you're on 

the radio, you're on television, you're all over the place saying 

that.  And you said, well there's a $14 billion debt but we can 

cut taxes by $200 million.  So I just asked how if you had any 

economic analysis to show that your plan was any wiser.  I 

mean we can talk about the politics of promising tax cuts and 

then coming and flip-flopping on it.  But I guess you don't have 

anything or you'd offer it. 

 

I want to just switch, Mr. Chairman, to a general question with 

respect to if you have some positive suggestions or some 

indications that you concur with your Minister of Energy that 

you have no philosophical problems with the memorandum of 

understanding between myself and Jake Epp that was signed 

with respect to doing research on energy, all forms of energy, 

and moving AECL to Saskatchewan. 

 

We had quite a lengthy conversation here in Energy Estimates 

and it was a positive one.  It was good.  And can we be as 

encouraged by his comments as I think we can, that it's 

possible to have research in all of these areas and move AECL 

into the province of Saskatchewan?  Is that possible? 

 

And I won't have to read you the memorandum.  I'm sure 

you've looked at it.  He said he didn't have any problems at all 

with the memorandum of understanding and research.  He said 

he had some problems with respect to the SaskPower and 

AECL agreement where they actually moved people here and it 

was a cost shared . . . and I told him I'd be glad to help in terms 

of cost sharing, in terms of ideas and suggestions. 

 

I think their off-shore people, private sector people, maybe 

even the feds and others . . . but if we could move that here, I 

mean obviously it's a big benefit because it's huge demand, 

long-term demand for that kind of knowledge, and all of the 

energy options and all the fuel cycles and how you make 

electricity and how you make energy. 

 

Is there anything that you would like to add that would confirm 

what the Minister of Energy said was accurate?  Was it 

consistent with the cabinet's view and your caucus and your 

government's view that in fact it's not the memorandum that 

you have a problem with.  It's a fine and fair enough 

memorandum.  And you would seriously explore having this as 

the basis for moving that research body and all that means into 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Was your minister in the 

ballpark here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we have always said 

that the so-called umbrella agreement which was negotiated by 

your administration is an agreement that we can respect and we 

think it's a pretty good agreement. And if that's what the 

minister said, I certainly endorse it.  We have also said, 

however, that the specific MOU (memorandum of 

understanding) between the Power Corporation and AECL, for 

all the reasons I've articulated, we cannot go along with.  As 

the member will know, we are discussing with Mr. Epp and 

AECL that specific agreement with a view to seeing if we can 

renegotiate a new one which would be more acceptable to our 

needs and to their needs.  And those negotiations are ongoing 

and so far as I know are ongoing and reasonably hopeful, but 

what they'll produce at the end of the day I don't know. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Just one last question with respect to that.  Is 

there something that you can recall specifically that might have 

been the problem with the SaskPower agreement?  It certainly 

wasn't moving people to Saskatchewan.  That's part of the 

agreement.  AECL moves here.  We get the jobs like FCC 

(Farm Credit Corporation) and Crown Life.  That probably 

couldn't be the problem. 

 

The second one, I would imagine, is you're worried about cost 

sharing this initiative.  In that agreement I believe that it does 

say that if you don't like the plan you get your money back.  If 

it's a cost-sharing problem and some other things, would you be 

prepared to . . . if that's part of it, maybe we could go to work 

on that.  And again I think it's very good diversification 

because it's research jobs, academic jobs.  Certainly the 

university, the president of the university, and others certainly 

at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon know that it is 

important.  And I can tell you, from an international point of 

view it would be an exciting thing to have that kind of interest 

in the province of Saskatchewan and I'm sure you're familiar 

with that.  If it's just putting the package together between 

Power and AECL, maybe we could open that up to more 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

private sector investment and/or other jurisdictions in other 

countries.  And if that's the case, are you open to that? 

 

And as you know, your Minister of Energy said he's open to 

private sector investment, he's open to offshore investment, 

other jurisdictions, whether it's American, Alberta, Manitoba, 

federal government, Japanese, whatever.  We already know we 

have Marubeni-Hitachi in the province of Saskatchewan.  

We're looking for others to come in here.  If you have no 

problem with the memorandum of understanding that Jake Epp 

and I signed, and it's only the agreement between power and 

AECL, and I'm sure you don't mind the jobs moving here, well 

maybe we can narrow it down and pursue it.  And if that's 

where it is, then I think, and I believe as I did when the 

minister was on his feet, we're pretty close to doing this . . . to 

refashioning this with some genuine understanding of how to 

put it together.  Would that be a fair statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we objected to the 

agreement which wasn't negotiated, the MOU on Power 

Corporation and AECL, just for shorthand purposes, 

fundamentally because we felt it was a pre-commitment, an 

implied pre-commitment to the fairly quick construction of the 

CANDU 3.  We came to that conclusion because the agreement 

talked about site location and storage and disposal of nuclear 

waste which we felt was implied that it carried with it the 

implication that there would be a CANDU.  That's a 

cancellation for it.  The cost sharing . . . we'd be prepared to 

reconsider cost sharing.  We get research, design work, all of 

that, if we can get them sold in the world and Saskatchewan 

being the basis for it, perfect, no problems. 

 

The other dimension of this was the level playing-field for 

Saskatchewan's needs.  We wanted the assessment of nuclear 

generation to be weighed as against conservation or wind or 

solar.  If those are options or not, I don't know -- the level 

playing-field and thus the establishment of the institute. 

 

Let's leave the institute aside for the moment.  It's just got up 

and going.  We are back dealing with AECL on the questions 

of whether or not we can come up with a new contract which 

would take care of our concern.  There is no implied 

pre-commitment, or pre-commitment. 

 

If we can do that I think that we could come up with an 

agreement, and I think you're right we're in . . . potential we're 

in the ballpark there.  I must tell you, I don't want to prejudice 

the negotiations, but I've always worried that part of the 

dimension from AECL's point of view was that they had to 

have a CANDU 3 built somewhere in order to sell it to the 

world, the prototype, and that makes sense from their point of 

view. 

 

I just don't think it makes sense from our point of view in 

Saskatchewan given the power demands, the power generation 

which is going to be coming on stream through Shand and 

Rafferty and all of the other things which are projected.  We 

don't think we have to make that decision until '96 or '97 for the 

year 2003 or 2007.  So what we'd like to do is from now until 

that time through the institute examine nuclear generation as 

one of the 

options. 

 

We're not ruling it out, just want to examine it as a level 

playing-field and if in the mean time we can get AECL or as 

much of it as we can on the design, engineering, research, all of 

that, we'd love to have them come here.  I've said this to the 

minister and I've indicated this to anybody that's prepared to 

listen, and I say it publicly here.  But if it means pre-condition, 

pre-commitment as we think the agreement is for the reasons 

I've articulated, we can't.  So we're back at negotiating and 

we're hoping that we can work out something there. 

 

(2345) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay, I'm going to just walk you through this 

just very briefly.  You've said that you don't have a problem 

with the agreement that was signed by Jake Epp and me, 

memorandum of understanding.  That's the umbrella 

agreement.  Okay?  I'll read you the umbrella, just a sentence in 

the umbrella agreement.  It says to work together to evaluate 

the feasibility of establishing a nuclear research and technology 

program in the province of Saskatchewan, including the list of 

things that we look at.  Okay?  He says no problem.  The 

design and manufacture of CANDU 3 nuclear reactors.  Well if 

you're going to do research you're going to have to look at the 

design.  He has no problem with it.  The construction and 

operation of a CANDU 3 nuclear power station in 

Saskatchewan.  The applications of slowpoke energy systems.  

The opportunities for the safe, long-term management of 

nuclear fuel and fuel waste.  Nuclear fuel cycle developments.  

Nuclear applications in medicine and agriculture.  And so on 

and so on. 

 

You have to . . . In other words the memorandum says, we 

research it all.  We look at how the reactors work.  We study 

fuel cycles.  We look at them all.  And we study just the 

feasibility of making CANDU'S and marketing them . . . 

(inaudible) . . . And if they were going to be here, how would 

you operate them? 

 

Now so that the public knows and we know that you 

understand what the memorandum of understanding is and it's 

been read here now a second time, it says to evaluate the 

feasibility of establishing a nuclear research and technology 

program. 

 

So it's feasibility, it's research, but it's research looking at all of 

it.  And it's the same applied to coal, same applied to natural 

gas, same applied to co-generation.  It's all in here.  The same 

words.  Like the same words for coal, the same words for 

energy. 

 

So there's no pre-commitment to coal, there's no 

pre-commitment to wind, there's no pre-commitment to solar, 

and there's no pre-commitment to nuclear.  It's studying it and 

research and have a very high-tech research program. 

 

Now your minister says he didn't have a problem with that. 

And I said . . . I put some words in his mouth and said, well if 

maybe we could just strengthen the line as you said here, but 

we don't have to ever use it if we don't want to.  I understand 

that.  I don't have a problem with that. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

And if that's the problem, then you can . . . we can put those in 

bigger letters.  Say well you know, I'm going to study nuclear . 

. . or say nuclear medicine.  I might not want to use some of the 

technology if I study it.  Well that's fair enough.  I might want 

to not use everything I know about the fuel cycle, but I want to 

study it. 

 

So if that's the case, I'm not going to belabour it.  I think that 

we're very close to having that come to Saskatchewan if you 

and your minister agree with the principles, this general, 

overall agreement of the MOU.  And if that's the case, then I 

think it would be excellent news for you, your administration, 

the people of Saskatoon, the people of Saskatchewan, and for 

western Canada for that matter, and all of Canada, because we 

could really crank up on this.  This is good research.  It's coal, 

gas, oil, all the other options with respect to conservation, and 

nuclear.  And we certainly have uranium and we're known for 

nuclear medicine and nuclear agriculture stuff.  It's positive for 

northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, urban and 

rural. 

 

And I would make the same commitment I made the other 

night to the minister.  I would be glad to help you. I mean, you 

may not want or need my help, but I tell you, you could find 

broad-based support for this agreement and having it 

implemented in the province of Saskatchewan, without 

frightening anybody.  It's research.  It's good for the university; 

good for all kinds of people. 

 

So you may or may not want to comment on that, but I think 

people want to know that you're open-minded to the 

memorandum, as you said you were.  And if the right kinds of 

words can be found, then I think we can get it home. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- All I can say, we're definitely 

open-minded.  The institute, we think, is one of the vehicles in 

which to assess, and we are actively negotiating with AECL.  I 

repeat my words in this regard. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 9 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Executive Council -- Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 

 

Item 1 -- Statutory. 

 

Vote 34 -- Statutory. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 10 

 

Items 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I just would like to 

thank the members of the opposition, the Leader of the 

Opposition, the Leader of the Liberal Party, for giving me the 

tough questions which they did these last seven or eight hours.  

I mean this genuinely.  I think this is what makes the debate in 

the legislature in Saskatchewan so hard, but interesting and 

good.  And I simply want to thank them.  And I particularly 

want to thank the Opposition House Leader, if I may, for 

accommodating me today, given the agenda of last week and 

this coming week.  But I'll close on those words.  Thanks. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the opposition, we'd 

like to extend our thanks and appreciation to the Premier and to 

his officials for joining him today and responding to our 

questions. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:55 p.m. 

 


