




















































Hansard: August 17, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2601 

 August 17, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Education to 

introduce the officials that are here with her. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

introduce Arleen Hynd, the deputy minister of the Department 

of Education. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I have an amendment to make on clause 4.  I'll read 

the amendment and then I'll explain it. 

 

 Amend clause 4(a) of the printed Bill by inserting the number 

"92" between the word "subsection" and the number "(1)" 

where they occur therein. 

 

Madam Minister, as I was looking over your notes and this Bill 

as they changed from the previous Act to this Act, you are 

making an amendment and it says: 

 

 Section 92 is amended: 

 

 (a) by renumbering it as subsection (1); 

 

I talked to the Law Clerk to find out what was happening with 

this situation.  And what had happened, I believe, when your 

people drafted the legislation they forgot to insert the number 

92 in there, as 92(1).  And what's going to happen with this, if 

the Bill passes as you have presented it, is this subsection is 

going to be lost into limbo some place, perhaps never to 

reappear again.  So this, Madam Minister, is a housekeeping 

type of thing to correct a typo error. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll be glad to take 

the proposed amendment under advisement for the time being 

in the absence of having the complete Act here to see how it 

fits in.  And we'll undertake to do that and consider the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe that 

now is the time for consideration of amendments and that we 

either pass them or we do not accept them as we move through 

this Bill.  So we have to make the decision now on this. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with the concurrence 

of the members opposite, could we move on to other sections?  

We are endeavouring to do the research on the whole Act, and 

if we could go on to others and come back to that in a few 

minutes. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's not a problem, Madam Minister, 

because I have a couple more amendments to do with section 4 

anyway, so I can present them now. 

 

This amendment is similar to the one that we went through 

with the Minister of the Environment dealing with . . . when 

changes are made to the regulations dealing with the Act, that 

public hearings should be held to allow people to have input 

into those changes.  Now I realize that if you're going to change 

a phone number within the regulations that there is really no 

need at that point in time to hold a public hearing about it. 

 

But if you're going to make some substantive changes to the 

regulations, that at that point in time the public needs to be able 

to have an ability to have some input into what those changes 

might be.  So this change, this amendment that I'm about to 

propose, is the amendment that the Minister for the 

Environment and I worked out last week.  And it's exactly the 

same wording.  So I'll read the amendment out to you: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (u) as being enacted therein the following: 

 

  (u.01) Except in circumstances that are considered by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to be an 

emergency, the minister shall seek advice and 

provide a reasonable opportunity for the public to 

be heard respecting any prescribed regulation or any 

prescribed amendment to a regulation under this 

Act. 

 

And the term "prescribed" is dealing with those substantive 

regulations that your department would go through your 

regulations and say, this is a minor regulation.  This deals only 

with housekeeping matters such as phone numbers etc.; or (b) 

that this is a substantive regulation and therefore would be 

prescribed as being one of those regulations which, if you were 

about to change it, would go and allow the public to have a 

hearing on it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, at this present time I would like to move that 

amendment.  I have copies here for yourselves and for the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- We have a problem here.  We're 

asking the Clerk to check and make sure that the copy of the 

statute here is up to date, because the wording of the 

amendments as provided by the member opposite, some of the 

sections do not correspond with the copy of the Act that we 

have. 

 

The Chair: -- With the co-operation of the members, the 

committee will just pause to allow the minister to verify with 

the Act. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, could we ask for 

clarification from the member opposite on the second proposed 

amendment where he says: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by adding 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

immediately after clause (u) . . . 

 

Now there are a number, a large number of subsections in 

clause (u).  Do you mean . . . Is it meant to insert the proposed 

amendment at the end of the section?  Or can you give me the 

words preceding where you propose to insert the amendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, from your 

proposed amendments to the Act, you have section 4(u.1) and 

then you go down (i) or (ii).  It would be in there prior to that 

but after section (u.1).  It would be section (u.01). 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, for clarification, is it 

between (u.1)(i) and (u.1)(ii)?  Is that the proposition? 

 

Mr. Chairman, that would be between the words where the end 

of clause (u.1) reads: 

 

 . . . grades or years taught in the school, as the case may be; 

or 

 

And then it goes on to section (u.1)(ii): 

 

 subject to subsection (2) . . . 

 

I know . . . (inaudible) . . . to have it clarified what it is that 

we're talking about. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair, in reading the amendment proposed, 

can see only one place where the amendment would be located.  

And it would be following the paragraph . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not up to the Chair to get involved. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm sorry.  Is the member for Rosthern 

challenging the Chair . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry.  

Is the member for Rosthern challenging the Chair?  I'm asking, 

are you challenging the Chair . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is 

the member for Rosthern challenging the Chair? 

 

(1915) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

The Chair: -- The amendment would be located after the 

paragraph entitled (u) and before the one entitled (u.1). 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if we're to understand 

correctly where this proposed amendment is to be inserted, we 

couldn't agree to the amendment because the amendment refers 

to regulations, prescribed amendments to regulations, and 

within the language of the Act and the . . . changes the 

amendments that we propose.  The proposed amendment is not 

relevant. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, we're dealing 

here in this section with a lot of parts that will eventually be in 

regulations, as to how and when schools will be closed or not 

closed, how grades will be moved or not moved.  So I feel that 

this is indeed a proper place for this type of amendment to be 

placed into the Act.  I don't know where in the Act it deals with 

regulations per se 

because they come after the Act is all written.  So really any 

place within the Act is perhaps a proper place to deal with 

regulations. 

 

And this changes . . . this amendment allows people to have a 

say in what is going to happen when new regulations are 

proposed.  And they're particularly interested in how new 

regulations deal with the closures of their local schools or the 

elimination of grades in those local schools.  So, Madam 

Minister, I would suggest that this is indeed a proper place for 

this type of amendment. 

 

The Minister of Education, excuse me, the Minister of the 

Environment worked on this very proposal with her officials 

and with lawyers from the Justice department to propose this 

regulation, not necessarily for The Education Act but for one of 

her Bills, and they found it acceptable. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I would think that this is the proper place 

to use this kind of a regulation to give people the opportunities 

to have a say on how regulations will be implemented and used 

within the Department of Education, because this is also the 

section in which you're going to give people the opportunities 

to hold meetings and to be heard when it comes time to discuss 

the closures of schools or the elimination of grades within 

those particular schools. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure whether 

it's proper to discuss a proposed amendment that's not moved 

before us in the context of this discussion.  But to go to the Bill 

itself and the amendments that are proposed, the amendments 

that are proposed are to provide exactly that process and to 

provide for public hearings and a public meeting of rate payers 

prior to the decision that the board of education makes. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I submit with respect, that the situation 

with the school, The Education Act, and duly elected school 

boards at the local level is entirely different than the 

governance and the requirements for hearings and the rights of 

electors with respect to the environmental provisions and those 

in The Education Act.  In the education system we already 

provide for elections of local boards of trustees, elections of the 

division boards, and we, through The Education Act, empower 

those boards to do certain things. 

 

The amendment that we have proposed that is before the 

committee at this time is to expand upon the public 

consultation process and provide that that public consultation 

process shall take place through a notice to the electors in the 

school division that is proposed to be affected prior to the 

school board taking a decision, which would allow for and 

open up the public dialogue, the public consultation process, 

and allow for electors in a school division to have knowledge 

of what kind of decisions a duly elected board is contemplating 

prior to their decision being taken. 

 

So I think that the proposals, the amendments that we are 

proposing to The Education Act that are before this committee, 

are adequate in this respect and are in fact designed to improve 

the consultation and input process of electors. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that is indeed 

what this . . . your amendments to The Education Act propose 

to do.  But what they don't do, what your proposals don't do is 

give people the opportunities for any inputs on regulation 

which is made within the bureaucracy.  They're not made on 

the floor of the House here; they're made within the 

bureaucracy after the Bill is enacted. 

 

My amendment would give people the chance to have some 

input onto those regulations.  When you come with a new 

regulation that is a very substantive one and has a major impact 

on the education throughout this province, on how the boards 

operate, then people should have an opportunity to have a say, 

to express an opinion on it, to have some input before that 

regulation is drafted and implemented.  And that's what this 

amendment would provide, is for that kind of an opportunity.  

And it says, Madam Minister: 

 

 . . . provide a reasonable opportunity for the public to be 

heard . . . 

 

So what it allows is for you to come forward with a proposed 

change to the regulations to allow the people to have some 

input.  They can write you letters back or whatever it may be, 

but they have a chance to give you some input on it, and for 

you to hear what their concerns may be as to how that new 

regulation will affect the way the local school boards and the 

division boards operate, and how education is delivered in this 

province. 

 

The Minister for the Environment found that to be a 

worthwhile amendment within her Bill to look how the 

environmental issues, the environmental regulations would be 

handled within this province.  There are many times . . . if you 

read through that environment Bill that we just went through, 

no place in there does it say anything about underground 

gasoline tanks.  It talks of underground tanks, but how the 

regulations are used to affect that operation within the province 

is very important.  It's as important as how the Bill is written. 

 

So this gives people the opportunity to have a say on how the 

regulations will be used to interpret the Bill as it affects 

everyone around the province.  And I believe, Madam 

Minister, that it is a very worthwhile amendment.  The Minister 

of the Environment and I agreed to this amendment in her Bill, 

and I believe it will be a substantial benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan to have that in place.  The amendment was 

changed a couple of times between the two of us to get an 

agreement on it.  But I still believe it's a workable amendment, 

Madam Minister, and I would suggest very strongly that you 

take a serious look at it, consider it, and accept it, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only say that the 

provisions of the legislation that the Department of 

Environment operates under and the provisions of The 

Education Act are entirely different in this respect; in terms of 

public consultation have, I'm afraid, no parallels whatsoever. 

 

As we did in these proposed amendments to The Education 

Act, the ones that are before the committee that we have 

submitted for consideration, we consulted 

widely throughout the education community with 

administrators, school boards, the Teachers' Federation, and all 

of the stakeholders interested in the education system, which is 

administered at the local level by local, duly elected boards -- 

entirely a different situation. 

 

So I'm afraid that we can't agree to accept the amendment.  We 

can't see it as being an improvement to the amendments 

proposed to the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you mention that 

you consult with various groups.  Do you consult with parents 

of the children who attend our educational system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we consult with all of 

the groups in the province.  I assume that the home and school 

association would be one of those, in addition to elected school 

boards, who in many cases are the parents of the children 

affected by the decisions of the board.  And so the answer to 

the question is yes, we do consult widely, including parents and 

including students. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think that there 

are a good many parents and students in this province who feel 

that they are excluded from that process when it comes time to 

make a change to, in particular, regulations.  You may be 

consulting with the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) 

and the school trustees' association, but the parents at home, I 

think, Madam Minister, do not have an opportunity to have a 

direct input into the changes.  If you're just changing a phone 

number it doesn't matter, but if you're making a very 

substantive change to the regulations dealing with education, I 

think it's important that the parents of this province have an 

opportunity to know what that proposed change to the 

regulation is.  And right now I don't believe they have that 

opportunity. 

 

The school teachers' associations may have an opportunity 

through their executive to get to know of it.  The trustees' 

associations through their executive may have the opportunity 

to get to know it, but I don't believe that information is 

disseminated across the province, that the parents do not get 

that proper opportunity to have a say.  And this type of an 

amendment would allow them to have that opportunity, Madam 

Minister. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:27 p.m. until 7:35 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Boyd Toth 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 6 

Nays 

Wiens Whitmore 

Tchorzewski Sonntag 

Lingenfelter Flavel 

Teichrob Scott 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Bradley Kujawa 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

 

Koenker Crofford 

Hamilton Stanger 

Johnson Knezacek 

Trew Jess 

Serby  

-- 21 

The Chair: -- The minister had previously taken notice of an 

amendment proposed by the member from Souris-Cannington.  

Are you ready to deal with that now? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  It says Section 92 

is amended by renumbering it as subsection (1). 

 

The Chair: -- Perhaps just for the information of the 

committee then let me read the amendment and then proceed 

from there if you're prepared to deal with it now. 

 

 Amend Clause 4 (a) of the printed Bill by inserting the 

number "92" between the word "subsection" and the number 

(1) where they occur therein. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it appears that the 

member is correct in pointing that out and we could agree to 

that amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, the last time you were before us, I talked with you 

about the idea of allowing electors within the school districts 

that are affected with school closures or with the elimination of 

grades within that school, to have a direct say in whether or not 

they approve of that type of an event happening -- whether or 

not they approve of their local school being closed or whether 

or not they approve of grades being moved out of their local 

school and being taken some place else. 

 

The amendment that I have to propose here will allow those 

electors to have that say within the school division.  The people 

in the school district affected can therefore have a say and let 

the school district know what their opinion is in a formal 

manner.  They can have a vote and let their opinion be heard 

whether or not they like the idea of having their school closed 

or having their grades reduced in that particular school. 

 

So I'd like to read the proposed amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

 Clause 4(c) of the printed Bill is amended by adding 

immediately after the words "only where" where they occur 

in the general words preceding clause (a) of subsection 92(2) 

as being enacted therein the following words: 

 

 "a vote of the electors residing in that school district approves 

such closure or discontinuance and" 

 

So this would give those electors the right to have a say on 

what is going to happen to their local school, whether it's 

closed or kept open, whether or not grades are moved out of 

those schools.  I think it's incumbent on those people 

when they do make that choice that they be aware that there 

could be a cost associated with it, that they may in turn have to 

bear a greater tax burden to support those classes that remain in 

their school or to support the school that remains open.  I 

would move this amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with regret, we would 

not be able to agree to an amendment of this nature.  Our 

position is that the school boards that are in a position to make 

these decisions, whether they're popular decisions or whether 

they're ones that the board likes to make or not, is duly elected 

by those very same people.  And I think an amendment of this 

sort would be tantamount to having a referendum on every 

single action that a duly elected body would take during its 

term of office. 

 

And I'm afraid that we've done our very best in the 

amendments that we proposed, that are before the committee, 

to enhance the opportunities for consultation by the people that 

would be affected by decisions to close a school.  But having a 

referendum or a vote of the electors on an issue such as the 

combining of grades or measures that duly elected school 

boards feel that they have to take in changing the configuration 

of the education system to benefit the people in the area they 

serve -- we feel that the proposed amendment would go too far 

and we couldn't support it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the section that 

I'm proposing to place this amendment in deals exclusively 

with the closures of school or the discontinuance of one or 

more grades or years taught in the school.  So I believe that 

those parents should have the opportunity to have a voice in it. 

 

The larger school division makes the ultimate choice as to 

whether to close those schools or move those grades, but many 

times what's happening is that the larger communities in those 

schools hold the majority of positions on the school board and 

a small district may or may not even have any representation 

on that board.  While they have the power of the vote once 

every three years, they are such a small group within the entire 

division that their voice is lost in the majority. 

 

The taxpayers in the large division are saying, we don't want to 

pay any more taxes so close all the small schools down.  

Because they feel safe.  They're sitting in the larger community 

and they feel safe that their school is not going to be closed, but 

it's fine to close the school 10 miles down the road because 

there's only 100 students there, or whatever it may be. 

 

But those parents have a right, I believe, Madam Minister, to 

have a say on whether or not their small schools should be 

closed.  But at the same time, when they take that right and use 

it they should also be willing to pay additional amounts, which 

is possible to do under The Education Act.  It's already there 

that the school divisions can levy an additional fee within that 

school district.  The RMs (rural municipality) are set up in a 

manner that they could handle the additional charges.  It would 

simply be a matter of them adding on . . . If it's school division 

A they would add on school division A(1) with a new rate that 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

would be added on to the tax roll for those people affected. 

 

So it's all possible to do, Madam Minister, but it's just a matter 

of the will to do it.  And I believe that it's important that the 

people in the area where those schools are going to be closed, 

where those grades are going to be lost, that they have a direct 

say on what happens for their children and for their 

communities. 

 

(1945) 

 

If at the end of the day keeping that small school open is going 

to harm the educational opportunities of their children then I 

believe, Madam Minister, that the parents will make the choice 

on what's best for those children.  If being better for the 

children means going to a larger school, that's what they'll do.  

If it's better for the children to remain in the smaller schools, 

then that's what they'll do.  But, Madam Minister, the people 

need to have that choice. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that is the exact 

argument that we raised in support of the amendments that are 

before the committee in which we proposed to enhance the 

process for electors in a school district to have an influence on 

the decision making of the board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, your changes 

give the people in the school district the opportunity to stand up 

and voice their opinion to the school board.  But it does not 

give them the power to influence the school board in any 

manner other than debate.  And if the school board has made 

up their mind that they are going to close that school then that's 

the end of it. 

 

The same as in this House, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman.  If 

you've made up your mind you're going to reject the 

amendment then there's nothing that we in the opposition side 

can do with the ultimate end to push it through.  So it's only the 

matter of debate.  And a lot of parents want to have an 

opportunity to have a stronger voice than just to debate the 

issue. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- . . . to the first amendment proposed 

by the member opposite with respect to the renumbering of 92 . 

. . Where is it?  It was the one which said: 

 

 Amend Clause 4(a) of the printed Bill by inserting the 

number "92" between the word "subsection" and the number 

"(1)" where they occur therein. 

 

And we agreed to that. 

 

The Chair: -- The committee has already voted on that and the 

question before the House, is clause 4 as amended agreed? 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the minister and her officials for being present today 

and aiding us in our deliberations on this Bill.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

my deputy minister for being available for the discussion on 

the Bill, and for the members opposite for their co-operation 

and suggestions. 

 

The Chair: -- Thank you for your co-operation with the Chair.  

Thanks to the official. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

The Chair: -- And I will ask the Minister of Finance to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

with me for assistance for the House, deputy minister, John 

Wright, on my right; Len Rog, immediately behind him, who's 

assistant deputy minister; and Jim Nelson, immediately behind 

me.  He's a manager in the E&H (education and health) tax 

field audit. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make a few 

comments regarding the Bill that's presently before the 

Assembly.  I don't think . . . It would be remiss if the 

opposition didn't take a moment to stand up and speak out on 

behalf of the electorate across this province whom, I believe, 

back in October voted for a party that they were led to believe 

all along was going to decrease rather than increase taxes. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, on numerous occasions the present 

Premier was quoted as saying that no new taxes would be 

necessary, that indeed governments should be able to live 

within its means, that $4.5 billion in revenue should be more 

than plenty or more than adequate enough to address the 

current budgetary needs of the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

on many occasions . . . and certainly we can look back to prior 

to October where the Premier said, we believe in living within 

our means; we think $4.5 billion expenditure a year is roughly 

enough, a sound enough sum in which to live within. 

 

The Premier also indicated while in Prince Albert that no new 

tax increases were necessary, that the taxes that were available 

were more than adequate to address the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) and NISA (net income stabilization 

account) programs, and also said very emphatically in the 

Leader-Post of September 6, no new taxes would be imposed.  

Instead the NDP would cut wasteful spending and encourage 

new economic development. 

 

All the time, Mr. Speaker, while we were leading up to and 

during and including the election time, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, 

under the leadership of the current Premier, were telling the 

people of this province that they wouldn't face new taxes.  And 

I can see why they were doing it because the former 

government had indeed come . . . was being very honest and 

very up front with the electorate of 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Saskatchewan, indicating that if we were going to tackle the 

deficit, if the deficit was ever going to be addressed, that you 

would have to set aside . . . or set forward a platform, or lay out 

some guidelines in which you would operate within. 

 

And part of the platform of the former government was to 

harmonize the provincial E&H tax, the tax we're talking about 

today, with the GST (goods and services tax).  Mr. Speaker, 

harmonizing the 7 per cent with the 7 per cent for a total of 14 

per cent, and through harmonization . . . On some occasions 

some of the members opposite said harmonization wasn't such 

a bad way of increasing or bringing in tax revenue, but on more 

than one occasion, Mr. Deputy Chairman, many of the 

members said no, harmonization wasn't the right way to go, we 

didn't need more taxes. 

 

And yet the government is now in this Assembly asking us to 

approve a Bill which gives them the authority to, I guess, 

legalize the increased taxes that have already taken place, 

increasing the tax revenue from 7 per cent to 8 per cent, and if 

you went in percentage factors that would be in the 

neighbourhood of 14 per cent; 14 per cent increase in taxation 

when the . . . What's the rate of inflation today?  Less than 4, 

less than 3 per cent?  Certainly . . . 1 per cent?  A considerable 

increase, Mr. Speaker.  And as a recent caller and a recent letter 

that came across my desk . . . really bemoaning the fact of the 

increases that men and women have been facing across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When we look back at the harmonization we remember the 

questions, the queries being placed by the opposition about the 

studies.  Had we taken the time, did the government of the day 

take the time, to do some intensive studies and surveys to see 

what kind of impression an increase or harmonizing the E&H 

with the GST would have upon the province of Saskatchewan.  

And we're wondering today if indeed the government today did 

indeed take the time to assess the impact the increase in the 

sales tax would have upon people across Saskatchewan, what 

kind of an impact would it have on jobs? 

 

One of the arguments that the opposition presented regarding 

the harmonization was by harmonizing would eliminate a 

number of jobs across the province.  Well if you look at it very 

closely, Mr. Deputy Chairman, harmonization certainly would 

have been a major asset to a lot of the small businesses across 

this province which would have enabled many of them to 

continue to operate and indeed possibly open the door for an 

additional . . . or at least maintain the jobs that were already 

there.  And many of these small businesses operate out in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another platform the government had was the fact that not only 

would they not increase taxes but they would find a way of 

eliminating waste and mismanagement and they would open 

the books.  And we all know of the fiasco that took place with 

Mr. Gass, and when everything was said and done he indicated, 

not only through his report but through the news media, that 

indeed the books were open if anyone really wanted to take the 

time and to sit down and review the books. 

And I know that the department, I'm sure, was more than 

willing and capable of informing people of a lot of the 

decisions that were being made.  And certainly when you talk 

about increasing taxes and talk about taxation, it's something 

that not . . . there isn't a person around that agrees to.  However, 

people are more than concerned about the deficit and are 

talking about the fact that we should be addressing that fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government laid out a plan, went to 

the electorate with a plan.  The NDP (New Democratic Party) 

went to the electorate with a plan as well.  They said, no new 

taxes.  But what have we done?  Today we've already passed 

three Bills or given third reading to three Bills that have 

increased taxes: personal income tax, surtax, corporate tax.  

And now we have the Bill before us. 

 

Can the minister indicate what kind of intensive studies were 

taken to establish what impact the increase in the provincial 

sales tax would have upon individuals, businesses, and 

unemployment in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

for the question.  It's the question that's been asked many times 

during the nine and a half hours or almost ten hours that this 

Bill has been debated, but I'll answer it one more time for the 

benefit of the member.  And as I said, it's been 10 hours that 

this Bill has been before the House which is . . . I think it's an 

important Bill; it deserves a decent amount of time, so I will 

not repeat the debate.  We've had a good debate on it. 

 

But I simply want to say that we recognize that the financial 

situation of the province is not very good.  We have to be 

responsible and address that situation.  We have to have 

prudent management of the finances of this province.  We have 

to learn to live within our means. 

 

This Bill provides $65 million of additional revenue.  If it 

wasn't for the additional revenue, we would have had to find 

some other places in which we would reduce the costs.  Now I 

don't know where else the government could have, in this 

budget, found more cost reductions.  We reduced the costs by 

$344 million.  That is clearly an option, and it's something we 

have to look at the next time around in the next budget. 

 

The member's question asks about what is the impact.  Well I 

want to say what I have said all along.  We did not analyse it 

on the basis of each individual tax Bill.  We had to look at the 

total totality of the provincial situation in the economy.  We 

concluded that a continuing growth of the debt of this province, 

at the rate that it was growing over the last several years, is not 

sustainable, that either we had to get that debt under control or 

the very future of this province was going to be in jeopardy. 

 

(2000) 

 

We can't continue to build on this mountain of debt where we 

are paying $760 million of interest this year.  I don't think 

anybody in this House will disagree with that.  We might 

disagree on how we tackle it but nobody will disagree that we 

have to get that under control. 

 

And so this is one means in which, in some small way, 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

we're getting it under control.  And the bottom line is that if we 

don't get it under control, even though it meant making the hard 

decision of having some tax increases, it would have not done 

anybody any favours because the impact on the economy, the 

future financial liability of this province, the very future of our 

children, would have been just too great. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  And yes, the 

minister is correct; we have spent some time on it.  And I've 

been looking through the Votes and Proceedings and just found 

the page and was just going to review it a bit, so I wasn't into a 

lot of the added debate.  But yes, we can disagree as to how 

we're going to address the deficit.  And there's no doubt that 

one of the ways to address the deficit is to . . . I'm not exactly 

sure how you do it.  Because I don't think anyone wants to 

admit that we all have a place or a responsibility for that deficit 

and we're all going to have to learn to shoulder and carry the 

load. 

 

But I think the biggest factor out there, Mr. Minister, is the fact 

that prior to the election, as I had indicated earlier, the belief 

was left in many people's minds that there wouldn't be an 

increase in taxes.  And what has taken place, Mr. Minister, is 

certainly . . . The avenue the government has taken by 

increasing taxes and affecting everybody is totally opposite to 

what was being said.  And certainly the former government 

was . . . The vote that took place on October 21 was an 

indication that people were fed up with taxes, and indeed 

elected for your government because you promised them no 

new taxes.  And it will be interesting to see where we are two 

or three years from now, or even as the minister has indicated, 

whether or not the required revenue will be forthcoming to 

address the deficit that is before us. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Minister, yes it is a difference in 

philosophy, a difference in views, but I still indicate and tell 

you that the electorate certainly believe that the increases in 

taxes weren't necessary.  And I find that it was inappropriate to 

not be totally up front with the electorate prior to October 21. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:03 p.m. until 8:13 p.m. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to on the following recorded division 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Anguish Scott 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Bradley Crofford 

Koenker Stanger 

Hamilton Knezacek 

Johnson Kluz 

Trew Jess 

-- 24 

 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton 

Boyd Toth 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 6 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I would just like to take this moment to thank the 

officials -- even though they're not with us just right now, they 

may be back in a minute -- for their involvement in the debate 

tonight. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to repeal The Heritage Fund 

(Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the Winding-up of the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the Farm Purchase 

Program Fund and to enact Consequential Amendments to 

Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from the repeal of 

that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Finance to have his 

officials return to the committee. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could have leave to introduce 

guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: -- I'd like to introduce a couple from the Ryerson 

area who happen to have stopped in to observe the proceedings 

tonight, Ken and Muriel Moore, and I'd like to ask everyone to 

join with me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 51 (continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 

The Chair: -- Does the Minister of Finance have officials here 

he's not already introduced? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to 

introduce the comptroller, Mr. Gerry Kraus, seated behind me. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill 51 is a Bill to 

wrap up the greatest hoax of the century, Mr. Chairman.  Of 

course I'm referring to the Heritage Fund, the pretend security 

fund the NDP of the '70s claimed to start. 
 

They even gave it a name, Mr. Chairman, they called it the 

Heritage Fund.  They said at the time they were going to start 

to build up funds for the future or future of our children, Mr. 

Chairman.  They said they were going to set money aside for a 

rainy day.  Well this side of the House remembers what it was 

like under those guys in the '70s, 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

that for the most part, they are for the most part an urban only, 

and it showed in their policies when they were in government 

and it shows in their actions today. 

 

What the NDP did in the '70s, Mr. Chairman, should never be 

forgotten and it should never be allowed to happen again.  Due 

to the members opposite . . . Do the members opposite 

remember the '70s in Saskatchewan?  I sure do.  Potash prices 

were soaring; uranium prices were high; oil was bringing a 

pretty fair dollar; and grain was the best price any of us had 

ever seen or received.  Life was good.  For the 960,000 people 

who called Saskatchewan home, life was good indeed. 

 

The NDP raked in buckets of money from the resource sector.  

They took it in hand over fist and did what the NDP does best, 

Mr. Chairman.  They stuffed it into their pockets of 

government and redistributed wealth to the bureaucracy. 

 

They said they were setting loads of money aside in case 

Saskatchewan was ever hit with hard times again.  They 

claimed they were securing money in case of drought or if oil 

prices fell or if potash dropped or other disasters.  In fact the 

premier at the time, Mr. Blakeney, suggested that if all 

resources dropped at the same time -- potash, uranium, and oil 

-- it would be a disaster for this province.  He said it would 

never happen simultaneously; those three things would never 

go down simultaneously.  And yet we saw in the '80s that's 

exactly what happened.  And that's exactly what happened; the 

result of it was a disaster just as he suggested it would be. 

 

They said they were building a Heritage Fund in case the land 

of milk and honey came to an end.  But the government was 

the only thing that got fat in the '70s.  Saskatchewan Heritage 

Fund certainly didn't.  While our neighbours to the West 

stashed billions of dollars away in the '70s, the NDP in 

Saskatchewan bought potash mines -- holes in the ground.  

That's where the money went. 

 

While Alberta was putting money away for tougher times, the 

Saskatchewan NDP were spending every penny in sight.  The 

difference between Alberta and Saskatchewan and the way 

they were run in the '70s is still showing up today. 

 

The Alberta government's heritage trust fund, a real heritage 

trust fund, last year brought in $1.3 billion -- $1.3 billion in 

interest alone -- to the government.  We are talking about 11.1 

per cent of their last year's budget, Mr. Chairman, from the 

interest gained on the heritage trust fund.  Talk about a smart 

government, setting aside billions of dollars for when the 

bottom fell out on oil prices and things weren't great any more.  

I think congratulations should be in order to the Alberta 

government. 

 

And in comparison, what did the NDP government of the late 

'70s leave our province with?  Zero, absolutely nothing. 

 

The former premier of the day, Allan Blakeney, said that the 

fundamental reason for the NDP's defeat in the early '80s was 

because the public believed the government was well-to-do, 

had lots of money.  There was in fact not 

lots of money.  Well there is not lots of money in 

Saskatchewan after an NDP government. 

 

It is hard to believe that in Saskatchewan, in the midst of high 

oil prices, high grain prices, high uranium and potash prices, 

that during a period of incredible wealth in the middle of huge 

boom, rural communities across the province were dying.  The 

NDP government was getting fat and telling farmers to keep 

pumping out the grain.  And oh, aren't things wonderful, isn't 

life good?  Don't mind about the 22 per cent interest rates; just 

do your best to pay your mortgage.  And the poorer cousin 

rural communities were mourning the death of another small 

town and yet another village. 

 

Life was not as good as it seemed.  Finally, Mr. Speaker, the 

'70s came to a close.  The NDP had 10 incredibly prosperous 

years to build this province, to make it strong, to make it grow.  

And do you know what?  After 10 years of wealth and good 

times in Saskatchewan, the NDP had not been able to convince 

one single, solitary person to come to Saskatchewan and make 

them stay.  The population was still stuck at 960,000 people.  

And rural Saskatchewan was sinking in a sea of high interest 

rates and low prices for their products. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the NDP had wealth beyond which we can 

scarcely imagine today, and the province was exactly where it 

started population-wise and further behind where it counts -- in 

rural Saskatchewan.  The NDP wasted the single greatest 

opportunity this province has ever witnessed.  They blew their 

chance and they blew away any hope of quick recovery for the 

people of this province.  You really have to wonder where all 

the money went.  Billions and billions of dollars gone into 

things like potash mines. 

 

Well everyone knows where the money went.  Let's see.  The 

NDP spent a billion dollars -- a billion dollars -- on potash 

mines alone.  Then there were the oil fields.  The NDP thought 

in the '70s, and they still think today, that if there was any 

money to be made it was going to be the government that made 

it. 

 

I guess all we have to do is look at the NDP's own Anderson 

report to get the facts.  Any way you look at it, Mr. Chairman, 

the idea of an existence of an NDP Heritage Fund is a parody 

itself and it is nothing more than political smoke and mirrors. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Clauses 1 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 19 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister like to thank his officials. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Indeed, Mr. Chairman, before we 

conclude, I would like to thank the officials on behalf of the 

Assembly for their assistance in the Bills that we've done here 

this evening. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you also to the 

officials for their time this evening. 

 

(2030) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- By leave of the Assembly, I move 

that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- By leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to repeal The Heritage Fund 

(Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the Winding-up of the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the Farm Purchase 

Program Fund and to enact Consequential Amendments to 

Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from the repeal of 

that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:35 p.m. until 8:45 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 

Wiens Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Anguish Scott 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Stanger 

 

Koenker Knezacek 

Hamilton Kluz 

Johnson Jess 

Trew  

-- 25 

Nays 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 7 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- Before we continue, would the minister 

introduce the officials who are with her this evening? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my left 

is the deputy minister of the Department of Education, Arleen 

Hynd; behind me is Rita Archer from the department finance 

division; and Robin Johnson. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, when the department funds school boards, do they 

have any requirements within the Act or the regulations as to 

how a student can transfer from one division to another, how 

the division decides whether or not that student has met the 

proper requirements for, say, if he's going from grade 10 in one 

division to grade 11 at the next . . . at the end of the school 

year?  Is there any requirements that the Department of 

Education puts on the school boards as far as how that transfer 

takes place? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response that would 

be . . . Transfers of that type would be handled at the local level 

through arrangements between the respective school divisions.  

The department would not have a role in that kind of a transfer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So you're saying that the department has 

absolutely no play in the transfers between one division and 

another?  Surely there must be some sort of requirements that a 

student who transfers from one division to another has to have 

met certain requirements to be able to go into a grade in 

another division.  There must be some sort of requirements in 

there. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is in the 

third-party funding.  The funds that the Department of 

Education would transfer to each respective board of education 

is based in part upon pupil enrolment or student count.  And so 

the student would be recognized by the division in which he is 

properly a resident unless some other arrangements are made 

between school divisions, in which case . . . there may be, for 

an example, one where a student would transfer to a different 

division 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

with the consent of both school boards, and tuition would be 

paid on his behalf by the transferring school division.  And that 

would be recognized as a cost in the funding formula and so 

forth. 

 

So there aren't a lot of examples of that kind of transfer, but 

there certainly are some.  And as I say, the only role that the 

Department of Education would have would be to recognize 

either the student's place of residence or to recognize in the 

funding, in one way or another, the fact that this respective 

school divisions have agreed upon some arrangement for 

transfer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if a student and his or 

her parents move from one school division to another school 

division, what is the circumstances under the case where a 

student may be moving, say, from grade 10 in school division 

A to grade 11 in school division B, and the whole family has 

moved into that school division?  Is there any requirements for 

school division B to accept that child into grade 11? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the receiving 

school division or the school division into which the family 

moves, if I understand the question correctly, would then 

become the school division where the student would be 

recognized for grant purposes and in the normal circumstances 

-- I'm not sure if there's a specific case -- that may be some 

kind of an aberration of what's usual, but certainly it's the 

responsibility of the school division to accommodate the 

educational needs of those people who are resident within their 

division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if that student had 

successfully completed grade 10 in the one school division, 

was moving over into a second school division, would that 

school division have to accept that student into grade 11 then? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 

is referring to a specific case that I'm not aware of, and we have 

provincial standards with respect to grades, and if a student in 

one school division has achieved a grade standard, in the 

normal course of events that grade standard would be 

recognized and accepted by the school division to which the 

student transfers. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Does that school division have to accept 

that that student has completed, if they completed it, through a 

regular school division accredited school?  Do they have to 

accept the fact that that student has progressed from grade 10 to 

grade 11? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, based upon the 

provincial standards and upon the required number of credits 

for admission into courses of further study within the high 

school curriculum, it would be expected that the receiving 

school division, or the school division to which the family has 

transferred, would accept that student and provide for their 

educational needs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What if that school division though, 

Madam Minister, said they were not prepared to accept that 

student as a grade 11 but would accept them as a repeat in 

grade 10? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it seems apparent that 

the member opposite is referring to a specific case on which I 

don't have the particulars.  If he wishes to bring more detailed 

information to our attention, we're certainly prepared to look at 

an individual case. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I have an individual case in mind, 

Madam Minister, but the questions are generic to any student 

that may be transferring. 

 

If a student is to attend a private school, a private accredited 

school, would a transfer from a private accredited school to a 

school division be accomplished in the same manner as a 

transfer from one school division to another? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, the 

eligibility to qualify for further courses of study are based upon 

provincial standards.  So that the student who is wanting to 

advance to a further grade would have to demonstrate that they 

have achieved and met those standards in their previous course 

of study. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if they have completed 

their course of study in either a school division or an accredited 

private school, when they transfer into another school division 

they may be asked to provide some support or demonstrate that 

they have indeed reached that level of capability? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what . . . 

exactly what the member opposite is referring to in terms of 

burden of proof.  But a transcript, if the student was a student 

in Saskatchewan that had met provincial standards, there 

should be . . . there would be a transcript of the marks and the 

subjects in the previous courses of study that would provide the 

proof, if you like, or the documentation as to what level the 

student had reached and so to what level he was qualified to 

advance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And a private accredited school would 

meet the same requirements as a school in a regular division, 

would they? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if it's accredited and if 

it meets . . . The key is, no matter what kind of a school it is or 

where it is in the province, if it meets the required provincial 

standards, then the transfer could be effected. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What 

happens then in the case of a student that has met those 

requirements who transfers into another school division and is 

refused advancement?  What recourse do the parents have to 

try and alleviate that problem? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's really 

impossible for me to hypothesize on this.  As I've said, if the 

provincial standards are met, the transfer should be effected.  If 

there is a specific case, which seems apparent, then I would 

appreciate being made aware of the particulars of that 

individual case so that we might deal with it and communicate 

with the school boards in order to determine what problem 

there seems to be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

This was a case that I had brought to your attention a while 

back from the Milestone area and I'll give you the name in 

private if you wish, later, but in this particular case there seems 

to be a problem where the parents are not being given the 

hearing they feel they deserve before the board and the 

superintendent.  And my question is, what recourse would they 

have if they cannot gain satisfaction with the local division 

board and the local superintendent of education?  Can they 

appeal to the minister for some assistance? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't say for certain 

whether there is a specific section of the Act that provides for 

such an appeal.  I think not.  But I certainly would undertake, if 

we were apprised of the particulars of the case, to communicate 

with the school boards and to be of assistance in any way that 

we could. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I will 

indeed pass on the information I have to you. 

 

On another issue of school repairs, you stated on June 8 in a 

news release that there were 64 schools that would receive 

some emergency repairs.  And later you stated that this was 

only a partial list.  Now have any other schools been added to 

this list, or are you contemplating any other schools being 

added to this list? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in the last session that 

we had at Estimates, we tabled a supplementary list to the 

original one that would contain the response to the member's 

question. 

 

If I may at this time, we also have available to table a volume 

of information, if we could have the assistance of a page -- a 

large page, strong page.  This is travel accounts and individual 

expenses that were requested.  We also have a breakdown of 

the expenditures since November 1 of each agency, board, and 

commission as requested.  And that is appended hereto. 

 

Then we have some information that was requested on August 

6 dealing with student loans, secondment complements, and 

aboriginal industrial training.  At least one of these questions, I 

think, was asked by the independent member.  But I'm sure the 

member opposite would be interested in this information as 

well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 

your information that you're supplying us. 

 

I don't have my copy of the report you gave me on the 

additional schools that would receive funding for renovations.  

I wonder if . . . is it a substantial list? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could have the 

assistance of a page to provide a copy; this one is dated August 

6.  It's a list of projects that were added since June 8.  There are 

only seven entries; it's one page.  I'd be very happy to provide 

it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Are you contemplating any other 

additions to that list at the present time, Madam Minister? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is still a 

contingency, even with the additions in the latest list. The 

amount that was originally budgeted, there still is a balance 

available there because there is always the possibility that 

emergency situations will arise, and we have to be ready to 

correct deficiencies that will affect the working conditions or 

the occupational health and safety of students or staff. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what do you classify 

as an emergency when it comes time to receive funding for 

renovations?  How do you determine what's an emergency and 

what would be normal renovations in the course of the 

operation of the school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, normally such things 

as the atmosphere . . . well anything that related to the 

occupational health and safety of the occupants of the building.  

The most recent cases that have received some publicity is 

because of air quality, that kind of situation.  There are . . . 

where enrolment pressures require additional class-room space 

and transportation to another school is not a feasible 

alternative; that there are major structural modifications to 

prevent deterioration, for instance if a roof started to leak and it 

was doing damage to the insulation and to the structure and so 

forth, where it would be more expedient to do repairs than to 

allow the deterioration to continue.  And basically that would 

describe the type of projects that would be considered of an 

emergent nature. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, when repairs are done 

to a school, does the department provide them 100 per cent 

funding or what's the formula involved when you provide 

funding for renovations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it varies slightly form 

one project to another.  There is a requirement when the subject 

of the project is roof repairs that the local division pay the first 

$5,000.  In most other projects the sharing is split, province and 

local is approximately 80 and 20 in most circumstances. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I notice 

on the list you gave me for the last seven or eight repairs, Fort 

Qu'Appelle on here, $22,000 for accessibility.  Is that providing 

ramps for wheelchairs or what was the project involved in? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the accessibility 

at Fort Qu'Appelle would address the requirements of 

handicapped students to access the school. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, when you're looking at 

designing a school or renovating a school, are there different 

requirements for elementary schools versus high schools?  

What I'm thinking of is, like your door handles.  If you have 

kindergarten and grade 1 children going in the door, they need 

doors at a different height, handles at a different height, and 

doors that'll open under a different pressure than say, 

somebody in high school.  Now are there different 

requirements? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer to 

that question would be that yes there are different 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

standards depending on the age of the child and the people who 

have to have access and use the building.  And these are 

recognized by the architects that the boards engage to do the 

design work.  And costs and those variations are recognized by 

the department when they arrange for the funding with the 

local board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if a school doesn't 

meet those standards, what happens if say you have a school 

designed for high school and you're going to put elementary 

school students in it, kindergarten, etc., and they don't meet the 

proper standards.  What happens in that case? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware whether 

the member opposite is referring to a specific case or whether 

it's hypothetical.  But it would depend again on whether the 

structural changes or the modifications were of an emergent 

nature or on whether it was related to occupational health and 

safety and those considerations that make funding for 

modifications a priority. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would 

emergency situation include the fact that a school board does 

not wish to fund a school any longer and wishes to transfer 

students to another school?  Would that be classified as 

emergency situation when it comes time to look at renovations 

to a school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if there is a specific 

case, it would make it so much easier if the member would 

refer to it.  I'm not sure that the location of a doorknob, for 

instance, could be a reason or a justification to close or not to 

close a school. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it may seem like 

a joking matter to you, but to the parents in this particular 

community it's not a joking matter.  And it's not just the 

location of a doorknob in a school, but it's also a matter of the 

access that those younger children will have to this particular 

school.  It's a matter of whether or not the space in that school 

meets the current Education department's standards, whether 

there is enough space for each student, whether or not those 

students have the proper amount of library space available or 

the proper amount of lab space available. 

 

So that's why I'm asking these questions, Madam Minister, is to 

try and determine whether or not there are some standards in 

place in the department that each school has to meet, and what 

happens under the circumstances where a particular school may 

not meet those standards. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, indeed there are 

standards for construction and for renovations.  And the 

facilities branch of the Department of Education works closely 

with the school board requesting funding or priorization of 

their proposed project, and with the architects and the designers 

of the renovations with the objective being of meeting those 

standards and having the facilities that teachers and students 

use be suitable. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the circumstance 

I'm referring to is the closing of the 

elementary school at Quill Lake and the moving of the students 

over to the high school in the same community.  And the 

parents in that area have contacted me, and their impression is 

-- and this is the local school board has contacted me -- is that 

the high school does not meet the educational standards 

required for the education of their children, that the lab space is 

not there.  The library space is not there, that the blackboards 

are too high for the kindergarten-grade 1 students because the 

school is designed as a high school, not as an elementary 

school. 

 

They're concerned that the far end of the playground does not . 

. . the playground is not fenced.  At the far end of the 

playground, there's a creek running through the property, that 

that poses a danger to those young students that will be 

attending this school.  While it may be a danger also to the high 

school students, the high school students are much more aware 

of the circumstances that they should not be in that 

neighbourhood.  But the younger students, the kindergarten and 

grade 1, are at risk when that area is not fenced off. 

 

The community . . . The school division has said renovations to 

this school are only going to cost us 7 or $8,000.  Well you 

have renovations here, Madam Minister, of $78,363 that you 

have approved for the Quill Lake High School.  Even at 20 per 

cent, that amounts to almost $15,000.  So, Madam Minister, are 

you aware of the circumstances in that school?  Have you been 

contacted by those parents, and what are you doing about the 

situation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I am aware of an 

indication that there are some changes proposed for the schools 

in that division in the area of Quill Lake.  But specifically what 

they are, I haven't been apprised of . . . or what the details 

might be.  And I will certainly undertake to discuss it with the 

facilities branch of the department and be of assistance 

wherever possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, what was the 

reasons given for the renovations to the Quill Lake High 

School? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the indication on the 

print-out here that we have that's provided by the facilities 

planning branch says that the allocation that was requested is to 

accommodate K to 12 access -- which would address some of 

the points that the member has raised -- and washrooms and 

resource facilities. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, when you receive this 

kind of an application, what process do you go through to 

judge whether or not that is actually an emergency situation?  

The people that have contacted me, the local school boards, say 

that the elementary school is in very good shape in their 

community, that there is no emergency need to close that 

school down.  Now what do you go through as a department to 

determine whether or not that is actually an emergency 

situation to renovate the Quill Lake High School into a K to 12 

facility? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the local board of 

education would look at the situation, the enrolments 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

 throughout the district, the transportation costs, and a number 

of other factors.  They would make their decision based on that 

without any interference from the department. 

 

Then if a renovation or a capital cost was involved in making 

the changes that they deemed to be appropriate to provide the 

educational service that they're mandated to do, they would 

contact the facilities branch of the department who would assist 

them in making Estimates in evaluation.  And they would 

evaluate the application from the school division for funding on 

the basis of some of the points we mentioned earlier.  Whether 

there's health and safety of students endangered by the 

condition, whether there are program requirements that can't be 

met in one location, whether there's additional class-room 

space required and transportation is not feasible.  I'm not saying 

not impossible, but where it costs more.  Those are some of the 

factors that the board would take into consideration. 

 

If the project met the criteria for emergency funding that the 

facilities branch of the department has set out, then it would be 

approved and the work would go ahead. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if a school 

division was to approach the department, the facilities group, 

and say we can't afford to keep school X open, but if we can 

move all our children over to school Y, will you pay for the 

renovations to it?  Is that a feasible question to ask?  It seems to 

me that's what's happening in this case. 

 

The school board doesn't wish to fund the elementary school in 

Quill Lakes.  From what I'm told, the school is in very good 

shape.  It's not that old of a school.  Transportation can't be a 

factor because they're in the same community.  They're about 

two blocks apart.  So transportation is irrelevant in this 

particular case. 

 

Programs, those same number of students are going to be 

attending the schools, whether it be in the elementary school or 

a combined elementary and high school situation, so the 

teaching staff is really not going to change that much.  You 

may be able to supply some better phys ed classes because 

you'll have a teacher in the high school that could supply it also 

to the elementary school, but I see very little possible change in 

the program. 

 

The only real change that I can perceive in this particular case 

is the funding situation.  The school board does not have to 

fund two plants.  In this particular case they can get by with 

funding one plant.  And the parents in this particular school 

don't wish that to happen.  So if a school board comes in to you 

and says, we want to close school A because it's costing us too 

much money to operate even though it's in good shape, will 

you fund renovations to another school for that purpose? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't . . . the 

department does not interfere in the decision-making process of 

the local board. 

 

It could very well be, and I don't like to comment on this 

particular case because I'm not aware of the details of the case 

in every single school in the province, but if there were two 

schools in a town and they both had a very low 

enrolment, it might make sense to combine them. 

 

And there would be other factors, not only that factor, there 

would be other factors that would come into the decision as to 

whether a project like that qualified for emergency funding.  

But I certainly can't comment on the details of each and every 

decision made by a school board in the province, but I have 

said, over and over in this House, that we do not interfere with 

and we do try to facilitate the decision-making power of the 

local school boards. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if every school 

division in this province was to submit an application for either 

renovations or construction of a new school, based on the 

criteria you've outlined as an emergency situation, that they 

have some sort of a problem with health or safety, programs or 

class-room space, or as indeed as would appear in this 

particular case, funding, how do you determine which ones 

you're going to fund?  You're funding 64 the first time and 

another 7 this time.  There are other applications in there that 

are seeking assistance for construction.  So how do you 

determine which ones are going to get it? 

 

Is it the ones that happen to be in the NDP constituencies? 

Because that's what happened in this particular case.  So how 

do you determine?  This one looks to me and to the people in 

those communities that it's strictly based on funding.  So how 

do you determine what's an emergency situation and what isn't? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with 55 out of 66 

constituencies in the province represented by the NDP, it's a 

little difficult to miss funding some schools in some of those 

ridings.  But I think you will find if you look at the whole list 

that geographically the projects are fairly evenly spread and 

there are quite a number of them that are in ridings not 

represented by the NDP. 

 

But apart from that, we would have to priorize those 

applications based on the funding that is available, the funding 

that has been budgeted.  And certainly whatever the reason, if 

there was to be a surge of applications for improvements, 

renovations, or anything other than new capital, we couldn't 

approve them all.  We've stated what our budget is.  We've said 

that we've approved a number but left a contingency for 

emergencies that may occur that we're not aware of yet, and we 

couldn't fund them all.  We'd have to do it with priority as 

funds become available. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, on the list that 

you provided me tonight, I see four schools with roof repairs.  

To me that is a legitimate emergency renovation need.  You 

can't have water running all over the place and ruining the 

books, making the students wet, and destroying all your 

equipment that's in the school.  That's a legitimate expense as 

far as I'm concerned, an emergency situation. 

 

Accessibility, if you have students coming into your school 

where you haven't had handicapped children coming in, they 

need access, fine.  Fund it. 

 

Now you're putting relocatable schools into Bruno.  That 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

one I kind of wonder about, and I know nothing about the 

circumstances in Bruno.  Now were they closing schools 

down?  Why do they need new class-room space in Bruno?  Is 

all of a sudden the population of Bruno increased such that they 

need students. . . not students, that they need class-rooms?  Or 

are they closing schools down and bringing the students in 

from some other location? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the repairs at Bruno, 

the relocatables at Bruno are as a result of some very extensive 

consultations with the local people in that area, with the local 

school division with some capital problems and structural 

problems and changes in enrolment.  The people in the area 

have worked it out to the satisfaction of -- from the letters I get 

-- a great many people. 

 

It's a different decision than was proposed in the first place, 

which shows that when there is consultation and when the 

division board listens, that the right solutions will emerge.  And 

I want to point out that there are, this year in '92-93, less 

schools being closed this fall than there have been for the last 

six years, considerably less. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't disagree 

with you that there may be less schools closing because those 

changes have already taken place in a lot of communities, but 

there are changes still to occur with a number of schools' 

populations dropping. 

 

Now back on the Quill Lake one again.  That renovation 

bothers me.  I didn't expect to see this.  I knew that there was 

applications in, or potentially applications in there, but from all 

information I had on that circumstance was that it was simply a 

matter of funding, from the school board not wishing to fund 

the elementary school any longer.  And I find it surprising that 

that would be classified as an emergency situation. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I hope that you will indeed look into this 

-- I had contacted you on this one before -- and look and see 

just exactly what is happening at the Quill Lake School as to 

the real reasons why this additional funding is necessary for 

renovations, whether they do actually have an emergency 

situation there or if it's simply a budgetary matter with the 

school division. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll certainly be glad to 

investigate and make inquiries as to the exact breakdown.  I've 

attempted to give the rough breakdown, being such things as 

washrooms, which could very well be a plumbing emergent 

repair.  But I will attempt to discover in more detail and I'd be 

happy to advise the hon. member of what I learn. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We'll go 

on to another topic now.  I have here a memorandum dated 

May 28, where the deputy minister has created a small 

committee to review the mandate, role, and objectives and 

organizational structure of the department.  For what purpose, 

what real purpose, has this committee been struck for, and what 

is it costing the department? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would assume 

that the member opposite is referring to . . . it would be an 

internal document, really, with respect to the internal 

reorganization of the department.  And we've spoken earlier 

about some positions that were . . . some secondments that 

were terminated and some positions that were terminated that 

were redundant or that were vacant and were not to be filled; 

and as an example, I guess, to school boards and those third 

parties that we fund, in ways to reorganize our administration 

so that as many scarce dollars as possible get down to the 

student and the class-room level.  We're asking school boards 

to look closely at their administration so we think it behoves us 

to look very carefully at ours and to make sure that the 

organization within the department and all the roles that people 

are playing in their jobs are as well co-ordinated as possible in 

order to be as efficient as possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Were any additional people hired for this 

particular committee or were they drawn from the department? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there was one part-time 

facilitator who was engaged to lead the exercise and to work 

with the employees in the department in looking at a 

reorganized structure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, who was this part-time 

person that was hired? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the consultant who was 

hired is a very well-known expert in this field.  It's Alan Scharf, 

formerly with the Saskatchewan Research Council and now 

operating a company called Creative Leap. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the bottom paragraph 

on this memorandum states: the committee will be meeting on 

a weekly basis throughout June and July and will submit 

recommendations to the deputy minister in August.  Has that 

indeed happened? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, there have 

been several meetings but certainly not on a regular weekly 

basis.  I did receive a report.  I think perhaps . . . probably 

bi-weekly would be more accurate, maybe about seven or eight 

meetings maximum since that memo.  And their work is not yet 

concluded and I have not yet received a report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you be prepared 

to table the report of the committee when it is finally submitted 

to you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that a 

document like that would be an internal working document.  It 

would be developed by the committee within the department, 

the employees there that are working with it.  It would be a 

recommendation to me in terms of the reorganization.  Without 

having seen it, I don't know whether I would follow the 

recommendations or not.  So I wouldn't agree to table it until 

those deliberations are complete and some recommended 

course of action has been decided upon. 

 

(2130) 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are funding that study and I believe they should 

have access to that information when it is appropriate.  And 

once the study has been completed, once you've had a chance 

to review it, I believe that is probably the appropriate time to 

submit that for public viewing. 

 

Because some of the questions on this memorandum that 

they're asking is: What is the role that the department should 

carry out?  What is the broader purpose of that role?  And then 

they go on with some sample statements.  Some of these 

samples may be too broad and others may be too narrow:  

monitor the delivery of education in Saskatchewan; provide 

funding and resources to educational organizations; give 

support and direction to educational organization; ensure that 

educational standards meet requirements; ensure that all 

citizens have needed education; educate citizens for work life; 

upgrade career opportunities and skills for Saskatchewan 

citizens; prepare citizens for work life. 

 

That covers a pretty broad area, Madam Minister, and I think 

the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know what kind of 

recommendations your internal committees are providing you 

with.  Will you please table that report when it is available? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will certainly make 

public any actions that are taken as a result of a report that 

comes out of this exercise because it will affect people in the 

department.  It will affect what their role is in their job, which 

we are in the process of redefining. 

 

It would appear that what the member is reading from is a list 

of suggestions and, if you like, probably from a brainstorming 

session that occurred within the department about looking at 

their role.  I think there is . . . Certainly it's healthy from time to 

time within a department or a company, and certainly 

businesses, particularly in times of change as we're living 

through right now, do this on a regular basis, is to do strategic 

planning, to redefine the roles of the people in their 

organization.  And that's what the department is doing. 

 

We certainly aren't going to table internal working documents 

that are not going to result in recommendations or action.  

When there is action to be taken, when there are going to be 

changes in job descriptions that will affect people, certainly 

that will be public knowledge. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, then earlier 

today we went through an exercise with An Act to amend The 

Education Act, and where I asked for public hearings to be held 

or the opportunity for the public to be heard, dealing with 

changes to regulations. 

 

Here you have a committee in place which will be 

recommending changes with either regulations or the internal 

operations of the department or perhaps even recommendations 

to the Act, and I believe that the people . . . You talk about a 

corporation going through this exercise once in a while, and 

that is good and healthy.  But at the end of the day, the 

shareholders have the right to have a look at it.  The chairman 

of the board has a right to 

look at it.  The board of directors looks at it.  And ultimately 

the shareholders have that right if they wish to exercise it.  And 

I believe the shareholders in this case -- the taxpayers -- should 

have the opportunity to have a look at this study when it's 

completed. 

 

Madam Minister, on a different topic, there are general 

proficiency awards available within the department.  Will these 

be carried out at a comparable level to last year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 

is referring to the grade 12 high school graduation, the answer 

to the question is yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, while your colleagues 

were in opposition, they continuously criticized the previous 

administration for cutting bursary programs.  They promised to 

reintroduce those programs when they became government.  Is 

there any provisions in this budget to reintroduce the bursary 

programs within the student loan system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in this budget there are 

no changes projected in the amounts available for student aid.  

We have kept it at a level amount equal to last year.  What we 

are doing is looking at the student aid policy to try and 

determine what is the fairest way to allocate those dollars to 

allow students the maximum accessibility to post-secondary 

education in this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I may be wrong, but 

did you not make an announcement last fall or early winter 

about a bursary program for medical students that would 

remain within the province?  Will that be taking place? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there may be some 

confusion here.  This may be a bursary program within the 

universities.  The University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon and 

the University of Regina have some programs within their own 

funding where bursaries are supplied, but there is not that kind 

of a specific bursary program within the provincial student aid 

department at the moment and has not been for some time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So if this kind of a program for medical 

students was in place, it would be funded strictly from the 

university level, through the funds that they would have 

available for their operation of the entire university? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, before I could answer 

the question I would have to have more specific information.  I 

wouldn't know the exact nature of the bursary that the hon. 

member refers to, whether it's one that would be within the 

university, whether it's one that would originate with another 

organization or perhaps in the Department of Health.  I just 

know that it does not originate within the student aid 

department. 

 

If he could give me more information on the nature of the 

bursary or the name of it, I might be able to discover an answer 

for him. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm going 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

from memory on this -- that there was an announcement made 

some time in the winter months that the government was 

looking at bursaries for medical students that took their 

education in Saskatchewan, to keep them in Saskatchewan.  

Perhaps it's a forgivable student loan, that if they remain in the 

province of Saskatchewan for X number of years the student 

loan will be written off.  Is there indeed something along that 

line? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't speak for other 

departments but there isn't such a program within the 

Department of Education or the student aid department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are you considering 

such a program? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've said, we are 

studying the whole area of student aid, looking closely at how 

other provinces dispense aid to post-secondary students.  We're 

looking at the VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for disabled 

persons program), all the different programs.  We're 

co-operating with the Department of Social Services in an 

analysis of the training on the job funds and other access to 

education in training programs that are in other departments 

besides Education.  We want to take a comprehensive look at 

the kind of aid that is available to students for post-secondary 

education, so that we can try to make sure that we honour 

priorities to allow students with ability to not be prevented 

from having the training that they could qualify for. 

 

But it's difficult in this atmosphere of just not having more 

dollars, and growing numbers of students attempting to access 

post-secondary education.  We have a committee that is 

reviewing the current practice, that's reviewing the practices of 

other provinces, and trying to come up with some 

recommendations for improvements to our programs in time 

for the next budgeting cycle.  But at the moment, it's still in a 

state where we're consulting with outside groups, with student 

unions, with the universities.  And we haven't made a 

determination as yet.  But we hope to make some changes in 

time for the upcoming budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you stated that you're 

studying the whole question of student loans, that you have a 

committee looking at.  Last year the federal government 

introduced a 3 per cent administration fee on federal student 

loans.  The previous government opposed that and was 

working to have it removed.  What is your government doing 

about the 3 per cent federal student loan administration fee? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we also opposed the 3 

per cent administration fee at the time it was levied by the 

federal government.  It's collected up front which makes it in a 

sense even more than 3 per cent.  We have asked the federal 

government to review not only the administration charge, the 3 

per cent, but also all the elements of their program, like the 

weekly loan limits, all the elements of which haven't been 

changed since 1984, although there's been inflation and 

different conditions that students have to contend with. 

We attended, along with other provincial representatives, a 

meeting with the Secretary of State, Robert DeCotret, in March 

of this year, where all the provinces presented papers with 

requests for those changes, including the elimination of the 3 

per cent administration fee.  And the response that we got from 

the federal government at that time was that they were 

considering dropping the 3 per cent administration fee and 

making the other changes, but not likely until the fall of 1993. 

 

So we have repeated our request for them to eliminate it for 

this year, but so far we haven't got a positive response. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad to hear 

that you're continuing on with the previous government's 

opposition to that fee. 

 

Madam Minister, I'm also glad to hear that you're looking at the 

student loan program and with overhauling the whole process, 

because when I look around this province, we have a large 

number of middle class citizens who are having problems 

getting their children into the universities, of funding their 

children into the universities.  They have an asset base such 

that once you take that into consideration they're very low on 

the scale when it comes time to have loans available to their 

students.  And I believe there needs to be some re-evaluation 

dealing with that, because while they may have an asset base 

that would indicate that they could afford to pay for that 

student, they don't have the cash flow.  In a lot of cases, 

farmers may have a larger asset base but, Madam Minister, as 

I'm sure you're aware, cash flow is almost negligible on a lot of 

farms. 

 

So the whole process needs to be updated and changed to take 

into account . . . to add some flexibility into it.  So I'm glad to 

hear that the minister has said they are reviewing it, but when 

can we expect to see the results of those reviews so that there 

are some changes available for those students? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have reviewed the 

provincial program on a management and systems, the 

operational basis, and we've made a number of important, 

positive changes to the application process, cutting the length 

of the application in half, simplifying it.  And with respect to 

the criteria that's considered in the approving of a loan, I'd just 

like to correct the impression that the hon. member has left 

with respect to the asset base of a student or the student's 

parents being considered.  The asset base is not considered.  

Income is the criteria. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, there seems to 

be a lot of people out there that are still having problems 

getting their student loans. 

 

I'd like to change topics again, Madam Minister.  This year it 

has been directed by your government that $7 million be cut 

from the operating funds, and it seems to indicate a general 

lack of commitment to the K to 12 level in this province.  More 

than 70 school boards have found it necessary to raise their mill 

rates in order to maintain the minimum level of service to their 

communities.  Not only have these mill rates been forced up, 

but school boards are faced with having to cut staff and reduce 

programs 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

and services.  And part of that we are seeing, we discussed 

earlier tonight I believe, in the situation with the Quill Lake 

School.  The cut in funding is perhaps part of the reason why 

that elementary school is being closed in that community. 

 

In the months leading up to the last election, Madam Minister, 

you and your colleagues went around the province assuring 

everyone that would listen that education would be a major 

priority to you, to your government.  You claimed that the 

previous government was underfunding education and you 

promised more money.  Now that you have attained power, 

Madam Minister, what has your response been to educators, to 

parents, and to the students who believed what you said when 

you said you would do more? 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you and the NDP have responded by 

turning your back on the promises that you made in October.  

You promised more money for education.  The member from 

Saskatoon Broadway was always criticizing the previous 

government for not spending enough money -- 3 per cent 

increase in a year was not enough.  She was criticizing the 

previous government for not providing enough money for the 

universities, that tuition fees were going up. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, tuition fees are going up 13 per cent 

this year, and that was what your members were fighting 

against previously, and you have not followed through on what 

was promised at that time.  You cut operating funding to the 

schools by more than $7 million, and 83 school divisions have 

been forced to swallow decreases; 47 school divisions had their 

funding cut by more than 5 per cent. 

 

(2145) 

 

Madam Minister, what advice do you give to those school 

boards who find themselves underfunded and betrayed by your 

government's lack of financial commitment to the education of 

this province? 

 

Now I'd like to read to you a comment from a school board and 

this is from the North Battleford catholic schools:  although 

grant increases will not keep up with such additional costs as 

higher unemployment insurance, higher Canada pension 

contributions, and tax increases -- gasoline, provincial sales tax 

-- we have not reduced programs.  We have however 

eliminated planned initiatives in Cree language and in 

resource-based learning and have generally reduced allowances 

for supplies, materials, maintenance and repairs, equipment, 

and professional development.  We have allowed no provisions 

for teacher salary increases. 

 

What do you say to these school boards?  What are you going 

to say to them when the teachers come to them and ask for a 

salary increase? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to 

point out that in previous years, if we refer to school closures 

for instance, in 1988-89, 20 schools closed with an increase in 

funding; in '89-90, an increase in funding, 13 closed. The 

following year with a further increase in funding, 18 closed.  In 

1991-92, the last year of the 

previous administration, 20 schools were closed with an 

increase in funding. 

 

This year with a decrease in funding of -- depending which 

sector it is -- between 1 and 3 per cent in the form of 

third-party grants, only 7 schools in the province are scheduled 

to not reopen this fall. 

 

What we say to the education community and what we said at 

the time that we announced the level of third-party funding at a 

reduction of 1 per cent for the universities, 2 per cent for K to 

12, 1 per cent for regional colleges and 3 per cent for SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Technology), was 

we asked them to consider the fiscal reality that the province 

finds itself in. 

 

We asked them as citizens of this province and as people who 

are committed to the very best educational opportunities, for 

the children, the students of this province, possible, to join with 

us in looking at their administrations, in looking at their 

operations, trying to contribute to the recovery of this province 

from $15 billion deficit we found ourselves with, to work 

together to effect a recovery and at the same time not to impair 

the opportunities of our young people to an education. 

 

And they have done that in most cases in a very admirable way 

by making reductions in administration, by trying not to affect 

programs.  They have done, in most cases, an excellent job.  

There have been some exceptions.  There have been some 

instances where people have said, institutions have said, oh 

well, we need to have more; it's the government's fault.  Very 

rare.  Most people and most institutions have joined with us 

and want to make a recovery from the abysmal fiscal situation 

that we face without damaging the opportunity of access to 

education, quality education in the province. 

 

And for that, all the professionals, the professional leadership, 

the teachers, the administrators, the trustees, the boards of 

governors in this province, are to be commended for the 

excellent job that they're doing in coping with the fiscal 

realities of the day. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the 

administrators and school boards are doing an admirable job in 

handling the situation as they find it today because you have 

indeed cut them back significantly.  You talked about school 

closures taking place over the last numbers of years.  The 

student populations were dropping.  The schools were closed.  

And the government provided assistance in allowing other 

schools to be renovated. 

 

But what's happening now is, in most cases you're not 

providing that assistance when the school divisions and those 

parents involved wish to have their students moved, wish to 

have their students moved into a larger school. 
 

I know of a number of circumstances across this province 

where the student populations in a particular school are getting 

down to the area where, under previous circumstances, those 

schools would be closed and moved into another school, but 

that's not happening today because the department is not 

providing any funding to provide renovations to those other 

schools.  So they have to keep them open and they have to 

swallow it 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

themselves -- the added costs. 

 

I have a letter here from the Prince Albert School Division:  the 

factors that affected the difficult decision arrived at, at this 

budget, include the overall decrease of 2 per cent in educational 

funding from the province; legislated employee cost-increases 

including salary increments; uncontrolled cost increases 

included natural gas, power, telephone, and automotive fuel -- 

a total of $36,000. 

 

And here's what they did to look after the situation for 

themselves.  They set the 1992 mill rate at 76 mills, an increase 

from 73 mills in 1991, a 3 per cent mill increase; utilized 

$166,100 from their accumulated surplus and reserves; reduced 

existing teacher staff by five. 

 

So they've cut their teaching staff.  I'm sure the STA loves it . . 

. or the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), Sorry . . . 

studying and reviewing information regarding the educational 

and financial implications of operating Wesmor School.  Well 

they study them, and they're going to close the Wesmor School, 

Madam Minister.  So what do you say to the parents of the 

Wesmor School when your funding, your tax increases, is one 

of the factors included in the closure of their school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've said before, I'm 

not prepared to comment on the details of the decisions that 

individual school divisions make.  I can only reiterate that in 

most cases across the province that school boards and 

educational institutions, educational professionals, are going 

with us in attempting to deal with the fiscal realities that we all 

find ourselves in, in the most constructive way possible so as 

not to affect the quality of education, and in most cases -- there 

are some exceptions -- in most cases without passing on the 

reduction to the local taxpayer. 

 

This was one of the comments we made at the time that we 

announced the third-party funding.  We said to the education 

partners, please be more creative than looking for the perceived 

shortfall in your funding from the local tax base because it's all 

the same taxpayer.  You know, please try to be more creative.  

And in many, many cases, they have.  And most of them have 

done their best. 

 

And we realize that it's not even-handed across the province 

because there are some school divisions that did have reserves 

that found it easier to cope this year than others.  Next year, as 

we've already announced, there'll be a further decrease.  That 

will make it more difficult.  But we know that the leaders in 

education are doing their best to cope, and we're confident that 

they will continue to do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I've received 

quite a number of letters from different school divisions across 

this province.  And in most cases they were not able to follow 

your advice, and they did indeed raise the mill rate for those 

different schools. 

 

Madam Minister, 83 school boards are carrying on the 

provision of education in their divisions this year in the face of 

major funding decreases by your government.  Your 

government saw fit to cut back on education at a 

time when quality education has never before been more 

important to the future of our province.  The roles of schools 

and teachers is expanding and the need for adequate funding 

has never been so great.  The cost of providing education is 

increasing, if for no other reason than because of inflationary 

pressures, and yet the NDP responds by cutting funding back. 

 

Let me quote something from a colleague of yours . . . that 

yours said during a debate in this House on educational 

funding.  And I quote: 

 

 . . . I have to ask, Mr. Minister: don't you have any kind of 

strength in that cabinet?  Don't you have any kind of capacity 

to convince your cabinet colleagues that educational funding 

in this province is important -- that education in this province 

is important? 

 

Madam Minister, those were the comments of your colleague, 

the member from Saskatoon Broadway, during Estimates on 

April 30, 1990.  And it's ironic that she was responding to the 

previous government's Education budget that called for a $12 

million increase in operating grants to school divisions. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister, the same question that the 

member from Broadway asked the previous Education 

minister.  Don't you have the capacity to convince your cabinet 

colleagues that education funding is important, in the light of 

the fact that your NDP government has actually cut school 

division operating funds by more than seven and a half million 

dollars in this budget? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the remarks that the 

hon. member has quoted from April 1990 with respect to the 

funding of education in this province preceded two huge 

operating deficits in the years of '89-90 and '90-91, including 

900 million in the last fiscal year alone.  So events that have 

taken place that have affected the actions of the government, 

the administration prior to October 21, 1991, have certainly 

precipitated some changes in the viewpoint -- not in the 

importance of education but certainly in our ability to respond.  

And as I say, the education community is working with us in 

attempting to recover from the situation we find ourselves in. 

 

The other point I would make is that it is true that not only is 

the distribution or the demographics of the population in the 

province changing but there has been a net loss in pupils.  At 

the same time, although some teacher positions have been lost, 

the teacher-pupil ratio is as high as it has been for the last five 

years.  So I think that the quality of education and the access of 

students has not been affected in spite of the events which have 

taken place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find it very 

interesting that once you and your NDP colleagues came to 

power that the previous commitments and promises you made 

became unimportant to you all of a sudden.  Isn't it interesting 

that in opposition your NDP colleagues railed about how 

difficult it would be for school divisions to meet their 

responsibilities with the kind of funding increases being 

provided to them by the previous government.  Madam 

Minister, again I would like to quote 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

for the member from Saskatoon Broadway in one of her 

contributions to the debate in this House.  And I quote: 

 

 I ask you . . . Mr. Minister, what are you going to do . . . with 

the fact that your government only increased educational 

spending, on average, by 3 per cent?  (Only increased it by 3 

per cent.)  As a result of that, Mr. Minister, school divisions 

across this province have had to increase school taxes 

dramatically . . . what you've simply done . . . is shifted 

responsibility for educational funding . . . onto the backs of 

the local taxpayers . . . 

 

You talked about huge deficits in the years of '89 and '90.  

Well, Madam Minister, there was indeed a huge deficit there, 

and that was in the budget.  The member from Saskatoon 

Broadway knew it was there, and yet she was still demanding 

that more monies be supplied to education even though they 

did get a 3 per cent increase. 

 

During the '90-91 educational budget, the funding for operating 

funds for school divisions was increased by $12 million.  At 

least you owe the member from Saskatoon Broadway and the 

taxpayers, the parents and the students of the 83 school 

divisions in this province who have had their funding cut -- in 

some cases by as much as 25 per cent or more -- an explanation 

as why you chose to ignore the promises you and your NDP 

colleagues made about funding education. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, there are a 

couple of observations I would like to make.  One is with 

respect to the amount that provincial mill rates went up, and in 

same way the 2 per cent reduction in K to 12 funding through 

third-party grants wasn't even across the piece.  Some school 

divisions received an increase.  Some received a decrease, 

more or less than 2 per cent.  At the same time the increase or 

decrease in the mill rate works the same way, but the average 

across the province, the average mill rate increase was one and 

a half. 

 

I'd also like to point out that in comparisons with previous 

years where, while there may have been some percentage 

increases in third-party grants, the previous administration, of 

which the colleagues of the hon. member opposite were 

responsible, they failed to fund the teachers' pension plan in an 

appropriate way.  When you take that into account, in 1992 the 

provincial share of funding to education is fifty-four and a half 

per cent of the total cost as compared to 52.8 in their last year 

of administration and 53.6 the previous year.  So the provincial 

share of the cost of education has gone up substantially. 

 

Also the total budget, including the contribution to pension 

plans this year, the total budget for the Department of 

Education is $920 million.  If you compare the . . . take the 

$760 million that is allowed for in the budget to pay interest 

only on the provincial debt and the approximately $218 million 

shortfall in federal transfer payments, you have $978 million 

which is . . . those two factors alone -- the interest and the 

federal off-loading -- would more than fund the total education 

system in this province for a whole year.  That's very 

significant when servicing the debt is our third biggest 

department, Mr. Chairman. 

(2200) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find it 

interesting you would bring up teachers' pensions because I 

believe that plan came into place about 1930-something and it 

was underfunded right from that time.  Your government has 

been in power for a good portion of that time, the Liberals were 

in power for a portion of that time, and the Conservatives were 

in power for the last nine and a half years of that.  And that 

underfunding has gone on right from the very beginning of the 

teachers' pension plan.  It has never been funded properly.  And 

we started to increase the funding necessary to bring that up to 

where it should have been. 

 

It's also interesting that you talk about the interest necessary to 

support the deficit.  Well, Madam Minister, interest was part of 

the budget in 1989 and 1990 and 1991 that was necessary to 

support the budget.  And yet your member from Saskatoon 

Broadway didn't seem to be worried too much about that.  She 

was demanding at that time more and more funding for 

education.  She wasn't concerned about paying the interest or 

whether or not the deficit would be increased by her demands.  

It didn't matter to your party.  You were simply demanding that 

more and more funding be spent. 

 

Madam Minister, all your political rhetoric doesn't change the 

fact that you have cut funding to education -- you cut it.  We 

didn't cut it.  Previous governments didn't cut it.  You cut it. 

 

So I just don't understand how you explain that to yourself, to 

your own colleagues back there -- that they were demanding in 

previous years that funding be increased.  How do you explain 

it to the member from Saskatoon Broadway, but sorry member 

from Saskatoon Broadway, we can't increase funding to 

education, we can't support the universities any longer.  The 

Minister of Finance won't give me enough money. 

 

Don't you stand up in cabinet and say something about this, 

that these people need the funding?  We need more educational 

opportunities in this province.  And you're denying people that 

opportunity. 

 

You haven't increased the funding to student loans and yet you 

turn around and say there's more people applying for them.  So 

how do you justify that?  How do you juggle those two things?  

Some place in there you're going to have to supply some more 

money, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess all I can say is 

that we will provide as much money within the fiscal realities 

as we can towards education and training which is a very high 

priority for our government.  But I think that to say that there 

has to be more, there's only so much.  You can't keep 

borrowing.  I think my preaching on that subject would not fall 

on very fertile ground, because the members opposite just 

didn't seem to understand the meaning of that.  And to keep on 

saying that you need to have more when you know it has to 

come from somewhere else, is the same kind of voodoo 

economics that got us into the problems that we are. 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

And the problems that the education community is working 

together to overcome -- and it will be hard and it's too bad that 

the education community and perhaps some opportunities in 

this province will have to suffer as a result of the deficit that we 

face  -- but I think the education community deserves credit for 

working with us, for joining with us and supporting us in 

effecting a recovery together from the gruesome situation that 

we were left with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you can criticize 

the previous government for the monies that they spent but 

they spent that money to help people. 

 

Madam Minister, I would like you to enlist . . . I want to enlist 

some more help from your colleague, the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, but quoting her in a debate over the 

previous government's 1 per cent increase to operating grants to 

one particular school division in the 1990-91 budget.  And this 

is what she said, Madam Minister, and I quote: 

 

 Well, Mr. Minister, how do you even pay the heating bill 

when your grant . . . goes up by less than 1 per cent?  How do 

you even pay your teacher salaries, Mr. Minister . . . How do 

you pay the potential . . . teacher wage increase that's going 

to occur once your government negotiates the teachers' salary 

increase . . . How do you pay for transportation costs, library 

costs, the costs associated with implementing core curriculum 

with an increase of less than 1 per cent . . . 

 

Well, Madam Minister, that's a good question.  And I think it's 

a legitimate concern, Madam Minister.  And I wonder how you 

explain it to the member from Saskatoon Broadway and to the 

people of Saskatchewan, how school divisions are supposed to 

pay for all those things with no increase in funding at all.  And 

while you're at it, Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 

explain to the member from Saskatoon Broadway and to the 

rest of us how those 83 school divisions whose funding was cut 

by your NDP government are going to be able to continue to 

provide education in their communities. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only say that I'm 

sure that I know that the member for Saskatoon Broadway was 

a very effective critic for the ministry of Education during the 

previous administration.  But I know that those institutions of 

which he speaks . . . and in fact her viewpoint has to be 

tempered by today, in 1992, the fiscal realities that we face and 

the budgetary deficit that we were left with that we were trying 

to cope with and so is the education community. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, she mentions 

wage increases for teachers.  What can we expect to happen in 

the next year because all these schools are going to have to deal 

with potential wage increases and a good number of them have 

not included any wage increases in their budget because they 

simply don't have the capabilities to do so?  So what kind of an 

answer are you going to supply to those school divisions that 

are concerned about wage increases for teachers? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 

knows, the teachers have been without a contract since the end 

of 1991.  They did have some bargaining sessions at the 

beginning of the year, and I believe the bargaining will resume 

again shortly.  But I certainly wouldn't comment, while the 

collective bargaining process is under way, upon the likelihood 

of the outcome. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, there's an awful 

lot of school divisions around this province that have budgeted 

on the concept that perhaps because you have cut funding to 

them, that you will not be providing a salary increase to 

teachers.  I believe in the end, when it comes to negotiations, 

the government holds the major hand at the bargaining table, 

that they represent 50-plus-1 per cent of the Saskatchewan 

Trustees Association bargaining unit with school teachers.  So 

in the end, it's the government who ultimately decides how 

much money is going to be spent on teachers' salaries. 

 

So, Madam Minister, when the time comes, it's your 

department that's going to have the ultimate say on whether or 

not teachers get a salary increase.  So if that is indeed the case, 

how are these school divisions going to fund that increase if 

you do indeed give the teachers a salary increase?  And there 

are some teachers out there, Madam Minister, who deserve a 

salary increase. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the bargaining team is 

made up of four representatives from the School Trustees 

Association and five on the management side.  But it will be 

the . . . It'll certainly be, not the Department of Education, but 

the Department of Finance that would be involved in the 

mandate.  But I wouldn't comment.  We believe in the 

collective bargaining process.  We believe in letting it take its 

course and work.  And beyond that I wouldn't comment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, collective bargaining 

is indeed a very important aspect of our society.  But there's 

also a concern as to how, if you agree at the end of the day to 

provide an increase to teachers, how it's going to get paid.  

Either you're going to have to come up with some more money 

or at the end of the day there's going to be less teachers.  

Because the money, as you say, doesn't grow on trees.  And the 

school boards can't run deficits like the provincial government 

can. 

 

So somebody's going to have to pay for it at the end.  And 

perhaps you can convince the Associate Minister of Finance to 

give you some additional funds . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I know he's a very difficult man to deal with at times. 

 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association has lobbied the government of Saskatchewan for a 

number of years for a 60/40 operation funding split between 

the province and the provincial boards.  That would be, 60 per 

cent of the operating funds required by school divisions each 

year would be provided by the province, and the remaining 40 

per cent would come from the local tax base. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the total amount of operating 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

grant the province will provide to school divisions as a 

percentage of overall operating funds that school boards will 

receive this year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I repeat the figures 

from earlier.  In the 1992 year, 54.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, prior to last fall's 

election, the NDP critic for Education, the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, demanded many times during Estimates 

that . . . during question periods and in debates on various Bills 

that the government accept the position of the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and moved to a 

60/40 operating funding split for division schools. 

 

In meetings with stakeholders, including the SSTA and the 

STF, the member from Saskatoon Broadway pledged the 

support of the NDP to the 60/40 proposal.  Now in government 

the NDP have performed yet another about face and have not 

provided that support. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Broadway said her government 

would do better.  Yet as this year's budget so graphically 

shows, the NDP neither is able to meet their commitment nor 

do they have any intention of doing so. 

 

Would the minister now come clean with the SSTA and other 

stakeholders in education and admit that the NDP have no 

intention of increasing government share of school division 

funding to 60 per cent, and that, even worse, the NDP intends 

to off-load their funding obligations onto the shoulders of local 

taxpayers. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in 1991 under the 

previous administration, the provincial share was 52.8 of 

educational costs.  In this budget, the provincial share is 54.5, 

which is already an increase of 1.7 per cent.  That's a fairly 

good step in these fiscal times towards the goal of 60/40 that 

we support as a goal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, some of the 

school boards don't seem to take too kindly to it, and they are 

not as impressed with your comments and your running of the 

Education department as some of your colleagues are. 

 

I have a letter from one of the school divisions.  This is from 

the Rosetown School Division.  And I can tell that this school 

division is a well-run school division, Madam Minister, 

because they're very efficient and they believe in recycling.  

They took the letter that I sent them and sent their reply back 

on the same letter.  They just typed it in at the bottom.  And I 

would like to read to you the first couple of sentences:  we've 

been taking a kicking since 1975.  The down-loading onto local 

taxpayers started with the last Blakeney term, continued 

through the Devine years and now into the Romanow regime. 

 

So, Madam Minister, they're not very impressed with your 

performance as the Minister of Education.  They weren't 

impressed, from these comments, with the last two previous 

administrations.  They are looking for something better, 

Madam Minister, and that's what your 

government promised them, and that's not what you've been 

delivering. 

 

Another school board, Madam Minister, and I think this 

particular school board has wrote a very . . . a letter that really 

provides a telling point.  Because it's not just in education 

where this point needs to be taken, but it's right across the 

board when it comes to dealing with your government. 

 

This particular school board has reduced their staff by 2.3 

full-time teachers.  But the last paragraph is the telling one:  in 

conclusion, I would ask that you use this information with 

caution.  We would appreciate it if you would not identify our 

school division by name since we must continue to do business 

with any government that is in power.  Additionally I would 

caution you that the information I have given you, while 

accurate, can also be misinterpreted. 

 

(2215) 

 

So this note on the bottom, Madam Minister, indicates to me a 

fear of your government, that if they speak out there will be 

retaliation against them.  And, Madam Minister, that's not the 

first time I've run into that circumstance.  I've run into it in 

other situations also, where people are afraid to speak out, 

because what else will they do to us? 

 

Madam Minister, while some of your colleagues may try to put 

those remarks into disrepute, that is indeed the circumstances 

out there.  There are a large number of people in the public 

who are afraid to speak out for fear . . . well they took away 

half my pension, maybe they'll take away the other half now if 

I say anything about it. 

 

So I think, Madam Minister, you need to take a look at what 

you're doing in the Department of Education to see that the 

people have the right to stand up and speak about what you're 

doing, without fear of retaliation from your department or from 

other departments. 

 

Meadow Lake School Division:  In our case the recognized 

expenditures were actually up $151,000 and this was 

accomplished even with a reduction of 23 pupils from the 

previous year.  However the increase in the computational mill 

rate took most of that away from us. 

 

So while you gave them some money with the one hand, you 

took it back it with the other.  But there's also one other thing 

that happened in the Meadow Lake School Division:  In 

addition to that, our assessment was up over $5 million due 

mostly to the construction at the pulp mill near Meadow Lake 

and the 41 new homes in the Meadow Lake area. 

 

So while there's been a lot of criticism of the previous 

government, some of the actions taken by the previous 

government have indeed been beneficial to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Here the mill rate is up by $5 million . . . 

excuse me, not the mill rate, the assessment is up by $5 million 

in the Meadow Lake area and there's 41 new homes in that 

area.  If there's 41 new homes, there must be 41 new families 

living in that area . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . this was done 

before the new MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

was in the area. 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

And if the new MLA has anything to say about it, they'll 

probably sell all those homes and move them out to Alberta. 

 

The Gravelbourg School Division:  A 2 per cent cut in 1992 

resulted in an amount of approximately $15,000.  The mill rate 

did not rise; however cuts had to be made to the physical 

education department, maintenance and janitorial department, 

school materials such as textbooks, academic supplies, and 

audio visual equipment, support staff. 

 

Madam Minister, you can say that everybody is doing quite 

nicely, thank you, with your cut to education, but the school 

divisions and the students are taking it in the neck. 

 

Moose Jaw Roman Catholic School:  We have not had to cut 

any programs; however we will be operating with two fewer 

teachers with a projected increase of 30 students. 

 

Well I would have to guess that their student/pupil ratio has 

changed a little bit from what it was previously.  If they 

eliminated two teachers and have 30 more students, 

somebody's got to be doing some more work there, Madam 

Minister. 

 

So your programs, you say you've cut here and everybody is 

quite happy about it and nobody is complaining very much.  

Well Madam Minister, I'm getting some complaints about it, 

that they're not too appreciative of your cuts to education.  The 

member from Saskatoon Broadway was complaining with a 3 

per cent increase in other years, and yet today we're taking a 2 

per cent cut and these people are complaining about it, Madam 

Minister.  And they feel that their educational services that they 

can supply to their students are being impaired by it. 

 

So, Madam Minister, will you go back to your cabinet 

colleagues and ask them to review your budget, to provide 

some additional fundings necessary?  You're going to have to 

go back to them anyway when it comes time to get your money 

for student loan programs.  You've already said that there's a 

limited amount there, but you're getting more applications and 

nobody is going to be turned away. 

 

So, Madam Minister, you're either going to have to go back to 

the Associate Minister of Finance and the Minister of Finance 

to get money, or you're going to have to cut some place else.  

And nobody else can afford to take those cuts. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat that 

it's unfortunate times that we find ourselves in, trying to dig 

ourselves out of a $15 billion hole.  We have asked for the 

co-operation of the people in . . . the education partners in 

working with us to do that with as little damage as possible to 

the education programs or accessibility to post-secondary. 

 

And of course everybody isn't happy.  It's not a happy time.  It's 

a time to make the most of what we have and to work together 

to improve things in the long run.  And in general and in the 

main, that is what is happening.  And we appreciate that kind 

of support that we're getting from 

the education community. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it seems they're 

giving that support to you very reluctantly.  And perhaps it is 

because of the one letter that you're not getting a lot of 

complaints, is because they're afraid to complain about it.  

They're afraid to complain; that if they say, you're harming our 

students, you're harming our school division, that the rest of 

their funding will be cut off.  Perhaps they're the ones that 

aren't going to get the emergency funding for renovations.  

There is a genuine fear out there, Madam Minister, that that 

will indeed happen. 

 

If the NDP do not intend to off-load the cost of education onto 

the local taxpayers in the forms of property tax increases, 

would the minister please explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan why more than 70 school divisions in this 

province were forced to increase their mill rates this year as a 

direct result of your underfunding? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to refer to a 

pattern here.  I don't have the figures for every year, but in 

1982, which was the last year of the NDP's administration, the 

provincial share of educational funding was 58.5.  Throughout 

the years from 58.5 per cent.  That's very close to the 60 per 

cent which the SSTA states as a goal.  From 1982 on the 

provincial share of funding declined year after year after year, 

and the only increase in that share has been again from 1991 to 

1992 -- this budget.  So that does represent an increase in the 

share. 

 

And I think that the references that the member opposite is 

making to people in the education system being afraid of 

vindictiveness and retaliation is a reflection on the situation 

that has prevailed over the last 10 years, where that was the 

kind of atmosphere that people had to operate in. 

 

They have no fear of that kind of action from this 

administration.  We do have compassion and understanding for 

their needs and their representations, but we don't have money 

and they understand that.  They have problems, they discuss 

them.  I didn't say it was all sweetness and light out there.  I 

said that we're all working together to make the best of a very 

bad situation that we were left with. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if people were 

afraid of the previous government retaliating when they 

complained about government procedures, the previous 

government would have had a lot of opportunities to exemplify 

that vindictiveness because there were a lot of complaints at 

different times.  But that didn't happen, Madam Minister. 

 

We had students marching on the legislature because funding 

was not increased as expected or as wanted for the universities.  

And yet all of a sudden they have an increase in tuition fees of 

13 per cent, and I haven't noticed any students marching on the 

legislature.  Why?  They can't be happy about a 13 per cent 

increase when they were unhappy at other years when tuition 

increases were very small.  And yet all of a sudden there's 

nobody marching on the legislature when they get a 13 per cent 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

increase.  What's the reason for that, Madam Minister?  Is it 

that they are afraid to say anything?  That funding will be cut 

even further? 

 

Madam Minister, your colleagues made a commitment to go to 

60 per cent funding -- 60/40 split.  When do you expect to 

reach that goal? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the provincial average 

changes in mill rate and the provincial averages share of . . . the 

provincial contribution to education do not look particularly 

favourable.  In fact exactly the opposite to the previous 

administration because the mill rate increase that is affected in 

this year by this current budget is the smallest in years. 

 

There were 2.2 per cent, 1.5 mills in this year; last year, 4.1; 

the year before, 5.1; the year before, 5.2; the year before, 4.2.  

This is the smallest mill rate increase in years in spite of 

funding changes. 

 

The other remark with respect to the tuition at the 

post-secondary institutions, they're saying . . . or anyone saying 

or trying to leave the impression that the funding cuts, 

third-party funding cuts from the province to the 

post-secondary, to the universities resulted in tuition fee 

increases . . . Let me tell you this: that the total amount of 

reduction in funding to the universities was approximately 1.7 

million, 1 per cent on the total of $178 million.  Their tuition 

fee increases raised 5 million.  So they weren't making up only 

for the shortfall that they perceived in the cut-back of 1 per 

cent.  They also increased their budgets.  And people are trying 

to leave the impression, including the member opposite, that 

the increases in tuition are as a direct result of the cut-backs, 

and those figures certainly wouldn't bear that out. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you talk about 

the mill rates increasing at 4 to 5 per cent over previous years 

and that they're only increasing by 2 per cent or so this year.  

But yet I think you have to stop and take a look at the inflation 

rate.  In previous years the inflation rate was running at 5 to 8 

per cent, and this year it's running from zero to one and a half.  

So your mill rate increase exceeds the rate of inflation; whereas 

in previous years, it was more or less at the level of inflation.  

So there has actually been a net increase in the costs to the 

school boards because of this mill rate increase. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to ask you a few questions now about 

the teachers' superannuation fund.  This year's budget for 

Education indicates an increase of more than 100 per cent in 

the government's contribution to the teachers' superannuation 

fund.  This year's total contribution to the fund amounts to 

$120 million.  Madam Minister, the overall budget for the 

department was slashed by 2 per cent.  Funding has been 

reduced to school divisions, operating grants, capital projects, 

core literacy, educational development fund, university 

operating grants, SIAST operating grants, regional college 

operating grants, and the list goes on.  One of the only areas to 

receive an increase is the teachers' pension fund.  What does 

this say about the priorities of the government, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that this 

speaks more to the priorities of the previous government than it 

does to the priorities of this government.  We didn't raid the 

teachers' pension plan.  We don't believe in finding money and 

finding revenue by raiding the pockets of teachers who have 

devoted a lifetime to teaching the students in this province.  We 

are for the first time in many, many years providing the full 

contribution to the teachers' pension fund, and that's the reason 

for the increase.  It is the amount that should have been paid 

year upon year that the previous administration failed to 

contribute. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the total 

contribution from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to the 

teachers' fund was $120 million.  How was the contribution 

that the government is required by . . . what is the contribution 

that the government is required by statute?  What is that fund?  

How much money should be put into there, based on the 

requirements of the statute? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the amount that's 

allocated in the budget this year is the proper amount to 

provide for the matching the employer as . . . the government 

contributes as the employer's portion to match the teachers' 

contribution. 

 

There was a draw down on what is called . . . the previous 

administration deemed whenever the interest rate was over 7 

per cent, whenever the yield was over 7 per cent that there was 

a draw down on those funds.  And that's what we're not 

prepared to do.  We're making the full contribution to make 

sure that . . . As the member opposite knows, there are two 

separate plans, the new plan and the old plan, the money 

purchase plan, the other one.  We are committed to make on an 

annual basis full matching contributions to the teachers' 

superannuation fund. 

 

(2230) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad to hear 

that and I imagine the teachers are also, that you're prepared to 

make a full matching contribution.  But is it required by law, 

by statute, to make that full matching contribution? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it certainly is our 

understanding that it is.  But the reason, there's also a moral 

obligation because there is an agreement, and that's what we're 

obeying.  Beyond that, I won't comment because, as the 

member opposite is aware, there was a legal action commenced 

with respect to the actions that the previous administration took 

with respect to teachers' superannuation fund.  So I won't 

comment any further. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, how is this 

contribution calculated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this is the current plan.  

The funding required is . . . We have to make payments on the 

annual superannuate payroll, those teachers that are already 

eligible for pensions.  We have to match current teacher 

contributions.  We can deduct from that amount, monies 

credited to teachers who superannuate during the year and fund 

earnings in excess of 7 per cent.  And that's the rate at which 

interest is 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

credited to teacher accounts.  So if there was a rate of higher 

than seven, we would be entitled to take that out. 

 

But I hesitate to get into detailed discussion on anything except 

the history of this because the teachers' pension plan in 

Saskatchewan is very unique in that it is a subject of the 

collective bargaining agreement and it's subject to negotiation.  

That collective agreement is currently on the table and 

elements of the pension plan are a part of those discussions.  So 

I would prefer and in fact will decline to comment further on 

the teachers' pension plan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you mentioned 

that funds in excess of 7 per cent, that you were entitled to take 

them out.  Therefore I'm assuming that if you're entitled to take 

them out that it's not illegal to do so.  Is that indeed the case? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is . . . we're 

getting into heavy water here.  This is the area that was the 

subject of a lawsuit.  The lawsuit has not been concluded.  It's 

not active at the current time, but it's certainly out there, and it's 

also on the matter of the collective bargaining agreement which 

is currently on the table. 

 

So in light of those two proceedings, I would not wish to 

engage in further discussion about the future.  We can talk 

about the history at length, but what's happening now or what 

will happen I decline to comment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you made 

accusations that the previous government was withdrawing 

funds from the teachers' superannuation fund.  And then you 

turn around and say that the government is entitled to withdraw 

funds over 7 per cent.  So if they were entitled to do so and 

they did so, that doesn't mean to say that they did anything 

illegal.  If they were entitled to withdraw it and then they could 

do so. 

 

So what's the problem with it?  The teachers may argue about 

it, and that's what the court cases are all about.  But if the Act 

says they are entitled to, well then, Madam Minister, it's legal 

for them to do so.  And when you criticize them for having 

done so, you may do so on a political level, but you can't do so 

on a legal level. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this is the area that is 

the subject of a lawsuit and I decline to comment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, let's assume that 

the department is entitled to withdraw funds over the 7 per 

cent.  If that is indeed the case, what would be the surplus in 

the fund at the present time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no surplus in 

the fund.  There's a $1.7 billion deficit in the fund and this is 

one of the . . . Well I'm not going to get into it.  This is one of 

the reasons for the lawsuit.  It is the subject of a lawsuit.  There 

is a question as to whether what the previous administration did 

was illegal or not, which is before the courts.  And so I decline 

to comment further on the subject. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you didn't seem 

to have a problem making comments about it when 

it suited your purpose, to imply that the previous government 

was doing something wrong.  You brought it up into the 

discussion.  I didn't. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to turn now to curriculum and special 

education.  And I would like to ask the minister for some 

clarifications with respect to the figures that appear in this 

subvote.  The curriculum and special education subvote was 

originally allocated a total of $10,544,700 in the 1991-92 

Estimates.  And the revised number in the '92-93 Estimate 

document is $10,136,100.  This is a difference of $408,600. 

 

Would the minister please explain why the funding allocations 

for the curriculum and special education subvote for 1991-92 is 

different in the 1991-92 Estimate document than it is in the 

1992-93 Estimate document? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

difference of $1.3 million in the 1991-92 financial plan and the 

'92-93 budget, one of the problems with making those 

comparisons is that the figure for 1991-92 was budgeted but 

that wasn't what was spent.  And so the figures estimated to be 

spent this year and what was actually spent last year are really 

quite close together.  And there were some items, such as the 

computer for the evaluation students' record program, where 

$237,000 was budgeted for in the previous year, and it's paid 

for and there's no need to expense that money.  So it isn't the 

magnitude of reduction that those numbers would appear to 

show because $10 million is not the amount that was spent last 

year.  It was restated. 

 

So basically, except for some decreases in cost because of 

slow-walking the implementation of the core curriculum, 

there's actually very little difference in what was actually spent 

in the restated figures for last year and this year's budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, assuming that 

the original budget figures for curriculum and special education 

was 10 million-plus for 1991, this year's funding allocation has 

experienced a decrease of 17 per cent.  This amount is a cut of 

more than $1.7 million. 

 

Even if we use your figures for the 1991-92 figure, taking into 

consideration the curriculum and special education, it still is a 

funding decrease of 14 per cent, or 1.4 million -- you use the 

figure of 1.3. 

 

Before I get into any other questions, Madam Minister, about 

why you chose to cut so deeply into this important area of 

education funding, I wonder if the minister would provide a 

breakdown of how the $8.7 million that you have allocated this 

year will be spent.  And I'd ask you to include spending 

allocations in the area of curriculum and instruction, student 

services and evaluation, special education and communications 

funds as well as other areas where funds were allocated in the 

subvote. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there were a number of 

projects in this area that were completed, like the northern 

initiatives task force, that was done, doesn't have to be done 

again.  There was the PALS (Principles of the Alphabet 

Literacy System), that literacy program that was piloted, that 

was done, doesn't have to be done again. 



August 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

There are projects ongoing but the up-front cost, the 

incremental costs of starting it are no longer there. 

 

A very significant amount also was the closure of the school 

for the deaf which was carried out at the end of last June, the 

last school year, by the previous administration of which they 

would be aware.  So there is not -- when you take all those 

factors into consideration -- there is not the dramatic increase; 

in fact there is very little decrease between what was actually 

spent last year and programs that are carried on this year.  

They're very, very similar. 

 

This is an area where we wouldn't want to make cuts.  It's an 

area where with mainstreaming children with various kinds of 

disabilities into the regular school system, we want to do a 

good job of this so these figures have to be taken in light of all 

of those factors. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to ask 

you a question dealing with help for visually impaired children 

around this province, and I've discussed this with you before.  

I'm just wondering where is that program, that project now in 

the current educational system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that program is still -- 

if I understand the question correctly -- it's still housed within 

the special education area.  As the member opposite indicates, 

and as we have discussed previously, our method of delivering 

this service and co-ordinating it has changed, but certainly not 

our dedication to it, and our wish to keep improving the 

system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's a very 

important program.  And I would encourage you to continue it 

and to provide the quality of service that was previously being 

provided in that program. 

 

I'd like to go back to the question I asked before, about where 

the $8.7 million is being spent.  How is it being broke down?  

Where is the money going to? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the breakdown of the 

curriculum in special education would be in curriculum in 

instruction, there would be $3 million including payroll and 

development expenses in that.  There would be $300,000 in the 

education development fund support for that.  There would be 

in assessment and evaluation, 640,000.  In provincial 

examinations and student records, there would be over 1.2 

million.  And the northern education task force would be 

850,000.  Communication funds, which would be to promote 

public involvement in education and include priorities such as 

reading and literacy campaigns, 382,000; and administrative 

expenses, 143; computer development fund and contract funds, 

that would be 915,000; and special ed would be 1.242 million. 

 

(2245) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, in 1988 all the provinces and territories of Canada 

agreed to take part in a national school achievement indicators 

program.  The purpose of the program was to develop a base of 

information from which provincial departments of education 

could access the 

performance of programs offered in their schools on a 

nation-wide basis. 

 

This kind of program, Madam Minister, seems to me it would 

provide valuable information to educators as to whether or not 

the programs offered were meeting the educational needs of 

our students, and how those students fared in relation to the 

counterparts in other provinces.  Would Madam Minister 

update us as to where this program is within your department 

and whether you're going to continue it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this was an initiative 

that was undertaken by the Council of Ministers of Education.  

It had a bit of a checkered history with provinces opting in and 

out in principle until last December. 

 

We attended our first meeting of the Ministers of Education 

Council at that time and found this to be a subject on the 

agenda which we were asked to make a decision.  So we came 

home to the province and we carried on some extensive 

consultations with the business community, with the home and 

school association provincially, and we made a decision that at 

this point in time we would monitor the results of the testing 

program as it's carried on in the other provinces, but that we 

would not actively participate because we are devoting our own 

energies to developing an evaluation system for our own core 

curriculum which is in the process of being implemented.  So 

we haven't ruled out ever taking part in this kind of an 

initiative, but for the time being we have other priorities and 

we're simply monitoring that program at the moment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would like to 

encourage you to take a serious look at that program and get 

back into it again.  I believe it has some value for this province. 

 

On the educational vote, item number 1, down at the bottom of 

the page it says, "A portion of this subvote is included in the 

vote Executive Council in 1992-93."  Madam Minister, what 

portion is included in Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, just as a point of 

clarification, I guess, the question by the member opposite 

made it seem as if we have an increase that's not accounted for, 

where actually the budget in that area is decreased by the 

amount of someone -- I have no idea who -- whose salary was 

paid from Executive Council, or someone in Executive Council 

whose salary was paid by the Department of Education last 

year. 

 

That is no longer the case.  We don't have legislative 

secretaries.  And we have a situation where people are paid by 

the department in which they are working so that the payment 

of those funds is completely transparent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if it was in last 

year's circumstances that would have been covered under the 

'91-92 budget.  This clearly says, "included in the vote 

Executive Council in 1992-93."  This is your government's 

budget, not ours.  So you're the one spending the money on it. 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard August 17, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the note 2 is with an 

asterisk and the asterisk appears opposite the 1991-92 estimate.  

And since there's a reduction from '91-92 to this current 

budget, I can only assume that when you follow the note 

through that it refers to a situation that happened last year, not 

something that's taking place this year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well if that was the case, Madam 

Minister, wouldn't it say 1991-92, not '92-93? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it goes on to say 

that, "The 1991-92 Estimates . . . have been reallocated on a 

comparative basis . . ."  So that would account for the 

differences: that there has been a restatement of the previous 

year.  So it's dangerous to draw that kind of conclusion, where, 

in fact, personal services within the department are in the 

payroll of the department and Executive Council will account 

for theirs in their own Estimates. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education 

Vote 141 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 

 

Items 1 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Education Development Fund -- Vote 64 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 64 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education 

Vote 141 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 

 

Item 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Family Foundation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 31 

 

Items 1 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 31 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Family Foundation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 31 

 

Items 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 31 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to thank the people from the department that have been 

over here to assist us, and I'd like to express my appreciation to 

the members opposite for their questions and their 

co-operation.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the minister and her officials for providing us with the 

answers that they did and their co-operation.  Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:09 p.m. 

 

 

 


