




















































Hansard: August 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2453 

 August 13, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could I ask you a 

few questions regarding the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Institute?  Was there a cost 

associated with the request by the Minister of Energy and 

Mines that Kilborn (Western) Inc. provide advice to the 

minister on the mandate, functions, responsibilities, and 

organizational structure of the institute? 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we were just looking for 

some of this information and we have it here.  The cost 

involved with Kilborn was a contract cost and the contract 

called for $33,450 for the work that Kilborn engineering did for 

the Department of Energy and Mines, and I wonder if the 

member has a copy of the Kilborn report.  If the member does 

not have a copy of the Kilborn report I'd be happy to table one 

for him, then they could read the contents which indicate the 

mandate.  And all the other questions I think he asked would be 

found in this report.  Did you want the report? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I wouldn't mind 

having the report, but I believe I'd like to have some of the 

answers read into the record.  Now I understand that you did 

have a cost, and I would appreciate detailed information of the 

total cost of that survey. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the costs of 33,450, as I 

gave the member just a minute ago, there was the contractor's 

labour costs, the costs that he had incurred with the people that 

he employed from his office and used to do the analysis, was 

29,450.  The travel and sustenance Estimates was $2,000 and 

the estimated total office expense was $2,000.  And if you add 

those three numbers up, you'll get the $33,450.  That's the only 

breakdown we have; we have no breakdown as to how his 

labour costs were broken down.  These were the labour costs in 

his office incurred by his staff. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you tell me 

at what stage of development that the institute is at now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be pleased to 

update the member on the state of the Authority -- I'll make 

that correction right now, it's called an Authority -- the state of 

the Authority right now is that the government has appointed 

three board members at this stage.  This was an initial 

appointment.  We are suggesting that there be five board 

members and that the other two be appointed at a time when 

the three board members can get together and make some 

recommendations of who they think would be a suitable board 

member for the Authority. 

The Authority at this stage has located its office in the 

Saskatchewan Research Council building.  They have a small 

office there with a telephone and address that people can 

contact them.  The SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) has 

kindly provided us with the telephone and the services of a 

receptionist who will take the calls at this point. 

 

The three board members have begun a search for a chief 

executive officer for the Authority and we have no specific 

time line on this.  We've been advertising and I guess it 

depends on the kinds of applications we get as to how soon we 

close the period of time in which we will accept applications.  

But we will be appointing two more board members, I suspect, 

within the next few months, and hopefully we'll have a chief 

executive officer in place who then will take charge of the 

office and hire the rest of the staff that is required for the 

Authority. 

 

The other thing that we have done so far, Mr. Chairman, is that 

the three board members have been doing some speaking 

engagements, particularly in Saskatoon, with local service 

clubs and other organizations that are interested in hearing 

what the Authority will do.  They've been doing a little bit of 

publicity work and they're also thinking of doing some work on 

school fairs and other things -- but these are all very 

preliminary at this stage -- but the three board members have 

been doing some thinking about where we should go.  I suggest 

that in a month or two we'll be having some more information 

and I would be happy to talk to the member opposite when we 

have that further information and keep him fully updated as to 

where we're at. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, do I take it then 

from what you said that there will be a total of five board 

members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Yes, that is our anticipated -- Mr. 

Chairman, that's our anticipated -- number at this time.  

However, we're not limiting them to five.  If they see that it's 

necessary to have additional board members in order to get 

different types of expertise on the board, we're not going to 

stand in their way to go another board member or even another 

two.  We've tentatively set an upper limit of seven, but we'd 

like to start with five and see how the Authority works before 

we expand it to seven members. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Does 

that include the CEO (chief executive officer)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  The CEO would be 

above the five board members and the CEO would then hire 

staff to staff the office and some of them could probably be 

researchers and obviously we need some stenographic help, 

some secretarial services, and the CEO would be responsible to 

hire the staff that would look after the office. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Then, Mr. Minister, could you tell me how 

many in total that you think will be hired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, initially we anticipate that 

we might have five or six on the initial 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

stages.  We're not setting a specific number right now as to the 

total because we're not sure just how much work this Authority 

is going to get, how much work they're going to be able to do, 

so we're leaving that fairly open for them at this point.  I think 

the budget will somewhat dictate to them as to the number of 

staff that they can engage to function in the Authority. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you 

provide the names and qualifications, salaries, job titles and the 

job descriptions of those that you have on staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, it would take a long time 

to read all this in the record.  I don't think the member wants it 

all, but I will give you sort of a summary of the people that we 

have at this point.  I want to make it very clear that these are 

board members.  These are not employees of the Authority.  

These are board members and board members will be paid on a 

per diem basis, and the per diem basis is the same as other 

board members that work for government agencies. 

 

The chairman of the board is Dennis W. Johnson and Dennis 

Johnson . . . and I have a whole page and I don't think he wants 

me to read this whole page, but I'd be happy to share this with 

you at some time if you would like to have all his 

qualifications.  But he is a professional engineer, and he is head 

of Pakwa Engineering in Saskatoon.  And I don't even have a 

quick summary here that I can give you, but his credentials are 

impeccable, and is well known in the Saskatoon business 

community.  So he's the chairman of the board. 

 

The second member of the board is Robert Walter Besant, who 

is a university professor on the University of Saskatchewan, 

and obviously holds many degrees and is well qualified to sit 

on a board like this.  And again, I have a whole page of 

qualifications and boards and services that he has rendered to 

the people of Canada.  And I'd be also prepared to share that 

with you. 

 

The third member of the board is Ann Coxworth.  Ann 

Coxworth has a master's degree from the University of 

California.  She lives in Saskatoon.  She is not employed as a 

professor now, but she has done some lecturing at the 

university, and works very closely with the environmental 

network of Saskatchewan, and is well qualified to serve on a 

board such as this. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, do you have no 

qualms about Ms. Crawford as an environmentalist?  You don't 

think that . . . Do you think that there will be no conflict there . 

. . or personal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is no.  I 

have no qualms at all.  Maybe I should elaborate a little more.  

We tried to get a balance on this board.  We tried to get a 

business person, and Dennis Johnson is the business person.  

He is president of Pakwa Engineering and has a lot of business 

experience as a professional engineer, and is an independent 

entrepreneur in Saskatoon in Saskatchewan. 

 

Robert Besant is a university professor.  Some people would 

say he's an academic.  Well that's a fair term.  This man is an 

academic, has done research in the area that we 

think that we need some expertise on the board. 

 

Ann Coxworth is an environmentalist.  And I think to get the 

proper balance, we needed those three people; a business man, 

entrepreneur; an academic, and we needed an environmentalist.  

Now we've left it open for two more board members, and these 

three people can choose board members that have the expertise 

that they think may be lacking.  But this government is very 

concerned that we are environmentally safe and 

environmentally conscious in everything we do, and therefore 

we think that Ann Coxworth is a very well-suited and qualified 

person to serve as a board member on this Authority. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't think I 

would argue her qualifications in her field, but she is 

well-known as an anti-nuclear person.  And how do you think 

that's going to work when this board is supposed to develop all 

types of energy, including nuclear?  They're supposed to look 

at it and she is definitely against that form of energy.  How do 

you reconcile that with the statement you just made now? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I indicated to the 

member opposite that we wanted to create a balance on this 

board, and Ann Coxworth represents one aspect of this balance.  

And as one member of a board of five, I would feel that it 

might be of assistance to the other board members if one of 

those persons took the other point of view.  It wouldn't really 

serve us very well in Saskatchewan if all five board members 

thought alike and moved in the same direction.  I think it's very 

important that on a board such as this, that is supposed to 

evaluate the electrical options, that you have people that have a 

balanced view of the issues that face the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you tell me 

under what budget constraints you have this Authority under? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  In the first year 

when we were just setting up the Authority, we have 

established a budget at a maximum of a million dollars in the 

first year.  This is part of the Energy and Mines budget.  In 

future years we will establish budgets in the same manner as 

we do other budgets.  The board members and the CEO will 

come before Treasury Board and make a presentation to 

Treasury Board regarding their budget requirements. 

 

In the Kilborn report, if you read the Kilborn report, I think you 

will find that he recommends a budget of somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of $2 million for the Authority on a full-year 

basis.  So for this year, we have a start-up - 

_ and we'll probably be in it six or seven months this year -- of 

a million dollars, and after that they will have to come, as I 

said, to Treasury Board on the same basis as all other Treasury 

Board Crowns will have to come to justify their budget before 

the Treasury Board. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Is 

this institute -- Authority . . . the new name, I guess, is 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

Authority; cost us quite a bit of money to change the name -- is 

that associated with what we call the new energy authority?  Is 

that it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not absolutely sure 

what the member's referring to, but as far as our department is 

concerned, we have only one energy Authority, and that's this 

one: the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority.  If he's referring to some other authority, that would 

not rest in our department, and I would not be prepared to 

comment on it. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Am I to understand, sir, that we just have one 

energy authority under mines in Energy and Mines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I was listening to 

your comments of the balance, and I was looking, while you 

were answering I was looking at the other members, and I 

wonder how you consider that a balance when we're talking 

about energy.  You have an engineer.  That's fine.  You also 

have a business person.  But I don't see anyone who is 

pro-nuclear energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, I wouldn't want to comment on 

what position these three people take on the view of nuclear 

energy.  I do know that the one member indicated what her 

position was.  She made it very clear to us what her position on 

nuclear energy was, and we still felt that it's a type of person 

that could well serve this board. 

 

The other two people have not indicated their position on 

nuclear energy one way or the other.  And I'm not particularly 

concerned about whether they're pro-nuclear or anti-nuclear.  

These are well-qualified people who have done research in the 

field of energy, who probably know more about energy 

conservation and development than the combined total of 

knowledge in this room and maybe a bunch of other 

legislatures in this country. 

 

And I have full confidence that these people will take an 

objective view of all forms of energy.  That's their mandate.  If 

they don't, they will hear from us. 

 

I also want to point out again that they are allowed to put two 

more board members on.  They can choose these board 

members.  They will suggest these board members.  They will 

recommend to Executive Council as to who should be 

appointed to this board.  So there's an opening for two more 

people at least, and possibly four, as time goes on.  But for the 

moment, we're looking only at two more.  And these people 

can have different forms of expertise.  And we'd be willing to 

look at qualified people who have expertise in the area of 

energy development and conservation.  And I'm sure that 

cabinet will have no trouble appointing people who take a 

different point of view than some of the people that are on the 

board right now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you say that you 

are satisfied and you go to great lengths to indicate your 

confidence in the knowledge these people have.  I don't think 

that's what we're talking about, sir.  I indicated 

that I have no problem with the qualifications.  But here you 

have an avowed anti-nuclear person and then you're saying to 

me that you have full trust in the other two to make that 

balance. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you may have the confidence, but there are 

other people that may have some worries.  Mr. Minister, how is 

this going to read in the public when you have an avowed 

anti-nuclear person and the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

policy is anti-nuclear?  And this is the only one on the board, as 

you yourself said, has made any commitment to one side or the 

other.  Now I wonder where you get the balance there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say to the 

member from Wilkie that this is not the first 

government-appointed board that Ann Coxworth has served on.  

I'd just like to draw to his attention that the former government 

appointed Ann Coxworth to the Saskatchewan Electrical 

Energy Options Review Panel, which is normally called the 

Billinton Report. 

 

And regardless of what her views are on nuclear energy, when 

the Billinton Report came out, it was viewed as a very 

objective report put out by the board.  And Ann Coxworth was 

the former government's appointee to this board.  So I fail to 

see where the member opposite makes such a strenuous 

argument that she should not serve on this board, when she was 

good enough to serve on their board doing work that was 

somewhat similar in many respects to what this Authority will 

do.  The other board presented only an interim report, one 

report.  This board will serve on a continuous basis. 

 

So if she was good enough to serve on that board, you know, 

maybe you can tell me what your objection is to having her 

serve on our board. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you again missed 

the point, I think.  I'm not questioning her qualifications.  That 

isn't what I'm saying.  I don't question the qualifications of the 

other two.  And whether she worked for anyone else or not 

doesn't matter to me.  I accept your assessment that she's 

qualified. 

 

What I'm asking you . . . and maybe I could put another 

question to you in this way.  I believe you said that the board 

would have full authority to hire the next two board members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'll answer in two parts.  I'll answer your 

last question first.  The mandate of the board is that they can go 

up to five members.  The board will recommend to cabinet, 

names for the appointment to this board.  The board does not 

have the authority to appoint members to the board.  The only 

people that can appoint members to the board is the Executive 

Council.  Board members don't appoint each other.  So they 

will recommend names to Executive Council and then 

Executive Council will appoint the board members.  So that's 

the way the process works. 

 

Again I'd like to just go back to the qualifications, and the 

absolute, I think, impeccable credentials of one Ann Coxworth.  

She has a Masters degree from the University of California.  

She lives in Saskatoon.  She's program 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

co-ordinator and a board member of Saskatchewan 

Environmental Society.  She's a former member of the 

Saskatchewan Electrical Energy Options Review Panel 1991.  

She's a member of the steering committee of the Canadian 

Environmental Network.  She's a member in management 

committee; Canadian Environmental Network.  Has past work 

experience including research in nuclear chemistry and adult 

community education.  Those are the qualifications and I think 

she's eminently qualified to sit on this board. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Minister, again I say, I'm not 

questioning her qualifications.  I never did.  I never said 

anything about her qualifications.  I'm asking you about your . . 

. you're comfortable with the balance.  Now you tell me that the 

Executive Council will be the ones that choose the next two.  

You've already got an anti-nuclear person.  The other people, 

us, have no way of knowing what your government will do 

when your government policy is anti-nuclear. 

 

So what is to stop the Executive Council from putting on two 

more anti-nuke people.  This is what I was talking to you about 

-- not the qualifications of any of your board -- the balance that 

will be needed to come down with a fair assessment of nuclear 

power, that's all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess the only answer I 

can give is when the former member was a member of 

government, they and their Executive Council appointed board 

members and in their wisdom they chose balanced board 

members.  Whether other people perceived that as being so or 

not may not have always been the case.  We are government; 

our Executive Council is charged with the responsibility of 

appointing members to boards. 

 

I guess all I can say to the member opposite that you will have 

to trust this government for the next four years to make good 

decisions on appointing board members, as we were forced to 

trust your government for nine and a half years to make 

appropriate choices as board members.  And if you have 

problems with that I can probably understand that, but I hope 

that in the same vein you understand that people on this side of 

the House may have had some difficulty when board members 

were appointed by your Executive Council.  So that's fair.  

Government has that responsibility and has that option. 

 

I can assure the member that when I'm on Executive Council I 

will have a reasonable amount of input into the new board 

members.  There is no way that I would want a board that was 

entirely one-sided.  I'm looking for a balance, as I've indicated 

right at the outset.  And when the two new board members will 

be appointed, the balance will be there, and I would be happy -- 

when the time comes -- to discuss with the member opposite 

the reasons for choosing the new board members. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

can we have your assurance that when you appoint the two new 

board members that you will choose someone from the nuclear 

industry or who has made a statement that is pro-nuclear, that 

they're in favour of looking at the nuclear energy as a viable 

option for Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes I would 

like to say to the member that we already have one board 

member who has indicated in a letter that he has no trouble 

with developing energy or electricity with nuclear power.  So 

we already have one member of that persuasion on the board.  

We have one who is on the other side.  We have an academic 

that will do the academic part of it. 

 

And the other two . . . I'm not going to choose the members.  

This three-member board will recommend names to us and 

then we will choose from that list of recommendations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, just a few minutes 

ago you said that you did not know what the standings were of 

the other members on the board.  And now you turn around and 

say that one of the members has indicated that he does support 

the concept of nuclear energy to generate electricity.  You've 

said that the board does not appoint the board members, that 

Executive Council does.  Now you're saying that the board will 

recommend to Executive Council who to appoint and that 

Executive Council, I'm assuming now, will eventually then 

make a choice from those recommendations. 

 

Now who is going to make the choice in this?  Is the Executive 

Council going to simply choose from the list provided to them 

by the committee members, the three members that are already 

been appointed by Executive Council, or will Executive 

Council be searching outside of that group for people on the 

board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'll answer your last question first, Mr. 

Chairman.  The Executive Council will not be searching for 

board members.  My mandate to the three board members -- 

and I met with them about a month ago -- my mandate to them 

for the two new board members was that they should come up 

with some names that they thought would be suitable board 

members, and if they came up with more than two, then they 

were to rank them in the order, one, two, three, four, if they 

gave us four names.  If they gave us more names . . . in fact I 

don't want many more names than that because it makes it too 

difficult to choose.  But I asked them to rank them so that 

Executive Council, when they make the decision, will know 

what the preference of the three present board members is. 

 

And then Executive Council ultimately makes the decision, as 

has been done in the past, as is done with all board members.  

And if the members opposite have trouble with that, then I'm 

sure they had a lot of trouble with their own government 

because that's the way things have been done. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm afraid I didn't 

have a choice in what happened in the previous administration, 

but I'm wondering, would you be willing to supply us with the 

long list prior to the acceptance of those board members to the 

board? 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- No, that is not the normal procedure, that 

Executive Council does not release the names of all the options 

and then lets the opposition pick over the options.  And then if 

we don't make the choices that they want then they will simply 

go around the countryside and say we didn't consult. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, I did hear you say when I was 

questioning you a little bit about the balance, that neither of the 

other two had indicated any preference one way or the other.  

And so when I was asking you about your balance, I was 

asking on the impression that the other two were neutral, 

because they had never expressed any leaning one way or the 

other. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if you're going to try to play games with 

me, then I suggest to you that I can play games too.  And if you 

want to get on with Estimates and you want to give me 

straightforward answers, then that's fine. 

 

I've tried to be reasonable, and I want some information from 

you and I want the answers from you.  I don't know how long 

it's going to take but we will get the answers.  And if you want 

to play games, fine with me, but I would appreciate, sir, that if 

you don't give me the answers honestly, then we could be 

having a little problem. 

 

It bothers me a little bit because I took you at your word, and 

then my questions were based on that.  And now if you're 

trying to play games and make me look foolish at the other end, 

then, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can do that for myself.  I 

don't need your help. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many 

projects are ready to go when the board is finally formed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, I'd like to 

comment on the remarks made by the member from Wilkie.  I 

have not misled you.  We have not in any way, shape, or form 

checked out these people, what stand they took.  The one 

person at a news conference indicated to a newspaper person in 

Saskatoon that he had no trouble with nuclear . . . generating 

electricity with nuclear energy.  Now if you want to take that as 

a mandate that he's in favour of it, you can.  You can choose 

whatever you want to do with that.  This is an objective person. 

 

And the other point is that I've been giving you straightforward, 

honest answers and I don't take very kindly to threats that 

you're going to keep me here a long time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think maybe I should read the mandate of the 

Authority and maybe that will help resolve some of the 

concerns that the member opposite has. 

 

The mandate of the Authority includes: 

 

 Evaluating electrical supply options for the year 2003 to the 

year 2020. 

 

 Promoting development of energy conservation and 

alternative energy technologies and related business 

opportunities through development of government-industry 

partnerships to reduce economic risks. 

 (And) Promoting the commercial development and 

application of new technologies to achieve expanded 

production or value-added processing of conventional energy 

resources. 

 

Those are the three main points of their mandate. 

 

You asked me the question how many projects were ready to 

go.  There are no specific projects ready to go because the 

Authority has not been able to establish a permanent office yet.  

It hasn't got a staff in place. 

 

And once this happens, then projects will be considered.  But 

there are no projects that are sort of sitting at the doorstep that 

are ready to go.  There may be projects that are further down 

the line but there's nothing there at the doorstep right now that 

they could jump in and take hold of immediately. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I'm 

going to refer back one more time.  You said, when you were 

talking to the member from Souris-Cannington, that one of the 

members indicated in a letter.  And now you're telling me it 

was something else again. 

 

So if you . . . I just don't want that sort of an answer coming 

from you.  And further, we are the ones that will be asking you 

questions.  We will be the ones to determine how long you are 

there to answer questions. 

 

Okay, let's get that straight.  That's your job.  It's my job.  So 

again I point out.  Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the 

reason, one of the reasons I was probing this bias on the board 

is in a news release, Leader-Post, by Mark Wyatt, there is a 

person by the name of Marcoux who said the appointment of 

Coxworth, a prominent environmentalist, threatens its 

consideration of the nuclear option. 

 

So there are other people are wondering about your balance on 

this board also.  And that's why I was trying to develop with 

you how, in your opinion, you had the balance. 

 

And when you indicated to me that the other two had not 

indicated their preference, I was of the assumption that they 

were neutral.  We had one avowed, anti-nuclear person and two 

neutral people.  And that's the point that I was trying to develop 

with you, sir. 

 

Another question I'd like to ask, sir . . . I'd like an answer for is: 

how will the environment legislation affect the oil and gas 

companies in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 

could clarify that.  Is he talking about new legislation that is 

being proposed, or is he talking about the environmental 

protection Act as it was in place?  Maybe it would help us a 

little in answering the question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm talking about 

the new, proposed environment legislation.  What is the impact 

going to be on Energy and Mines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, again I'm going to give 

you sort of a general answer because I'm not sure that 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

I can give you a specific answer until I have a specific thing 

that you need answered.  I may not even have the information 

here because it would fall under the environmental department.  

But let me just give you a general answer, and maybe the 

member will accept that as an answer. 

 

Generally, the industry -- the mining, oil and gas industry -- 

always has concerns about environment, and they're as 

concerned about protecting the environment as, I think, the 

general public in Saskatchewan is.  And in recent years 

particularly, the oil and gas industry and certainly the mining 

industry has done a very good job of protecting the 

environment in their areas.  And in my conversations with 

them, they always indicate to me that they are concerned about 

the environment.  They want to co-operate with the 

government in protecting the environment because they realize 

that their future in this province depends very much on how 

they treat the environment and how they treat the soil. 

 

From my observations in the oil industry and in the gas 

industry and the mining industry, particularly the uranium 

mining industry, these people are working very, very hard to 

meet the requirements and the standards that are laid out in the 

environmental protection Act and have not, to my knowledge, 

expressed specific concerns about a specific aspect of 

environmental protection. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, then I can assume 

then from what your answer was that you have been in contact 

with the mining and oil people and you're developing the 

changes to the environment and the impact with them so that 

they can live with it. 

 

And the reason I'm asking you, sir, is there is some concern, 

there has been some concern expressed.  And I just wonder if I 

can . . . if that's the proper interpretation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I will not quarrel with the 

member's assessment.  There's always concern.  Any time that 

new regulations come in that industry has to comply with, there 

is some concern.  First of all, there's a monetary concern 

because every compliance to a regulation requires a certain 

amount of outlay of cash on the part of the industry. 

 

And industries today -- the mining industry is no exception, the 

oil and gas industry is no exception -- are having some 

difficulties with cash flow, as we well know in this province.  

And any additional requirements on their part to protect the 

environment causes them concern.  But they're realistic 

enough, the people I've talked to are realistic enough to know 

that if they don't protect the environment, their future in this 

province, and in fact all across the world, is going to be 

jeopardized.  Because they have to realize that they're living in 

a world that is becoming increasingly environmentally 

conscious, and they have to comply or else they will not exist. 

 

So I find them very co-operative.  They'll express their 

concerns.  They'll sometimes even complain about certain 

regulations that may be a little too tough.  But by and large, the 

industry has been most co-operative and lives within the 

guidelines of the environmental 

protection Act. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I thank you for 

that assurance, and I accept it as given.  I think you . . . Could I 

just go to another question?  And it's regarding the relocation of 

Total Minatco uranium company.  It's in Saskatoon.  What are 

the terms of the agreement?  And is the government providing 

any incentives to this company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

member for that question because I haven't had an opportunity 

to ever mention in this House about the move of the head office 

of Total Minatco to Saskatoon.  There were no government 

incentives.  This company decided that they would move their 

head office to the province where most of their business was. 

 

Now they moved . . . and I want to make this very clear that the 

Minatco office that moved to Saskatoon is that aspect of their 

office that deals with uranium mining.  It is not their total head 

office.  I think I want to make that very clear.  It's only that part 

of their office that deals with uranium mining, and their head 

office will have approximately 17 people working in it out of 

Saskatoon. 

 

But there were no government incentives for their move.  They 

chose to do this on their own.  I think they're good corporate 

citizens in Saskatchewan.  It also indicates their confidence in 

the industry and it also indicates their confidence in this 

government. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, did 

you in your response answer when they are moving and how 

many positions?  I'm sorry if I missed it. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, they have already moved.  

They've relocated their office to Saskatoon.  They are in the 

Scotia tower and the Princeton tower is where they've located 

their office, and their initial projection is that they will . . . 

when the office is fully staffed there'll be 17 people on staff. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that 

and when you mentioned a few minutes ago about, trust me, 

when we were talking about the board members of the 

Authority, I have to admit, sir, it kind of scared me a little.  

And I'm wondering what assurance did you give this company 

that you would not arbitrarily break any agreement you had 

with them if the government policy, the NDP Party policy says 

no uranium mining in Saskatchewan at your convention in the 

fall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, when this company chose 

to move their head office to Saskatoon they were fully aware of 

what was on the New Democratic Party policy.  They're also 

fully aware of the statements that this minister has made on 

behalf of this government.  When I became the minister I told 

the mining industry, the oil and gas industry, that it was 

business as usual, and when changes were going to be made in 

government policy that they would be consulted and we would 

make that decision.  We would inform them of that decision 

after consultations. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, then I assume that 

this company are satisfied with that answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well I think the fact that they're satisfied 

with this answer is evident in the fact that they spent a 

considerable amount of money moving into Saskatoon and 

establishing an office there.  And that's really all I can say on 

that point. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to indicate 

to you it says here in a report: that uranium industry concerned 

about an election.  And that was before the last election, 

because of the position the NDP had on nuclear energy. 

 

It said that they were going to be phased out as new jobs came 

in.  And that's why I'm wondering if you had given them any 

guarantee.  What would your position be if you decided there 

would be no uranium in industry?  Would you buy them out or 

would you confiscate it, or how would you handle it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is doing some speculation now and I am not prone to answer to 

speculation.  Because what if's, I really don't think that they 

carry a lot of weight right now.  I could say what if the sky 

would fall, you know.  It's just too speculative and I cannot 

really give you an answer. 

 

All I can continue to say is that these companies know what's 

on the policy book of the New Democratic Party.  They knew 

that before they came.  And I gave them no solid assurances of 

anything.  I simply talked to them and I told them that this is a 

pro-development government.  I think if you read the news 

reports you will probably read those statements.  And that this 

government is not going to do things that are going to 

jeopardize the development of the industries in this province. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that sounds 

reassuring.  But I just would like to take you back to the potash 

people a few years ago.  They found themselves in a spot 

where they didn't have much choice.  So I find that reassuring. 

 

I think one of my colleagues would like to ask a few questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

reviewing the proposed legislation for SaskEnergy, I have been 

unable to determine anywhere in that Bill a suitable regulatory 

mechanism associated with the transportation of natural gas in 

this province.  And I'm wondering, given that the various 

petroleum associations, SIGUA (Saskatchewan Industrial Gas 

Users Association), everyone over the last couple of years has 

prepared briefs on that topic for the Government of 

Saskatchewan, why there is no regulatory mechanism being 

brought forward with the SaskEnergy Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would love to answer the 

member's question, but the SaskEnergy Bill is not in my 

jurisdiction.  It falls under the jurisdiction of the Minister of 

Economic Development.  So I'm sorry, but I'm not prepared to 

comment on that, on what the contents of 

that Bill is. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's not 

acceptable.  When I filled that chair, I can assure you that 

IPAC (Independent Petroleum Association of Canada) and 

Canadian Petroleum Association, the producers in 

Saskatchewan, all of them, along with the Industrial Gas Users 

who you meet with -- I would suggest probably on a fairly 

regular basis because I always did -- spent a great deal of time 

talking about the need for regulatory mechanisms in the natural 

gas business. 

 

And I am sure the brief that was prepared last year by the 

Industrial Gas Users is well known to you, sir.  In the 

formulation of the TransGas Bill, the Minister of Energy would 

have had a great deal of say.  And I want you to tell me exactly 

what your department's role has been in those discussions 

because you undoubtedly have had them with the industry.  

And I would like you to tell the Assembly where that's at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, there's no question that 

we've had discussions with the industry on exactly the issue 

that the member raises about the regulations of pipelines and so 

on. 

 

Now I think we have to separate the SaskEnergy Bill from The 

Pipe Lines Act.  If he's talking about The Pipe Lines Act, now 

that is within the Department of Energy and Mines.  But the 

SaskEnergy Bill isn't. 

 

So if the member would like to ask me another question, I'd be 

pleased to respond. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I know where the lines are 

drawn and who has responsibility for what.  That's not what I 

asked you.  I know that the people involved in the production 

of natural gas, the end users, all of them meet with the Minister 

of Energy on a regular basis.  And they talk about the need for 

regulatory . . . tolling, tariff, those types of things. 

 

Now they were very concerned with SaskEnergy and TransGas 

previously.  And now that there has been a final determination 

on the SaskEnergy Bill, as to where TransGas will be, then 

along with that final determination needs to be some regulatory 

mechanism in place.  I mean the people that you are supposed 

to represent in this government has been fairly adamant about 

that for a long time. 

 

And I just want you to inform the Assembly where those 

discussions are going.  And if you are planning, in the case of 

TransGas, to bring in a mechanism similar to the one in Alberta 

or similar to other jurisdictions, something that will allow the 

public some assurance that the government isn't going to gouge 

on natural gas rates, that's what I would like you to tell the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I would be happy to tell the member 

opposite, Mr. Chairman, and the Assembly about where this is 

at.  I'm glad the member mentioned the fact that the industry 

has been complaining for many, many years on the regulatory 

body.  I'm a little surprised that when he occupied this chair 

why he didn't bring in some regulations on that, but I guess 

that's history. 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

But I can assure the member that my department and I have 

had some discussions just very recently on opening up The 

Pipe Lines Act for the next session of the legislature, and we'll 

be taking a look at what needs to be done.  If it is possible to 

put in a regulatory system that is suitable and acceptable to the 

industry, and if it's feasible, we are prepared to take a look at 

exactly that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, it's very feasible.  And I know 

that the people in the industry want it.  That's not the question.  

Now one of the . . . I'll just read a section out of the brief by 

SIGUA, presented last year to the Department of Energy and 

Mines, amongst others, on this issue. 

 

 The basic principle of public regulation is that the owner of 

an essential monopoly is entitled to a fair return on 

investment, and the customer is entitled to safe, reliable, and 

efficient service.  To strike a balance between these two 

entitlements, an independent and informed body is needed.  

The body must be able to decide how much money the owner 

needs to operate the business and earn a fair return, the size 

of the revenue pie.  It must also be able to decide how the pie 

is sliced, how much of the total cost should be borne by each 

customer. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this is a fact of life in every province but 

Saskatchewan.  And it was anticipated with the privatization of 

TransGas that that would then follow with a regulatory 

mechanism.  And I can assure you if I had occupied that chair a 

little bit longer, that would have been the case, but there was a 

change of government. 

 

But the requirements for the public to have a regulatory 

mechanism in place, to safeguard the interests of the consumer 

no matter what their size, is the same.  And I know that those 

presentations have been made to you and it is absolutely 

fundamental, now that the SaskEnergy Bill will be a reality -- 

perhaps in this session -- that that not be put off to some later 

date, because the potential to gouge is just tremendous where 

you have an unregulated entity with a natural monopoly like 

SaskEnergy. 

 

So I would like to know sort of where we are at on both the 

pipeline side and with the residential and industrial consumer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the priorities of the 

government for this session was that we would get the 

SaskEnergy Bill out of the way, and it was absolutely 

necessary and imperative that that situation be clarified as to 

the position of SaskEnergy.  And that's all I can say on 

SaskEnergy because it's not within my jurisdiction. 

 

But we are having discussions with the industry, as the member 

read from the brief that SIGUA presented, and other 

organizations and agencies have also presented briefs to my 

department and to me personally regarding a similar issue.  

This is a concern, and we recognize this concern, in the 

industry and for the people in Saskatchewan in general.  And as 

I said earlier, my department is prepared to discuss this issue 

with the industry, to look at the different pieces of legislation 

and Acts which may need amendment in order to satisfy the 

needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's a little bit like putting 

the cart before the horse, in my opinion.  I've had people from 

the Industrial Gas Users make representation to me because of 

the issue with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) wanting the 5 per cent claw-back on grants-in-lieu 

that were removed with the deregulation of the gas industry.  

We're talking two and a half million dollars there. 

 

We've had people in the pipeline business make representation 

to us, and they are quite worried because what they've seen 

already from your government is increases in the gas rates.  We 

now have the debt that was associated with TransGas and 

SaskEnergy rolled back into SaskPower.  And quite frankly, 

sir, no one out there, neither the producer, people in the 

transportation business, or the end user, is going to have a clue 

what goes into the rate structures as far as the rates that are 

being set by this natural monopoly. 

 

I'd just like to read a little bit more, Mr. Chairman, from this 

brief so that the minister clearly understands what we're talking 

about in this issue: 

 

 To decide these broad questions the body must be able to 

decide whether the facilities constructed are required by the 

public, whether the amount spent on the facilities was 

prudent, and consequently how much of the owner's 

investment should be recovered from the public. 

 

 They must be able to decide whether the costs forecast are 

reasonable and necessary, including the cost of attracting 

investment.  They must be able to decide whether the service 

provided is adequate and whether the conditions for 

providing the service are appropriate. 

 

 And finally, it must also be able to decide whether the rates 

charged for serving a particular customer-class fairly reflect 

the cost of serving that class. 

 

And the title of this section -- I'm sure the minister is familiar 

with it -- is, "Regulators must provide a surrogate for 

competition."  Because what we have here is a natural 

monopoly.  The previous government went out of its way to 

make sure that natural gas was distributed through this 

province far greater than under the previous government.  In 

other words, natural gas was deregulated, it was taken to tens 

of thousands of farms, villages, businesses.  All of those people 

now dependent upon natural gas for various parts of either their 

livelihood or their home heating, that type of thing.  With that 

extra amount of gas being used in this province, the burden of 

proof increasingly is on government to make sure that there's 

no gouging going on. 

 

Every other province in Canada has a regulatory mechanism 

that people can appeal to, talk to, and make sure that the tolling 

and tariff is fair.  And I think, Mr. Minister, to simply say that 

SaskEnergy doesn't relate to me is unacceptable.  You're the 

Energy minister.  When I was in those shoes I had to deal a lot 

with it.  It wasn't 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

simply the minister responsible for SaskPower.  So I would like 

you to tell me exactly what assurances that you have given 

IPAC, SIGUA, other organizations that are involved, of where 

the timetable is going to be and what this regulatory 

mechanism that you have in mind looks like. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can simply repeat 

some of the things I've said, and just to reiterate them and 

maybe fill in on some of the details that the member is asking 

for.  I indicated to the member that we as a department are 

going to take a look at The Pipe Lines Act this year and 

legislation could be ready as early as the next session.  It's not 

going to happen this session, it certainly wouldn't be ready.  

And it could be ready as early as next session. 

 

There are two things we have to consider and the member is 

reading from the brief that was presented by SIGUA and I 

respect that.  And I've talked to those people and I've also read 

that brief.  That is one side of the story, and SIGUA and the 

industrial gas users and other gas users have a story to tell and 

they have a certain scenario they use. 

 

On the other side of the situation we have the people who own 

the pipelines and they also have a story.  And the object of 

legislation will be to establish a balance so that both the 

consumer and the pipeline can live with the kind of legislation 

that's going to be brought forth.  At this point I cannot give the 

member any specifics on legislation.  We will be talking to the 

people that own the pipelines; we will be talking to the people 

that use the pipelines to see if we can get a balance between the 

two.  If we can get an agreement between the two that they can 

live with, then as I said earlier we are prepared to take a look at 

the Act, open up the Act, and bring forth legislation in the next 

session. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the people that 

are in the pipeline business and the people that are producing 

gas in this province aren't very far off of where SIGUA is.  As 

you know, last year when a group of IPAC companies put 

together a proposal to purchase TransGas, along with that came 

a proposal for regulation because they did not want to be in the 

same position that they had been previously when the 

government owned it. 

 

And that regulatory mechanism that was talked about, along 

with that proposal of a half a billion dollars, was very similar to 

what SIGUA . . . (inaudible) . . . So don't tell me that SIGUA 

and the people that are producing the gas are very darn far 

apart on this issue.  Both groups, I'll say to you, Mr. Minister, 

want this done, and they want it done sooner than later because 

quite frankly they don't trust government.  That's why they're 

insisting that there be a regulatory mechanism in place in this 

province like there is in every other province in Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you must be favouring one form or 

another.  I know that the department has done a tremendous 

amount of work in this area.  Now is there going to be a 

complaints-based model?  Is that what's favoured?  Is it a 

rate-review model?  Is it one that they call it informal 

supervision?  I mean what are we favouring 

here? 

 

Your department has the work done on it.  Where is the 

minister leaning?  What have you indicated to the people on the 

producing side?  Which one do you favour from what you've 

seen that you would take forward as a regulatory model? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say to the 

member opposite that I don't disagree with him, that the 

industry that uses the gas and the industry that pipes the gas are 

far apart.  I don't think I indicated that in the answer I gave him 

earlier.  They may be very close together, but it's still 

incumbent on us to talk to both of them to make sure that 

there's a balance that the two of them can agree to. 

 

At this point we have looked at various models.  We haven't 

come down on the side of either one or the other at this point.  

There are several factors that we have to consider before we 

choose a model that we're going to enhance or promote, and 

one of the factors we have to take into consideration is the cost 

factor. 

 

If you were to look at something like the National Energy 

Board, the NEB, there's horrendous costs involved with that, 

and we're not interested in that kind of a thing where we have 

to put forth huge sums of money in order to settle probably 

what in many instances are relatively minor disputes that need 

to be solved.  We're also looking at the effectiveness of the 

board.  Cost is obviously a factor, and if you have an effective 

board, then usually the cost is also lower than if you have an 

ineffective board.  So we're looking at those two aspects but we 

have not come down on the side of one or the other at this 

point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  I'll put it to you another way, Mr. 

Minister.  The people that you have been discussing this with, 

and I know they're all aware of SaskEnergy's intentions -- and 

I've received briefs from a number of people vis-a-vis the 

SaskEnergy Bill -- and it always comes down, like where is the 

regulatory mechanism that goes with this?  The people that you 

obviously are doing all this consulting with, what would they 

like?  Which one does SIGUA like?  Which one do IPAC like?  

Can you give us some indication with this consultative process 

where these people are coming down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the question the member 

asks is fairly specific, and as I indicated earlier, we haven't 

arrived at specifics yet.  But I can give him sort of a general 

answer as to where we are with the industry. 

 

In relations to TransGas, I think it's fair to say that TransGas 

has recently been trying to make information available to the 

industry as to how they arrive at their rate structure, and they're 

trying to make it as transparent as possible.  Now the users of 

the gas are seldom satisfied with what the pipeline owner tells 

them as to what their costs are and what is transparent and what 

isn't transparent.  But they have made an effort in recent 

months to do this.  The industry -- I'll be very frank -- is not 

totally satisfied with that.  They would like more than that, but 

it goes part way to satisfying their needs. 

 

The model that would probably be the easiest to 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

implement and probably the lowest-cost model would be sort 

of a complaints-based model where you have a board or a 

tribunal or whatever organization you have that would look at 

complaints made by either side, either the producer, or the 

person who pipes the gas, or the person who uses the gas.  And 

that would probably be the simplest and maybe the cheapest 

model to operate. 

 

I would say at this point that if the industry wants a Cadillac 

model of a complaints mechanism, then they have to realize 

there will be costs involved, and these costs involved with a 

Cadillac model of a regulatory body would be passed on to the 

industry.  The government and my department certainly cannot 

afford to have a Cadillac model of a complaints-based 

regulatory body or any other based regulatory body that's going 

to cost a lot of money. 

 

As I indicated before, cost is a factor.  It is a factor to the 

industry.  It's also certainly a factor to the department.  And 

effectiveness -- if it's not effective, it doesn't matter what it 

costs; it's no good.  So effectiveness is possibly, in all 

likelihood, the highest priority and cost would come second. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate that information, Mr. Minister, 

on what TransGas is doing with the people that it does business 

with.  But what I asked you was your discussions with industry, 

both on the user side and the production side, which model 

they were favouring presently. 

 

I know SIGUA doesn't particularly favour the 

complaints-based model; they have some problems with it.  So 

I was hoping that you would inform the Assembly, with the 

consultations that you have ongoing, given that SaskEnergy's 

Bill is going to be a fact of life here and that all of them are 

going to be subject to that legislation, what model they prefer.  

Because I think it's important for the public to now start getting 

involved in this debate of what model the public will ultimately 

have their rates set by, what SIGUA's preferring, what some of 

the producers are preferring in the way of a regulatory body. 

 

That's what I would like you to tell me so that the public 

watching TV have got an idea where this thing's coming down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say to the hon. 

member opposite that I know he would like a very specific 

answer.  I can't give him a specific answer.  I'll be very blunt 

with him; I don't have a specific answer to give to his question 

because it depends on who you talk to as to what kind of a 

model they want.  And they don't all want the same model. 

 

So for me to say that, you know, this organization wants this 

model, another organization wants that model, it would simply 

be confusing.  What we're prepared to do is to sit down with 

the industry and discuss the different models with them and 

hopefully come up with a model that they can all live with. 

 

It's very difficult to come up with a model and say, well this is 

the model and you all have to live with it.  That's one way of 

doing things, but generally not very satisfactory. 

So what we want to do is we want to get some input from these 

people, as well as the people that own the pipeline, as to what 

kind of a model they can live with. 

 

So I can't give him a specific answer.  If he keeps pushing on 

that, I'm sorry; I have to give the same answer.  I cannot give 

you a specific answer to your question. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I can assure you, Mr. Minister, I won't be 

confused about the different models.  It's something I took a 

great deal of time in making myself aware of.  So I won't be 

confused at all.  Now if you're telling me that you don't know, 

that tells me that you haven't consulted with anyone. 

 

Now the individual owning the pipeline is the Crown.  In the 

case of SaskEnergy and TransGas, it is the Crown that will 

own it.  I mean, the NDP campaigned long and hard on the fact 

that that pipeline and the $200 million worth of pipe that are 

going to be laid in this province in the next few years would be 

owned by the Crown.  You were very adamant about that. 

 

So it is you, sir, Executive Council, the Crown that owns the 

pipeline that will be doing the transportation of the gas.  And 

they are the ones that are going to set the tolling and the tariff 

rates. 

 

Now I would like you to tell me -- and I'm sure that you've had 

conversations -- of which model SIGUA favours today, which 

model for instance the gas producers in the Sand Hills region 

favour, the gas producers perhaps up in the Lloydminster area 

because they've got further to go and they don't have a 

gathering system in place yet, what they favour.  Because 

they're all going to have to deal with TransGas, and TransGas 

is owned by the Crown.  And TransGas will set the tolling and 

tariff rates. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you've done your consultative work, you 

will know where those people are stacking up.  And I would 

like you to tell the Assembly tonight which model is favoured 

by the various areas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, just a few comments to 

make regarding the question that was raised.  The pipelines in 

Saskatchewan are not all Crown owned, I think.  As the 

member well knows, there are other organizations that own 

pipelines in Saskatchewan.  He's absolutely correct that 

TransGas is the major pipeline owner in Saskatchewan, but 

there are others that also have to be considered when we put in 

regulations. 

 

In our discussions with the industry, particularly since the new 

year, when I first became minister last November, the industry 

laid those kind of concerns before us, in fact a whole raft of 

concerns before the minister.  And mainly they were interested 

in getting to know the minister and also getting to know where 

I was coming from and what kind of views I had in regards to 

their industry. 

 

The biggest concern the organizations have had is not the 

regulatory body.  It's been mentioned; it's not their number one 

concern.  What we have indicated to them is 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

that the government is willing to look at this.  They have 

emphasized with us recently that there's a need for government 

to agree to take a look at this.  We've indicated to them that 

we're not going to do it this session of the legislature, but if 

legislation is going to come forward, it's going to come forward 

in the next session. 

 

Their primary concern is to make us aware of this, that there's a 

concern out there. We've recognized this concern.  And as I 

indicated to you earlier, we are willing to continue discussing 

this issue with them. 

 

And as far as specific models is concerned, I think I mentioned 

to the member before that I don't have a specific model that I 

think is going to suit all the different industries that use the gas.  

We'll look at their models.  Hopefully we can come together to 

an agreement with a combination of all the different models, 

one that will satisfy the industry generally. 

 

There'll always be specifics that will not . . . never be satisfied, 

but we hope we can satisfy the industry in a general way. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, for some reason you keep 

wanting to skirt around this issue.  Now I didn't ask you which 

model you preferred, or the government preferred. 

 

You have been telling my colleague and you've said all along 

what a wonderful consultative job that you are doing.  Now I 

know the industry's main concern has not been tolling and 

tariff; the main concern is that you'll jack the royalty rates up to 

the point where they'll have to shut their wells in.  But beyond 

that, they are very concerned about tolling and tariff. 

 

Now what I specifically asked you was not your position or the 

government's position, albeit that will be important at the end 

of the day.  I want to know, in your consultations with these 

other groups, where they are coming down. 

 

SIGUA, unless they've changed in the last few months, the 

individuals that I knew weren't shrinking violets.  I'm sure they 

come right out and tell the minister exactly where they sit on 

this issue.  And I don't suppose Gerry Protti and a few of the 

other folks at IPAC are sitting back on their hands being 

reticent about this particular thing.  They favoured certain 

models in the past and I'm sure they favour certain models 

today. 

 

And I want you to tell me and tell the people of Saskatchewan 

what models they favour.  They've never been ones to hide it.  I 

just want to know if you know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to just make a 

comment about the first remark that the member made 

regarding the industry and concern about this government's 

position on royalties. 

 

The kind of scaremongering that the members opposite have 

engaged in prior to the election, during the election, and since 

they formed government is absolutely unfounded.  I think if 

you checked with the industry and how satisfied the industry is 

with the regulations and the legislation that this government 

brought in, I think you 

will find that it is unfounded. 

 

This government did not change the royalty structure.  We are 

in the process right now of doing a royalty review, but we did 

not change the royalty structure.  And those kind of allegations 

don't go anywhere to enhance the industry in this province.  

We're trying to do everything we can to make this province 

attractive for the industry to come and work here, and the kind 

of remarks that come from the opposition that this government 

is trying to destroy the industry by increasing royalties doesn't 

do anything to enhance the industry's interest in this province. 

 

Coming back to your specific question.  The industries are not 

nearly as concerned about specifics and models as they are in 

the concept, and that's what I've been trying to convey to the 

member.  If the member is pushing me to give specific models, 

I will not do that because then there's a tendency to want to 

bind people to those and hold them to that. 

 

This government is willing to sit down with the industry, to 

listen to their particular models that they have; then we will, in 

consultation with them, develop a model that they can live 

with.  And as I said before, not every line in a regulation or in a 

regulatory body is going to suit every pipeline or is going to 

suit every producer.  What we have to do is have a regulatory 

system which is generally accepted to those that pipe the gas 

and the oil and also to those that use the pipeline. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's sheer 

malarkey and you know it.  Those groups have never been 

hesitant to put their name on the line when it comes to a 

regulatory mechanism -- absolute malarkey.  Now you may not 

want to be bound to it, Mr. Minister, and that's the problem that 

we've got here.  We've got SaskEnergy coming forward with a 

Bill.  We've had rate increases already.  And I suspect the 

Minister of Finance has got his eye on the gas business for a 

little more cash. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Minister, that SIGUA isn't all over the map.  

They will have a position, as will most of the other groups that 

you deal with.  They're not shrinking violets, sir.  I can 

understand your hesitancy on behalf of the government to give 

us a position.  I want to know from you where these folks are at 

these days, what position they've taken.  They will have one as 

an industry association, I can rest assure you.  And in your 

consultation with them, you should know what it is.  I just want 

you to tell me in the House tonight. 

 

And as for your other point, I sat in your chair for two years.  

And I had members of your caucus, your colleagues over on 

this side, accuse me and my government of royalty give-aways 

amounting to several billion dollars.  Every time I went through 

Estimates, I had to answer to those questions.  And every last 

one of them that questioned me left no different impression in 

my mind that they were going to rectify that several billion 

dollar problem that they were always accusing me of making -- 

I and my predecessors. 

 

So when I make that statement, it only comes from the words 

that were spoken by your colleagues over a great number of 

years, that there had been an immense rip-off 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

of the taxpayer by those particular companies.  And it had to be 

rectified.  And that's when I make that comment; I'm only 

repeating to you what your own colleague said to me over a 

great number of years. 

 

Now back to gas regulation -- I'm sure the groups will have a 

fairly definitive point of view.  And I would like you to tell me 

about those groups, not the government's because I understand 

why you would want to hide that.  I want you to tell me about 

SIGUA and IPAC and others, where they're at today with their 

industry association points of view. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I can just . . . Again I'll 

have to repeat some of the things I said before because I just 

don't have a lot of new things to say to the member opposite.  I 

can say, however, that we haven't had any new, recent 

initiatives from either SIGUA or IPAC or any of the agencies 

that transport gas or oil for that matter. 

 

I can't give you specifics tonight because I don't have them 

with me.  I will undertake to provide you with any of the briefs 

that we have received with the specifics in them.  Some of 

those briefs are rather lengthy, but we can point out exactly 

where the specifics are.  My department will undertake to 

provide you with those, and we can probably have a further 

discussion on this at some other time.  But right now I cannot 

provide you with the specifics. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I find this a little 

disturbing that the Minister of Energy, the individual 

responsible for the transportation . . . or the companies that 

transport gas, the minister that meets with the industrial gas 

users, isn't conversant enough with this that he can tell the 

Assembly tonight where his clientele are coming with on 

regulatory control in the natural gas business. 

 

We're going to have a Bill . . . We're going to have a Bill 

rammed through this legislature, like we've had every other 

piece of legislation rammed through, probably in the next 

couple of weeks, that gives the government the mandate to do 

whatever they want in the natural gas business as far as taking 

it to the consumer. 

 

That's going to be a fact of life.  And something like that, that's 

going to be a fact of life, means that the people that are using 

that gas . . . I mean somebody like IPSCO, some of the major 

potash mines, the industries that use very large volumes, 

Saskferco, are going to be very concerned about that tariff and 

tolling structure, I can tell you, Mr. Minister, and through their 

various industry associations are going to make their views 

known, as are the people that are producing the stuff. 

 

(2030) 

 

Now we've got a Bill that's a fact of life, that's on all of their 

minds.  And I know it is, because they've told me it is. 

 

And they will be talking about regulatory mechanisms.  And 

what you're telling me is tonight that you aren't conversant 

enough to bring to this House tonight in your Estimates where 

those various groups stand on that.  I mean, fair ball.  If your 

cabinet colleagues won't trust you 

to come forward with the government's view on it in these 

Estimates, that's all right.  We'll have to deal with that at 

another time. 

 

But I know the industry groups that you supposedly are 

responsible for will have very strong-held views on that, 

because they know that thing's going to be a de facto piece of 

legislation soon.  And every last one of them could be in a 

position to lose financially because of it. 

 

And I think in the interests of the industrial users in this 

province, and the interest of the small-business men, and the 

interest of the home owner, who is going to be subject to this 

unregulated government monopoly very soon, that you would 

want to bring to this House information as to where those folks 

stand.  That's your job.  They all talk to the Minister of Energy 

about it.  And I think, Mr. Minister, that you wouldn't want to 

miss this opportunity to tell us where that is, considering the 

fact that that Bill will be law very quickly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'm not sure, Mr. Chairman, that there 

was a question in that.  But I have a few comments to make on 

this. 

 

The member opposite obviously assumes that TransGas, who is 

the major transporter of gas in Saskatchewan, is out there to rip 

off everybody else that uses gas.  Well I don't think that that's 

TransGas's mandate, nor has it ever been their mandate, and 

nor will it ever be their mandate.  As I indicated earlier, 

TransGas is doing everything within its power to inform the 

groups that use the gas to tell them how their rate structure is 

set up and to be as transparent as possible so that the user can 

see the costs that are involved in transporting this gas.  

TransGas isn't out there, nor is the government out there, to rip 

off the consumers. 

 

What the member opposite seems to be asking me is what are 

the different options out there and he wants me to pick and 

choose between all the options.  And I'm not prepared to do 

that.  As I indicated to the member earlier, I'm not prepared 

here to give him specifics; however I have undertaken to 

provide him with briefs where, if the specifics are in those 

briefs, we will give him the specifics and he can decide which 

ones are the good ones and which are the bad ones. 

 

There's no point in me making statements here tonight that 

says, this group wants this and this group wants that.  When 

that becomes public knowledge it simply is viewed as pitting 

one group against the other.  I'm not interested in doing that.  

I'm interested in working with the industry, not against the 

industry.  And I'm not interested in working with one group of 

the industry and not with the other group of the industry. 

 

I'm interested in making sure that the publications and the 

submissions from one group receive the same fair treatment as 

the submissions from another group and that's the purpose of 

our department.  Maybe the member doesn't understand that 

form of consultation but that's what we've engaged on and 

we're going to continue to do that kind of consultation with the 

industry. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this is so 

unbelievable that it almost doesn't deserve any more 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

dealing with.  You know full well that those various groups 

talk all the time.  The individual sitting beside you from your 

department knows this stuff on a day-by-day basis.  I can 

assure you he's that competent and he will know exactly where 

every last one of those groups sit. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, what your hesitancy is all about is that 

you don't want to have anyone in this province, anyone in this 

province think that the government isn't seriously considering 

this.  And I don't believe you are.  I believe what we're going to 

do is get a SaskEnergy Bill and with it we're going to get the 

duplication of gas rate increases that occurred the last time the 

NDP held power in this province.  Between 1971 and 1982 gas 

rates went up about 180 per cent in this province and I think if 

you check the numbers between 1982 and 1991 you will find 

that it was significantly less. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if this is why you are so hesitant to talk 

about this issue -- that the Minister of Finance plans on using 

natural gas to gouge the consumer, to gouge our business 

people like you did between '71 and '82, and I think before this 

Bill sees final reading that we better go back to the drawing 

board.  If that's all that SaskEnergy's here for, we better not 

pass it through this legislature if it just simply means increased 

gas rates for everyone. 

 

And you know, as well as I do, you can talk all you want about 

TransGas being transparent.  If TransGas doesn't want to be 

transparent, there's not a darn thing anyone in this province or 

anyone shipping gas through it, can do about it -- not a darn 

thing.  You are a natural monopoly and you can charge 

whatever you feel like. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if this isn't the case, I think it would be 

proper for you to set a timetable, before this legislature tonight, 

of when consumers and users and producers can expect a 

regulatory mechanism to make sure that they aren't going to get 

ripped off by SaskEnergy.  And I think it would be . . . Given 

that you know so much about what everyone thinks about this, 

I think it would be good to have a timetable laid out now for 

folks so that they know this is on the government's agenda, and 

it isn't going to be shoved off to the side. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite's concerns about regulations ring somewhat hollow 

when his government established a Public Utilities Review 

Commission and then shortly afterwards cancelled it.  So his 

concern is obviously not very sincere when he talks about a 

regulatory body.  I think his government found out very 

quickly that the regulatory body, the way they had it set up, 

wasn't functioning all that well. 

 

I think I have indicated on several occasions to the member 

opposite that I've given him a timetable.  I said it will not be 

this session of the legislature; that we are prepared to look at 

The Pipe Lines Act, and other related Acts, and other related 

legislation, for the next session of the legislature.  That's the 

timetable and that's as close as I can come to giving him a time 

line on this. 

 

In response to some of the remarks that the member has made 

about, you know, me talking to the industry and consulting 

with the industry, I'd just like to remind the 

member opposite that he and I attended a meeting in Regina, 

known as the IPAC annual meeting, the Saskatchewan section 

of the IPAC annual meeting, where I had the opportunity to 

address the group, and he and I sat at the same table, in fact, 

had a table at the same lunch. 

 

I don't know whether the member opposite paid any attention 

to the president of IPAC, Charlie Fisher, when he made his 

introduction and his remarks about the Minister of Energy in 

Saskatchewan.  And if he did, he will recall -- I will just remind 

him -- that Mr. Fisher indicated to all present in that group that 

this minister was the most consultative minister that they had 

dealt with. 

 

And I also noticed that right after he made his introduction, the 

member opposite left the room and didn't wait for the speech. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, one thing you'll 

find out about IPAC is that they are tremendously hospitable 

and they always say nice things about ministers of Energy in 

formal settings like that.  I'm sure you'll find that their 

hospitality over the years will be just extraordinary. 

 

And the reason, Mr. Minister, that I didn't stick around for I 

know what would have been a scintillating speech was I did 

have duties in the House here.  It was question period and, 

unlike the minister, I felt it was responsible to be back here for 

question period. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I'm saying to you that that timetable is 

unacceptable to a whole lot of people in our province.  It's 

unacceptable to the producers.  It's unacceptable to the users 

because a whole lot of things can go by before you get through 

that review of the pipeline industry.  We can see a whole lot of 

dollars disappearing out of the pockets of home owners, 

farmers, small-business men, people like IPSCO, people like 

Kalium, people like Saskferco, if there is changes in the tolling 

and tariff associated with TransGas. 

 

And you're right, the former government disbanded PURC 

(Public Utilities Review Commission).  PURC was universally 

disliked by nearly everyone because of the costs associated 

with it -- government and the people that had to make 

presentations to it. 

 

It was well attended by lawyers but the costs for the value were 

very high.  So in the second term of government it was felt far 

wiser, Mr. Minister, to sell TransGas to investors and, by doing 

so, as a private entity it would then be very easy to put in a 

regulatory mechanism so that in the future the taxpayer of this 

province didn't have to pay for pipeline going in the ground and 

therefore would be the same as every other province in Canada. 

 

There's nowhere else, sir, in the entire dominion where the 

taxpayer is paying for the pipe going into the gathering system 

on a natural monopoly.  Nowhere. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that didn't occur because your government 

took over in October.  We now have TransGas back inside of 

SaskEnergy, a natural monopoly with no regulatory 

mechanism, no regulatory mechanism at all. 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

And you can make all of the wonderful statements you want in 

this House about them being transparent with their tolling rates, 

tariffs, but the simple fact is if somebody over there doesn't 

want to reveal it they don't have to, and they can charge 

whatever they wish.  And that ultimately will end up on the 

doorstep of every home owner in this province.  We've already 

seen it, Mr. Minister.  We've had natural gas rates falling, 

falling for the last 12 months -- not going up.  And yet we have 

seen rate increases already on the natural gas side by 

SaskEnergy.  We've got a falling market. 

 

The people producing it are taking home less, the people that 

are transporting it on the private side are taking home less.  

And you, Mr. Minister, and your government are taking home 

more.  Now if one wants to accentuate that over the next couple 

years, the potential is there to make very large profits for your 

new corporation and everyone else gets it in the ear. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Minister, I want to get some assurances 

from you that you know what you're talking about, that you 

understand the situation, and that at the cabinet table, you're 

doing your fair bit of representation to make sure that we have 

a regulatory mechanism in place that doesn't allow that to 

happen. 

 

And to simply say, well I'm going to open up The Pipe Lines 

Act some time in the future isn't what people from the users 

and the producers are telling me.  They're saying they would 

like something a little tighter than that before other of your 

cabinet colleagues have the opportunity to do something else. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, will you assure me tonight that at the next 

session of this legislature that The Pipe Lines Act or some 

other mechanism will be on the agenda so that when people are 

phoning me, I can give them the assurance that this government 

is going to deal with that regulatory component sooner than 

later. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to some of the 

comments made by the member opposite, it appears to me from 

his initial remarks, that one of the sore spots seems to be here 

today is that whether it's privatization of TransGas or whether 

it's public ownership.  I don't think that's the debate, but that 

seems to be a bit of a sore spot.  And the undercurrent of his 

remarks seem to indicate that that's one of the things that are 

bothering him. 

 

Your government had intentions of selling TransGas; our 

government chose to keep TransGas as a public utility.  And 

we believe that the public utility is the right way to go.  You 

have a different philosophy.  And you have every right to think 

that it should go the other way if that's the way you choose to 

think. 

 

In regards to the SaskEnergy rates, everybody knows that gas 

prices have fallen.  They look like there may be a bit of a 

rebound now but it is not significant.  But I think the member 

opposite understands very well that SaskEnergy buys very little 

gas on the spot market at the reduced 

prices.  They have long-term contracts and some of those 

long-term contracts have absolutely nothing to do with the spot 

price of gas as it is being sold for at the well-head today. 

 

We also have to recognize that SaskEnergy has to have a 

15-year supply reserve in place.  This all costs money.  So if 

the gas rates go up they have very little to do with what the 

price of gas is at the well-head, and I think the member knows 

that very well.  I just want to make sure that that gets into the 

record. 

 

As far as the assurance is concerned, for me to give an ironclad 

insurance would be foolhardy.  I cannot do that because I 

cannot look into the future.  I have given the member the 

commitment, and I will make that commitment again, that we 

are going to look at The Pipe Lines Act and we will consult 

with the industry.  We will talk to the people in the industry 

and if we can come up with some legislation that is satisfactory 

to all aspects of the industry and that the government can live 

with, then the next session of the legislation would be the 

appropriate time to introduce that into the legislature. 

 

For me to stand on my feet and say definitely next session of 

the legislature, it's projecting into the future and I'm not 

prepared to do that.  I'm more realistic than that because I know 

that things can happen between now and the next session that it 

may not happen.  But the intention is to make it happen and 

that's the assurance I give the industry and that's the insurance I 

can give the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if there's another rate 

increase I suspect it won't happen because no one over there 

will want to face the music.  It would be along with 

introduction of a regulatory body. 

 

But we'll leave this for a minute because obviously the minister 

isn't going to provide any more answers.  But I do assure the 

minister I expect any information that he has from the various 

groups, briefs that they might have on regulatory mechanisms, 

that that will come across. 

 

Now I want to go to another area.  I'd like the minister to tell 

me tonight where exactly the Oil and Gas Conservation Board 

is at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board is a three-member board.  It's in place.  

Two of the members that were on the board when I became the 

minister are still on the board and one member has been 

changed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, will you tell me who was 

changed and who remains on the board, and have you replaced 

that individual that you changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The members of the board today are Dr. 

Vigrass, Doug Ruse, and Murray Walter. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You didn't answer the question, Mr. Minister.  

I said who has changed and who was the replacement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The member that was changed was 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

Murray Acton and Murray Walter replaced Murray Acton. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And what were Murray Walter's 

qualifications that necessitated the change?  Why was Murray 

Walter . . . what were the differences that the minister felt 

needed to be rectified there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I don't have Mr. Walter's rsum here 

with me, but Mr. Walter is a lawyer in Swift Current in my 

constituency.  Mr. Walter is a respected lawyer in an 

established firm in Swift Current.  And as minister, it is my 

prerogative and also my obligation to appoint the board 

members, and it was my choice to appoint Murray Walter to 

the board. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what the minister is telling me . . . there 

was no problem with Mr. Acton, that he was fulfilling his 

duties quite adequately.  Just that the minister liked this Mr. 

Walter from his constituency quite well and he thought that he 

should have a place for him.  Is that what you're telling the 

House tonight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- What I'm telling the member opposite is, 

when he was minister he chose the board, and he chose Murray 

Acton to sit on the board, and I don't know what reasons he 

used to put him on the board.  When I became the minister, I 

chose Murray Walter to put on the board and I believe that 

Murray Walter is a competent individual who will do an 

excellent job on this board. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can tell you there's a 

slight difference.  That the cabinet chose Mr. Acton because of 

names brought forward with a report that he did on surface 

rights in the province of Saskatchewan and how it affected 

various aspects of the oil and gas industry.  That's why the 

cabinet chose to put Mr. Acton on. 

 

Now I would like to know what this Mr. Walter, other than 

being a friend of the minister, has done in the oil and gas 

industry that he deserves to have this appointment on the board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Walter comes from the city of Swift 

Current and we have a lot of oil business and gas business in 

that particular area and Mr. Walter has represented many of 

these people and is well-familiar with the industry and is doing 

a competent job in the short time that he has been in office. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if I remember correctly, 

Mr. Walter ran for the New Democratic Party in 1975 against 

Dennis Ham.  I suspect from what we've been finding out in 

this legislature for the last few weeks that that probably had 

more to do with expertise than the oil and gas industry. 

 

At least Mr. Minister is quite frank about these things.  It's sort 

of refreshing because of all the ducking and diving that your 

colleagues do in this area, that you more or less call a spade a 

spade and lay her on the line, and I do appreciate that.  Perhaps 

you could influence some of the rest of them to be a little more 

forthcoming in this area.  Patronage is a wonderful thing when 

you have such a definite mind-set about it, so I'm glad, Mr. 

Minister, that 

you confirmed for the House and public tonight exactly where 

we stood on that issue. 

 

One final question, Mr. Minister.  Is the Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board still situated in Weyburn or is it operating 

out of Regina?  Where is it at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the board is operating out 

of Regina. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I missed that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the board is operating out 

of Regina. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that the 

commitment of the previous government, to have it operate out 

of Weyburn close to the oil patch, is not going to happen at all, 

that there's been a policy decision to make sure that doesn't 

happen?  Or may that happen in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The policy decision that we made is to 

move that board . . . or keep that board in Regina.  Two of the 

members live in Regina; the other one lives in Swift Current.  

In order to have cost-saving measures in place, we decided to 

have the board in Regina rather than moving it to Weyburn.  

That doesn't mean to say that it's cast in stone that it will 

always stay in Regina, but for the immediate term it'll stay 

here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the mandate of that particular 

agency was expanded somewhat in the last year.  Had it been 

redundant for a number of years and it was reinvigorated and 

was given a mandate because of some things that were 

happening in the petroleum industry.  Can you tell me if that 

mandate has been maintained, expanded, exactly . . . just 

briefly where this board is now, if it's working on any 

particular case or where it's at these days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, there's been no change in the mandate of the board 

since we've taken over.  The mandate is exactly the same.  The 

board responds to issues that are submitted to it by the minister 

and since I've been minister, the board has dealt with one issue 

and no new issues are pending at this point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So we can be assured then, Mr. Minister, that 

the board is up and operating on the Gulf/Kennebar type of 

situation, that it is active, that it is ready to go, that the funding 

is in place, and that if there is another situation arising that the 

board then is prepared to act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thanks, Mr. Minister. Well my final 

comment, Mr. Chairman, in this area is it seems that the 

Minister of Energy definitely has an expensive criteria 

compared to some of his colleagues when he's choosing board 

members.  This one is worth 608 bucks.  So we've gone from 

the lowly types on the first board, when we examined, at $100 

average, to 300 on another one, and now we're at 608. 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

It seems that the harder we look, that all the promises made by 

New Democrats to not indulge in this patronage stuff in the last 

election has fallen by the wayside.  And every board that's been 

examined so far in this House has a criteria attached to it.  And 

this one has a very significant financial contribution. 

 

And I must say to the minister, besides being very forthright, 

you also seem to have the ability to hold out for a higher price, 

and I congratulate you on that.  I'm all done, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 

address a few questions to the Minister of Energy with respect 

to several energy options. 

 

And I just, in the beginning, want to know whether the minister 

is comfortable with answering some questions with respect to 

some of the newer technologies that include the integrated 

gasification cycles and some of the new efficiencies in CO D22 

(carbon dioxide), and also some of the new information with 

respect to various oil options, biomass; and if he's prepared 

perhaps to even answer a few questions, in theory if he likes, 

on nuclear energy and various kinds of other sources of energy 

which might be linked to wind power, and solar, and other 

things related to the energy business.  Is he prepared to open up 

and discuss some of these various energy options in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the Leader of the Opposition, my department is 

engaging in a comprehensive energy strategy where we will be 

going out and doing some public hearings and determining 

what the energy options and strategy for the province should 

be, what policy we should have in Saskatchewan. 

 

The other items that the member mentioned, I would be happy 

to comment in a general way.  But in a specific way, some of 

those would fall under the mandate of SaskPower, and I would 

not want to be standing here committing SaskPower to any one 

of these options.  But we've certainly taken a look at the IGCC 

(Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle).  We're studying the 

possibility of an IGCC option on a power plant.  It has 

obviously got possibilities.  It's obviously also very expensive, 

as the member probably very well knows.  And one has to 

consider the economics of it. 

 

If however, as the member alluded to, some of the by-products 

of the IGCC or products of the IGCC could be used for 

enhanced oil recovery, there could be a synergy worked out by 

where we could save the atmosphere and also have an 

economic spin-off in the oil industry. 

 

And we're certainly very interested in that.  And as the member 

probably well knows because this is in his area, in the Midale 

field, the Shell project on the CO D22 enhanced oil recovery is 

a pilot project, and Shell is injecting a lot of money in it this 

year and even next year.  But the problem that they have and 

that we all recognize is the source of the CO D22.  And there is 

a possibility here for SaskPower and our department to work in 

conjunction on 

an IGCC plant to supply the CO D22 to whoever in the oil field 

wants to use it.  I think there's an exciting opportunity here 

which may take a few years to develop, but I think it's there. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I agree with you that 

there seems to be a good demand for various sources of energy 

and new technologies in energy.  I'm going to read a statement 

here, and I just want to ask you if you would agree with this.  

It's just a straightforward statement; it's not complicated. 

 

There seems to be a growing world-wide demand for 

technology, new technology, related to the development and 

extraction and the efficient use of all energy resources that we 

have in Canada. 

 

Would you say that there is a world-wide demand for new 

technology on efficient, effective energy use?  And would you 

say that that would be something that you and your department 

and your officials in the province would, number one, agree 

with?  And number two, would you endorse that?  Does that 

sound like a reasonable statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I think in a general way, 

the statement that the member, the Leader of the Opposition 

read is a statement that could be accepted, I think, by just about 

any Energy department in the world. 

 

And there is no doubt that there is a world-wide need for new 

technology in energy production, energy use.  And I think 

there's also a very, very big need in the world, not only in our 

country but everywhere, to develop new technologies for 

energy conservation.  It is one thing to produce the energy, to 

produce particularly electrical energy, but it's, I think, equally 

important and maybe even more so in today's economy to 

conserve some of the energy. 

 

And I think that's an area that we would really like to zero in 

on, and the Energy Conservation and Development Authority is 

set up for exactly that purpose -- to provide input into 

conservation as well as development of new technology for the 

industry. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Given the fact that 

we have things like, for example, coal and oil that our 

neighbours have -- North Dakota has, Manitoba, Alberta -- 

would you consider it to be a reasonable idea to co-operate 

with other jurisdictions in developing some of the new 

technology, commercial technology, advanced technology, in 

terms of coal use, solar use, oil or other forms of energy, 

particularly in the fact that you've got overlapping jurisdictions.  

Oil doesn't just stop at boundaries, coal doesn't just stop at 

boundaries, and certainly wind doesn't, and others.  Would you 

generally agree with co-operating with other jurisdictions in the 

development of technology, co-operating with it, and for 

efficiency, for conservation, for all of these things that you just 

talked about? 

 

Given the fact that there's a demand for it, are you in the mood 

for co-operating and does it sound like a reasonable thing to do 

with your neighbours or with other jurisdictions? 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for 

the question.  I'm very pleased to answer a question like that 

because that's an area that I'm very interested in is 

co-operation.  I am fully aware of what the member says, that 

resources don't stop because somebody drew a line on a map.  

And unfortunately, in Canada we have used these artificial 

barriers very often as a means of stopping the co-operative 

ventures between provinces.  One of the things that I can say 

for certainty here is that our department and our government 

has been talking to the Ontario and Alberta and B.C. (British 

Columbia), particularly those three, on the use of coal for 

generating electricity. 

 

As the member is aware, Ontario generates a large amount of 

electricity using coal.  And we are one of the suppliers, and 

Alberta and B.C. are the other suppliers of this coal.  And we're 

interested in co-operating with them to make sure that we have 

transportation systems in place that are economical so that we 

can ship this coal. 

 

We're also talking to these three provinces regarding an IGCC 

unit on a power plant which we may be able to build 

co-operatively with them as a demonstration unit.  And if that 

could happen, the technology could be sold all over the world. 

 

In the area of air quality, and I think it's a very important, it's a 

very important area in our society today, particularly when 

you're burning a lot of coal to generate electricity, we want to 

co-operate with the rest of the country, in fact with the rest of 

the whole continent, on pollution control and air-quality 

control. 

 

And these are areas I think that you cannot draw boundaries, as 

the member well knows, boundaries on the ground and say this 

is where the pollution stops and here's where it starts.  So these 

are things we have to co-operate in order to survive, and our 

government and our department are certainly willing to do that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 

response.  From that I gather that you would consider 

co-operating perhaps with Manitoba or Alberta or North 

Dakota on perhaps some coal studies or coal gasification 

studies on . . . Well, let me just ask you specifically.  Would 

you consider co-operating with other jurisdictions, 

neighbouring jurisdictions, on assessing the feasibility of 

various kinds of coal, clean coal combustion, integrated 

gasification combined cycles -- and you know about those -- or 

the commercialization of technology, CO D22 fired plants, 

development and commercialization for uses of recovered 

CO D22? 

 

Would you enter, would you consider entering co-operative 

arrangements to study the feasibility of that with, say, North 

Dakota or Manitoba or Alberta or neighbouring jurisdictions?  

And all I'm saying is, would you consider co-operating and 

looking at the feasibility of that because coal cuts across 

borders and gas does, and we're out here in western Canada.  Is 

that something that you might look at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I can give an 

unqualified yes to that.  We would certainly be interested 

in that because, as I maybe took too long to say before, but 

these resources do not stop at borders.  And we are very 

interested in co-operating with other jurisdictions that have 

similar problems and similar aspirations as we have because I 

think we're all aware in our society today that we cannot do 

these things in isolation.  It's too expensive, in the first place, 

and the other point I want to make is that there's no use 

reinventing the wheel over and over again.  If we can do this 

co-operatively and all benefit from it, I think that there's an 

unqualified yes to that, that we're willing and interested in 

doing that kind of thing. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that.  

Would you also be prepared to co-operate and assess the 

application of energy efficiency in looking at new technologies 

that might help in agriculture?  And we've got some . . . 

obviously want to reduce the costs in agriculture, agriculture 

inputs, and improving the efficiency of electricity, looking at 

ethanol with neighbouring provinces and studying propane, 

examine the feasibility of all the uses and technological 

advances in things like ethanol, propane, some new 

efficiencies, new kind of motors. 

 

As well would you consider co-operating in assessing the 

feasibility of things like biomass which has some potential in 

some places: forest products for fuels or other uses for woods, 

peat moss for power, alternate uses of transportation fuels -- 

again propane, natural gas? 

 

Would you co-operate in just studying the feasibility of this 

with other jurisdictions?  Because, in your words, it's too 

expensive in isolation, perhaps, to do this on your own but if 

you had neighbouring people do it . . . or maybe you could 

have a joint venture.  All your departmental officials maybe 

could drive propane trucks or natural gas cars or something to 

say, well we'll try it.  We'll go ethanol or something.  Would 

you consider at least initiating discussions with neighbouring 

jurisdictions to assess the feasibility of things like that here in 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

the question because these are things that we're very interested 

in doing and particularly with the energy strategy that we're 

hoping to develop in the course of the next year.  Many of 

these things will fall under their jurisdiction and will be 

considered. 

 

One of the things that the member mentioned that I'm 

particularly interested in is using natural gas in automobiles, 

probably even in farm tractors or highway transportation, 

locomotives, etc.  These are possibilities, and since this 

province has an abundance of natural gas, there's an abundance 

of natural gas in western Canada, it seems to me that this is a 

logical fuel for us to use.  It's a matter of making it practical 

and economical for people to purchase the equipment to use the 

natural gas.  And then it's also a matter of distribution. 

 

At the moment there are a few natural gas vehicles around, but 

it's the same old problem that we had with propane a few years 

ago where there weren't enough stations for somebody to have 

a propane vehicle.  And that becomes more feasible and more 

practical. 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

I could spend some time talking about ethanol, but all I really 

need to say here, is at the moment the production of ethanol is 

probably a little bit too expensive in relationship to other fuels.  

And until we can come up with a system of producing ethanol 

that is more price sensitive and more in line with other fuels, 

I'm not so sure what the future prospects of ethanol usage are.  

But it's certainly one of the things we need to take a look at. 

 

And the same as the member mentions with biomass forest 

products.  But we hope to do a comprehensive energy strategy, 

have a lot of these things, have a policy in place.  And as far as 

co-operation is concerned with other jurisdictions and us 

initiating them, I can only say that we're interested in this.  We 

will certainly be willing to proceed on that line. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that.  So 

if I was to say . . . if a neighbouring jurisdiction come along 

and said that I'd like to evaluate the feasibility of determining 

new opportunities and mutual benefits of perhaps 

implementing fossil-fuel research to encourage the 

development and application of new technologies in oil -- 

because we have a lot of it -- in coal and natural gas resources, 

try to diversify our resource base . . . Such technologies might 

include field scale, upgrading, enhanced oil recovery, improved 

coal and oil transportation systems. 

 

That would fit.  That would fit what you've just said, that we 

have a lot of it.  It's an abundant supply.  We have neighbours.  

And if they would co-fund some research in this, whether it's 

ethanol or whatever, a feasibility study in that area or those 

areas would be something that the province under your 

department would seriously consider. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you 

for the question, to the member opposite.  The questions that 

the member has asked are very interesting and I think very 

relevant in today's society.  And I will say to the member that 

last September, I believe, there was an MOU (memorandum of 

understanding) signed between Saskatchewan and the federal 

government which alluded to a lot of the things that the 

member has mentioned.  And our department and our 

government has accepted that broad umbrella, MOU as we call 

it.  I don't know if that's the proper name for it, but I think he 

knows what we're talking about. 

 

And the things mentioned in that MOU are things that we can 

relate to, the things that this department would be willing to 

work with, in co-operation with either the federal government 

or other jurisdictions that have similar interests as we have.  

We have to, and I think in order to survive in this industry and 

in this business, we have to co-operate and not spend the same 

amount of money in each jurisdiction to develop the 

technology. 

 

So yes, we are interested in that and we would certainly be 

willing to co-operate.  And we've indicated the same to the 

federal government, that we would be willing to go along with 

that.  Some of the things that you have mentioned, we've 

already begun discussions with them, 

but they're in the preliminary stages. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  

Obviously you're aware of the potential in all of these areas. 

 

Given the fact that you have acknowledged that you would 

enter into an agreement, or consider an agreement to evaluate 

the feasibility of the things we just talked about -- that's all I 

said, evaluate the feasibility -- would you be prepared to 

evaluate the feasibility of nuclear energy on the same basis?  

Because we have a lot of it; we have a great deal of uranium.  

Would you be prepared to enter into an agreement with 

neighbours or the federal government to evaluate the feasibility 

of all the nuclear options? 

 

And the same verbiage I'm sure you're aware that I just talked 

about in gas and oil and biomass is the same verbiage that 

people talked about in terms of uranium and the nuclear 

industry. 

 

Would you be prepared to work together with other 

jurisdictions, like the federal government, to evaluate the 

feasibility of establishing nuclear research and nuclear 

technology in the province of Saskatchewan?  The same 

verbiage that you whole-heartedly agreed with in other forms 

of energy which you admit we have a great deal of, and it's 

expensive to do it by yourself. 

 

So I'm careful with these words and I was careful when I asked 

the first words, and your response was quite deliberate.  Would 

you be prepared to co-operate with the federal government in 

evaluating the feasibility of establishing nuclear research and 

technology here in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in the time that I have 

been in this portfolio and this government has been in place, 

we have indicated to the federal government on several 

occasions that we are willing to talk to them about nuclear 

research, about nuclear development, the possibilities of the 

technology. We have indicated to them on several occasions 

that we are willing to do that.  And the government is willing to 

enter into agreements with other jurisdictions to study the 

feasibility, to study the technology, to do the research on that 

fuel as well as on the other fuels. 

 

One of the things that we mentioned when we established the 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority, we 

specifically listed all the areas which we wanted this Authority 

to take a look at -- and I don't have the list sort of off the top of 

my head -- but all the different forms of generating electricity 

were listed there, and nuclear was one of them.  So we're not 

closing the door and saying that we're not interested in 

research, in developing technology, and feasibility.  Those are 

all things that we can accept and go along with at this point.  So 

I hope I've answered the member's question on that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  Now from 

that, I would gather that if you are genuinely interested in at 

least discussing a co-operative agreement with the federal 

government to evaluate the feasibility of this, then you must, I 

would think, logically be prepared 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

to include an evaluation of the feasibilities of nuclear research 

and technology, nuclear technology world-wide.  I would think 

that would be fair ball. 

 

What are they doing with nuclear technology in the United 

States, in France, in South America, wherever they're doing it?  

That would seem to me to be something that you'd be interested 

in.  We certainly do in oil and in gas and in wind and in solar 

and others.  We don't logically avoid looking at information.  

So I would gather that you would be prepared to study on a 

co-operative basis the feasibility of using technology that is 

used world-wide.  That's the first question. 

 

Would you also be interested in doing research on nuclear 

physics, nuclear medicine, agriculture radiation, related 

technologies to simulators, lasers, and radiation processing?  

Would that be fair ball in terms of the kinds of things that you'd 

want to look at? The nuclear fuel cycle, like the oil cycle, the 

fuel cycle, the coal cycle, the gasification cycles -- would you 

be interested in looking at the fuel cycle?  And if you're 

interested in what you're looking at, what you do in the fuel 

cycle, then would you be interested in looking at what happens 

in the fuel cycle when you have nuclear energy.  How do you 

spin it out?  How do you rework it?  How does France do it?  

How do other people do it?  I'm sure that you see where I'm 

leading.  Are you prepared to study it in depth?  All of it.  So 

that you know what you're talking about when it comes to the 

fuel cycle, it comes to world technologies, it comes to the latest 

information on what we're doing. 

 

It seems to me you are very close to saying -- and I would 

never put words in your mouth, but saying -- that you are 

prepared to at least entertain a co-operative agreement to study 

the feasibility of all forms of nuclear energy, which I think you 

would, including how it works and the cycles and what it 

generates at each cycle, so that you know what you're talking 

about.  Is that a fair summary or would you like to summarize 

that in some other fashion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, I think maybe I'll use my own 

summary but I think it's . . . your summary really isn't all that 

far out.  I think in Saskatchewan over the years at the university 

level particularly -- and I'm sure you're more aware of this than 

I am -- we've had research in the nuclear aspect, particularly in 

the nuclear physics aspects, the medicine and so on -- it's an 

ongoing thing.  It's not something new to this province.  There's 

no reason in the world why we would want to stop research in 

this area. 

 

I can agree with most of the things that you have said in this 

regard.  If it stays with the study of the technology, the 

feasibility, these are the kind of things that I can buy into, that I 

could accept.  I think we're maybe being a little cute here but I 

think we know what we're getting at. 

 

As a minister of Energy I can accept those kind of things, and 

those are the kinds of things that we have been discussing with 

the federal agencies -- they're basically the only agency that 

you can discuss this with because there aren't too many other 

agencies in Canada that do any nuclear research and nuclear 

work -- so we have been discussing these with the federal 

agencies. 

We're willing to continue that on a co-operative basis but, I 

may as well just spit it out, we're not ready to make 

commitments to developing a nuclear industry as far as 

electricity is concerned at this point.  We're not prepared to go 

into a waste disposal system in Canada for nuclear waste.  But 

as far as the studying of the nuclear cycles, the nuclear industry 

and the uses of it are concerned, yes, we are interested and we 

have indicated that very clearly to the federal agency. 

 

Hopefully, we'll be able to work something out so that we can 

develop the industry, or at least part of the industry here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  

Now I will be as careful as you are.  You see, I think you are 

very close to studying the nuclear energy as an option in 

Saskatchewan, not to use here but to know about it.  Because if 

you're prepared to study nuclear technology world-wide . . . 

well how did they make electricity with nuclear energy?  They 

make it with electrical generators.  Right?  That's what they 

make it with, so you have to study that. 

 

So how do the generators work?  How do the light water 

reactor works?  How do the heavy water reactors work?  How 

do they work?  I mean obviously if we're going to know about 

it, we've got to study it, which means we would have to study 

how the New Brunswick nuclear reactors work, how the 

Ontario reactors work, how the Japanese or how the French or 

the American reactors work. 

 

We could be leaders in research to know how best to run them, 

how best to operate them.  It's part and parcel of that industry.  

It's like you've got to study oil; well how do you take CO D22 

and generate the electricity?  How do you use it in coal 

gasification? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think you have said in a very common sense 

manner, in a very straightforward manner, that Saskatchewan 

under your administration -- at least as far as your department 

and your portfolio -- you would be prepared to study the 

feasibility of various world options in terms of nuclear energy 

which includes: how does it make electricity, how do the cycles 

work, how is the fuel cycle work . . . To be knowledgeable 

about it so we could teach about it, so we could have it at the 

university, so we could understand.  You see where I'm leading 

you.  Or I'm not leading you, but you see where I'm taking . . . 

 

For us to be absolutely the best in the world in knowledge in 

the nuclear industry or coal industry or gas industry, in 

electrical and generation of power, would be a benefit.  Now I 

think you would agree with that, and I'll let you respond.  But if 

you are prepared to study the nuclear industry, you would have 

to be prepared to study how you make electricity which means 

how do reactors work and, number two, the fuel cycle which is 

part of it. 

 

Is not that a fair statement, that if you are open to that research 

it includes the cycle and it includes the reactors that make 

electricity?  I didn't say make them, and I didn't say store them.  

I said study how it works so that we know how the cycle 

operates world-wide and how it would operate here and how 

the reactors work under various 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

technologies: heavy water, light water, the new technologies 

that AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) has or others. 

 

Is that a fair summary, that if you are prepared in theory to 

co-operate with the federal government to study that research, 

it would include what I've just talked about?  I'll just let you 

respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the member has 

summarized it fairly well.  I think maybe if there's any 

exception I would take to what the member has said, is he's 

laying out a very broad research pattern, a very broad research 

program for the province of Saskatchewan, which may not be 

practical or may not even be feasible in Saskatchewan because 

of the resources.  So it would be very difficult for me to say a 

qualified yes or a firm commitment that this is the whole 

package. 

 

But certainly, many of the things that the member has said are 

within the jurisdiction of the offer that we have made in our 

discussions with the federal government.  As I have indicated 

in this House before, and I have indicated it publicly, we have 

made those kinds of overtures to the federal government, to 

AECL specifically, to do the research in Saskatchewan so that 

we will benefit from the opportunities of employment, benefit 

from the technology that may be developed.  There may be 

sales for it, the sale of technology.  If we can't sell the product, 

we can certainly sell the technology. 

 

And we have indicated to them that we are very willing to do 

this.  But we have certain limits on it.  And I think the member 

understands the limits.  I have indicated the limits to him.  It 

would be difficult for me to say we're going to go into all of 

them, for the simple reason that a person is never quite sure 

how many resources you have to allocate to the research and 

the technology that is required. 

 

But certainly, in broad terms, yes, we would agree with that.  I 

would agree with that, that that's the direction we should go.  

And we've made no secret of it.  We've made this fairly public 

that we've indicated that we want to do this. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that.  

Now I'm not going to put words in your mouth, but I'm going 

to get very close, if I can. 

 

It seems to me that you just said that we could conceivably 

design new technology here in Saskatchewan, and even market 

that technology world-wide when it comes to energy options, 

including nuclear.  So if we could be the best at the university, 

or the best in your new science centre, or the best whatever, on 

nuclear design, that would be a good thing.  If we knew as 

much or more than anybody else on how to design reactors, 

how to market them, how to market technology, how to market 

various new methods in the fuel cycle, whatever, that would be 

a good, positive thing for Saskatchewan to have in the long 

haul, given the fact that we have, as you put it, this abundant 

supply of this massive amount of energy.  And we have the 

environmental problems and some other things. 

 

Is that true, that you're saying it would be good for us to be at 

the top of heap world-wide when it comes to the best 

technology and the knowledge and the science related to the 

nuclear industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I will certainly say this much, that 

there're certain aspects of the nuclear industry that I think we 

would love to be the best in.  If we could be the best in nuclear 

medicine in the world, you know, we'd love to do that. 

 

I will not specifically say anything about reactors because that's 

where we get into the fine line, you know, whether you design 

the reactor or when you have the technology is the next step to 

design.  So it's a little bit of a shady area for me, so I'm not 

going to be specific on that. 

 

But there's no question that the people of Saskatchewan and 

certainly the institutions and the universities and other research 

institutions want to be the best.  We want to sell this 

technology.  We want to sell it world-wide, and we are doing 

that.  As the member well knows, you know, we are leaders in 

a lot of areas in the world and we're selling technology. 

 

And we certainly want to do this as far as . . . in a nuclear 

aspect as well.  If we can reach an agreement with the agency, 

the federal agency, to bring some of that research from Ontario 

to Saskatchewan, hey, we want to do that, and hopefully we 

can develop an industry here that is going to be top-notch and 

we can sell the technology to other countries. 

 

I'm going to be very careful in choosing my words here, as the 

member's very careful in choosing his words, that this 

government at this point in time is not committed . . . it will not 

commit to a reactor and will not commit to waste disposal.  

And we're not anxious to do a lot of research that's going lead 

us into that path.  We want to sort of stay off that path, but we'll 

certainly follow other paths of research. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  What I want to 

get at is that I'm leading this, as they say on the farm, leading 

this horse up to the trough and I'm trying to see if it's going to 

take a drink of this water, of research.  You have said up and to 

a certain point you're prepared to do the research on nuclear 

technology.  But are you saying you won't do research on how 

you make electricity out of nuclear technology?  Because that's 

a reactor?  That's what it's called; it's called a reactor. 

 

Now the reactor is a political word, I suppose, for some people, 

but that's what it does.  You take the uranium and you process 

it in certain technology to make electricity.  That's what it is, 

and that's what they do in the United States and France and 

Great Britain and Germany and Japan and China and every 

place else.  And we do in Canada. 

 

And you're saying -- I just want you on the record -- you will 

not do research on how you make electricity from uranium, yet 

you want to have the research institute here be the best to study 

world-wide nuclear technology.  And 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

I'm not trying to box you in; I'm just trying to clear it up 

because I think you are close.  I think we're both close.  I think 

the province is close to having a very good research agreement 

-- research, research.  Not making, not manufacturing, not 

storing, but researching how you make, researching how you 

market, research how you store, research the fuel cycle.  

Knowledge.  See?  And you know what I'm getting at.  If the 

agreement was knowledge on how to make, to market, to 

manufacture, to use, to cycle -- that's kind of a win-win, isn't it? 

 

I mean you can say to whoever you wanted to say to, look I 

didn't say I'm going to build anything.  I want to research.  If I 

wanted to know the best kind and the best technology, the most 

efficient, the most effective, then I'd have to look at a thing 

called the motor.  I mean when you're in the automobile 

business, I'll do automobiles, but I guess I just can't study the 

motor because the motor has a political connection or 

something.  Well the motor here is the technology that takes 

the uranium and makes electricity. 

 

And I know the politics that you face, and world-wide I 

suspect; you're not alone.  But what I'm trying to get at is . . . 

And I'm trying to help because I think it's good for the 

province.  It's good for you, good for everybody, the 

knowledge of that industry.  And I think you've agreed.  You're 

on record -- and rightfully so -- saying on all of these things 

that we've gone through on this agreement before I got up here, 

study the feasibility, study the feasibility of all this technology. 

 

Wouldn't you . . . Isn't there a way, Mr. Minister, that you 

could agree to study the technology that includes the fuel cycle: 

what different reactors do, how they're made, how they 

function?  Isn't that fair?  Isn't that fair for Saskatchewan 

people to study how they work?  We could make them; we 

don't have to use them.  We could market them; we don't have 

to use them.  Always a government in control decides, hey I'm 

at a point where I really think I'd like to use it or I'm not at that 

point.  That's always a government's prerogative. 

 

But to study it and to know when to say yes or no because 

you're fully knowledgeable as the case is in gas and oil and 

biomass and ethanol and propane and wind and solar . . .  We 

should know all of it.  Wouldn't the minister agree just 

logically it would be a good idea to know all the information 

on nuclear energy, including studying how a reactor works and 

how the fuel cycle works?  I mean isn't that what it's about? 

 

And aren't you close . . . And I take you at your word.  You 

want an agreement with the federal government.  I think we're 

almost there.  I think we are there.  We just have to sort of put 

the two fingers together, touch the dime, and we could be on 

with some really interesting research.  And I think you're close.  

I'm not going to put words in your mouth.  And you're astute 

enough and skilled enough that I won't.  But I want to . . . well 

I just want you to respond again, if you would, because I think 

you can get an agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to respond to 

what the member has said.  Very often when we do research, it 

doesn't end up being pure research.  There's usually a string 

attached to it.  You know, there's a 

caveat attached to it. 

 

And in the case of nuclear research in Canada -- and I don't 

have to explain this, but I'll put it on the record -- that the 

people that do nuclear research in Canada is AECL, as we all 

know.  AECL is in the business of research and selling 

CANDUs (Canadian deuterium uranium) to whoever is 

interested in buying these CANDUs or other electrical 

generating equipment.  That's what they're in the business. 

 

And I guess one of the difficulties we all have -- at least I have 

and people on our side of the House, the government side of 

the House certainly have -- is that pure research can very 

seldom be separated from some other strings, some other 

caveats attached to it.  If we could do the pure research, the 

things that the member has mentioned, you know, the fuel 

cycle and how a reactor works, would not cause . . . I believe it 

wouldn't cause anyone any serious concerns. 

 

The problem that we have in Canada, as I think the member 

well knows, is that there is only the one agency, and that 

agency is in both.  It's both in the research and also in the sales 

aspect of it, and very often when you tie into one, you get tied 

into the other.  And I guess that's the concern we have.  And 

possibly we can reach an agreement.  We're working very hard 

at it.  We're trying to reach an agreement where we're not tied 

into the one if we take this one. 

 

And hopefully we're going to arrive at that.  And you know, 

you are probably very close to being correct, that, you know, if 

you could get . . . they're that close together, if you could get 

them to touch, it would work.  But that's sometimes the most 

difficult stretch to go, that last little bit.  You know, you can 

come up to there, and then you can't seem to make that final 

deal. 

 

But I have no problem indicating to this House and to the 

Assembly and to the public that is listening, that we have 

sought an agreement and we are seeking an agreement to do the 

research.  But since we're dealing with an agency that also 

wants to sell them, there seems to be a bit of a problem. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well in other words, Mr. Minister -- you can 

correct me if you like -- you don't have a problem in doing 

research on nuclear energy, as long as you're not committed to 

using it.  Nobody ties you to using the nuclear energy.  So you 

could study the design of the cycles, you could study the design 

of reactors, you could study the construction and operation of 

reactors, you could study the world-wide nuclear technology 

fuel cycle. 

 

In other words, you're not afraid of the knowledge.  That's what 

you're saying.  You're not afraid of the knowledge, and the 

knowledge includes design, manufacture, construction, 

operation, fuel cycles, all of those things.  You would like . . . 

It's fair enough to know about them.  Your problem is -- fair 

enough -- you don't want to be pushed into necessarily using it.  

I understand that.  I have the same hesitation, as I stand here.  I 

have the same concern on any technology.  I want to know 

before I use it. 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

So if there was a line in an agreement that said, you don't have 

to use it but you will commit yourself to studying how it works 

and how it operates, then I don't think you'd have a problem -- I 

mean, in terms of just the knowledge base itself.  You know 

that you don't have to do coal gasification.  You can study it till 

hell . . . Hades freezes over.  You can study solar, you can 

study biomass, you can . . . you never ever have to use it any 

more than you want to. 

 

On this one, you said, for environmental reasons or political 

reasons, I just want to make sure I've got a line in there that 

says I don't have to use it.  But I am prepared to study it.  I am 

prepared to study how the motors work, how the cycle works, 

how they operate, the efficiencies of operation, how we could 

have better design, incremental, smaller, easier, 

environmentally safer -- all the rest of that stuff.  I'm sure what 

you're saying is you don't have a problem with all that 

knowledge.  You want a safety valve that says, but I might not 

want to use it.  I might make them, manufacture, sell the 

technology, teach about it, market it world-wide; I could make 

the stuff here.  But I might not necessarily want to have one 

myself. 

 

Is that a fair summary of where you are?  And if you had a line 

in an agreement that said, or a stronger line in an agreement 

says, well we always reserve the right, whether we're going to 

use the technology or not, but we want to be the best in every 

aspect of knowledge of all of this, would that get you home?  

Would that get you closer to a co-operative agreement setting 

money aside?  Pick a number, whatever it might be -- 10 cents 

apiece or whatever.  But assuming that you can come up with 

appropriate money over a longer period of time, is that a 

reasonable kind of line that could get you, you know, down the 

road, that you could manage the, you know, the public as we all 

need to in administration of energy or agriculture?  Is that close 

enough?  Is that what you would look for? 

 

Seems to me that's what you're asking for.  And if that is right, 

if you will do all this . . . And we can read the whole agreement 

here in the legislature, and it's feasibility studies -- and you 

know it and I know it. And we'll table it tonight.  If that's it, and 

then you had another line in there that said, but we always 

reserve the right whether we're going to use any of this 

technology ourselves -- and include the whole works -- would 

you be closer? 

 

Would it be close enough that you and I, as sort of political 

adversaries, could lock arms and say, you know, I'll bet we 

could do this; I'll bet in the province of Saskatchewan we could 

get this done.  And the Minister of Energy, or the minister of 

Power, or the Premier, or whoever, could pull this off and 

could get it done.  It's that close, and it's important.  You know 

it's important.  Energy is important.  Knowledge is important.  

We are a big knowledge energy province in terms of 

reputation.  Is that pretty close?  Is that getting pretty close to 

what you would have to have to get this done? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, pretty close can be 

pretty far.  You're never quite sure where that is at.  The 

member opposite is concentrating fairly heavily in 

his questioning on the reactor.  I'd lean more towards other 

kinds of research.  The reactor research is not . . . We're not 

opposing reactor research, but I wouldn't want to concentrate 

heavily on that at the expense of something else. 

 

I think as a society and as a government and as a people in this 

province, we would be far more interested in doing research in 

the area of nuclear medicine and food irradiation and so on.  

These would probably be higher priorities for us than moving 

into the reactor field because I think I know where that leads 

us, and I think we all know where that leads us eventually.  If 

you get down the road too far, it's pretty difficult to say no, and 

it's very difficult to put these iron-clad lines or barriers in that 

say, this far and no farther.  It's possible.  Now I won't disagree 

with that. 

 

But I'd be more interested in pursuing other aspects of nuclear 

research.  I'm not excluding this one.  I'm not saying we 

wouldn't be interested in doing this, but it would be of a lower 

priority than some of the others. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I agree with you whole-heartedly 

with respect to, this isn't everything, it's just part of the 

package.  And part of nuclear research is the motor that 

generates electricity, which is a reactor.  We've got the word 

out now and we're talking about it, and you study it and how it 

works. 

 

That's why in the agreement there is all the research with 

respect to medicine, agriculture.  We might not use it in 

medicine.  We may find, well that's fair enough for cancer 

treatment; this isn't.  It could lead us down a path that's wrong.  

We make those decisions.  But I agree with you 100 per cent.  

There's coal, oil, gas, and in nuclear energy there's medicine, 

there's food irradiation, there is all the technology that we can 

use that is for all kinds of purposes.  But you see what we're 

hung up on this agreement is, fair enough, but there's that word 

"reactor".  We can't study how the motor works. 

 

Look, all I've said is that is there a way to get you comfortable 

enough that you can study all this, including the motor, and the 

cycle to know how it works, because even if you're doing 

cancer research, and you're taking the generation of nuclear 

electricity and the atom, itself, it's a cycle, and you can cook it 

up and you can bring it down and you can use it again and use 

it again.  You need to know about that. 

 

What I'm after is that . . .  and I quote you, and I think you said 

-- and we'll have it in Hansard -- we're not opposed to reactor 

research.  You just said that.  We're not opposed to reactor 

research.  So if you're not opposed to all this research, you're 

not opposed to reactor research, you're not opposed to fuel 

cycle research, then all you need is something that says, I might 

not use this but I want to study it, and then we'd be there. 

 

Now maybe we need to spend some more time on how we say: 

but I reserve the right not to use the nuclear medicine research 

or the nuclear agricultural research or the nuclear reactor 

research, but I want to know and be the most knowledgeable in 

the world in all of it. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

Now there must be some lines lawyers could dream up or some 

other people -- school teachers, professors, or whatever it is.  

They could say I want to know all about this but I don't 

necessarily will use it.  I might not use it.  You see how close 

that is?  So you are, and if we can go through what you've said 

here tonight, and I think your cabinet . . .  with respect, most 

cabinets say, I want the knowledge industry.  We're in the 

information age, clearly we are.  Technologically information 

age, education and everybody knows that.  And you have said 

that you are not opposed to research, even on reactors, even on 

fuel cycles. 

 

So we're not trying to cut a deal in public here, but we're 

getting close, Mr. Minister, very close for your administration 

to form a co-operative deal with neighbouring provinces and 

the federal government on all kinds of research including 

reactors.  All we need is a way for you to be able to say to your 

public and your constituents, we don't necessarily have to use 

any of it but we're certainly going to know everything there is 

about it.  And then we get the jobs and the spin-off and the 

knowledge-based industries that put Saskatchewan right up 

there, because as you point out, we've been blessed with the 

resource. 

 

So again, aren't we extremely close to getting an agreement that 

would put all this together in a package that Saskatchewan 

could endorse?  Isn't it very, very close? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, let me just comment on 

one statement that the member made.  I don't want lawyers to 

write any agreements because nobody can read those and 

understand them.  It has to be written in layman's language so 

that we know what it says.  I want to be able to read it and 

understand it, so it has to be written by someone that writes 

English. 

 

The member opposite is saying a lot of things that we've 

already discussed several times and I will repeat again -- I don't 

want to do this too often, but I will repeat again -- the 

commitment and the objective of this government.  As I said 

we've made this public so this is no secret.  I'm not giving any 

secrets out of school here. 

 

We do want to enter into agreements or agreement with the 

federal government through whatever agency it involves, to 

develop technology, to do research, to market this research, to 

use it ourselves, whatever economic spin-offs we can get off 

this.  We also have to keep in mind another factor here that we 

haven't discussed and that is the cost factor, obviously. 

 

As the member knows that many of these research facilities are 

very, very expensive and hopefully that if we can strike an 

agreement with the federal government, that they will do a 

good portion or the bulk or maybe the whole funding of this for 

the simple reason that they're doing it now in a different 

province and there's no reason why they wouldn't do with the 

whole funding here. 

 

So as a province we don't have -- at this point -- a lot of money 

to put up front on the table and say well here, go ahead.  If we 

had all kinds of money it would probably be an easy decision 

to make on a lot of these issues.  But we 

don't have the money and therefore the negotiations are 

probably a little more difficult to come by when you're trying 

to negotiate with somebody that wants you to put up a fair bit 

of money in order to do this research. 

 

If the federal government and its agency, the AECL, are 

willing to enter an agreement on terms that we can live with, 

we have indicated before that we are willing to talk to them. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's very good news, Mr. Minister, really 

good news. 

 

Mr. Minister, all provinces, all jurisdictions go through the 

same economic cycles and our administration here and our 

province needs jobs, needs money.  I agree with you.  We do. 

 

There is, Mr. Minister, as you know, a tremendous demand for 

energy world-wide.  I can tell you from my personal experience 

-- and you and I can talk about it -- there's a demand for nuclear 

energy world-wide, and the best technology world-wide. 

 

We as a nation just sold reactors to Korea -- billions of dollars, 

billions of dollars.  It's like a wheat market or an oil market.  

It's huge, Mr. Minister, absolutely huge.  Billions and billions 

of dollars in demand for the technology, for how to manage it, 

how to operate them, how to build them.  That's the fact. 

 

And they pay, Mr. Minister.  They pay dearly for Canadian 

technology and Canadian knowledge on how to manage that 

technology.  It is a huge demand for Canadian young people, 

professors, academics, technicians, other people.  That's a fact, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

So you see what you're holding in your hand, and why I bring it 

up here.  And I bring it up as sincerely as I've brought up 

anything in this legislature.  You and I, when we have the 

opportunities in government, can create economic opportunities 

for generations -- literally for generations. 

 

Now you mention money.  Would you entertain the possibility 

of other jurisdictions and the private sector working with you 

as a government to fund research, serious money?  Hundreds of 

millions of dollars or maybe even billions of dollars coming 

into the province of Saskatchewan to study, make, 

manufacture, market, this technology world-wide?  Not just 

coal, not just oil but nuclear? 

 

Would you enter into agreements with Japan, China, the United 

States, the private sector world-wide, to be part of research and 

economics in a joint venture?  In other words what I'm saying 

is that with an arm of government that you might set up which 

is research and so forth, with cabinet ministers on the boards, 

or whatever you might want, would you entertain the 

co-operation of the private sector locally, the federal 

government nationally, and internationally people who have 

been prepared to spend money on genuine research and then 

spend money and help do a joint venture with you, 

manufacturing, marketing this technology -- manufacturing and 

marketing the technology on how you handle the fuel 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

cycle for the Japanese or the Koreans or the Americans or 

South Americans or the Europeans? 

 

And you know why I'm saying that.  I agree with you. We can't 

build it all ourselves.  You were right to start with.  We have 

the resources, but we don't have a lot of the money to process 

them and manufacture them and get them up. 

 

If you want money and you want the jobs and the technology, 

there are people prepared to come and talk to you seriously 

about really long-term research and all of this capacity where 

you say, you know, we're not opposed to reactor research, we 

might even use and market the technology ourselves.  We don't 

have a lot of money, but then of course I would suspect if 

there's a demand for information on the fuel cycle and reactors 

and knowledge and so forth, you would entertain money 

coming in, joint venture, do research that could lead to the 

manufacturing and marketing. 

 

Isn't that . . . I mean if we don't have the money ourselves and 

the demand's there, we have the resource and we need the 

technology, then the only other way is, as you point out, 

somebody else's money.  The federal government maybe could 

do it all, but would you entertain other governments and private 

sector partners coming in here and at least discussing in a 

co-operative way this massive kind of research on energy in the 

nuclear business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I don't want to speak here for the 

Economic Development minister here, but the philosophy of 

this government is that we welcome private money, private 

industry to come and help us build this province and establish 

industries in this province.  It's no secret.  In fact several of the 

projects that we're working on right now are dependent on 

whether the private sector can raise enough money to initiate 

the project, and then we're willing to be a partner with them. 

 

I won't mention any of the projects here, but they are projects 

like that that we're aware of, you know.  And it's a matter of 

getting the private sector to put up their money so that the risk 

isn't all taken by the government, isn't all taken by the taxpayer, 

that a good portion of the risk is taken by the private sector 

who ultimately, if they invest, will benefit. 

 

And we're not opposed to money coming from other 

jurisdictions.  And if it's offshore money that wants to develop 

an industry in Saskatchewan, I imagine that the Hitachi plant in 

Saskatoon is basically offshore money.  I'm not so sure that 

there's too much provincial money there.  And we're not 

opposed to those kind of ventures if the opportunity came 

along, and we would pursue the opportunities if they came 

along to do development.  I don't know what more I can say 

that . . . we are interested in this area.  We have made those 

overtures to the agencies at the federal level that deal with this, 

and we're simply awaiting decision and discussions with them. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I really 

appreciate your candid answers.  We'll just take it a little 

farther.  If, hypothetically, the federal government, AECL, 

Hitachi, Marubeni came to Saskatchewan and said, we 

would like to do a joint venture here in research and 

manufacture of the latest technology, nuclear technology, the 

reactor technology so that we can market it world-wide, would 

you consider that? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I think everything I have said here this 

evening probably leads one to believe that we would consider 

that, and I guess before I would sign anything or make any kind 

of agreement is that I'd want to see the deal.  I'd want to see the 

fine print.  I'd want to know what it says.  And if it's, as I'll 

repeat again, if it's something that we can live with 

philosophically and environmentally and industrially, there's no 

reason why this government wouldn't enter into agreements 

with partners, be they private industry, be they other 

government agencies.  We're not hung up as to who the partner 

is as long as it's a reliable partner that we can live with. 

 

But before I would commit to saying we'll enter into 

agreement, we'd have to see the text of the agreement and we'll 

want to read it very carefully, and regardless of what I said 

about lawyers before, I would get some lawyers to read the text 

of that agreement because somehow they seem to be able to 

interpret a little better.  That's so that my colleague over here is 

satisfied that I'm not completely and entirely opposed to the 

lawyers. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now I'm going to 

give you a little bit of verbiage just so that we could pursue 

this.  If you had the federal government, AECL, 

Marubeni-Hitachi, come to you and say that, we wanted to 

work together with the province of Saskatchewan . . . mostly 

their money, okay? Let's assume that money wasn't a problem. 

It's mostly theirs -- for that matter, all of it or most of it, so that 

you were happy.  And we want to work together to evaluate the 

feasibility of establishing a nuclear research and technology 

program in our province, including the design and the 

manufacture of reactors, and the construction and operation of 

it and marketing of it. Would that be in the ballpark? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I think it's pretty safe to say that just 

about everything you've said would be in the ballpark 

depending on how big you make the park, but it's certainly 

within the ballpark and I will simply repeat again, reiterate 

again for the record, that we are pursuing, we are pursuing 

negotiations.  They're currently going on and we are pursuing 

negotiations with AECL and the federal government to develop 

research facilities in Saskatchewan, actually to bring the 

research facilities into Saskatchewan.  I'm not sure that Canada 

can have two facilities.  We can't make any firm announcement 

because there's no firm commitment at this point.  But that's the 

stage it's at. It's at the talking stage. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this has been a remarkable 

evening for Saskatchewan and maybe for Canada, because I 

agree with you whole-heartedly and I believe you've been very 

straightforward and very sincere.  As you know, I have just 

read the verbiage of the agreement between the province of 

Saskatchewan and the federal government.  It's the very 

verbiage that's in here.  And it's honest, it's straightforward, to 

study oil and gas and solar and biomass and including the 

design, 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

manufacturing, and marketing of reactors.  I sincerely believe 

that there are firms and there are countries and there are the 

people who will finance it from here to Ying Yang, Nebraska.  

I mean, you know that that's a big demand.  So you're right.  I 

agree with you.  I agree with you.  It's good to do the research.  

And I honestly believe . . . And there's nothing in here that says 

we have to use any of it.  You know that.  And I'll table it 

tonight.  It doesn't say we have to use any of it. 

 

There always is a concern, well if you're doing all the research 

in it, maybe I'll use this, or maybe I'll use that.  Of course that's 

there.  But how are you ever going to do the research without 

saying, well maybe I'll like it.  And maybe you will.  Maybe for 

environmental reasons you'll like, you know, whatever it might 

be. 

 

So, if we took this agreement . . . It's got my signature.  No, it 

doesn't have to be my signature.  But it's got the federal 

Minister of Energy's signature on it.  If we replaced my 

signature with your signature, this agreement is no more or no 

less than what we've talked about here tonight.  And here it is.  

It's no more or no less.  In fact, it even pays the provincial 

government if you want to back out after three years.  They 

even give you money. 

 

I'm not pushing partisan politics here.  I am very sincere about 

what we've talked about here tonight.  I think, sir, you are very, 

very close to a genuine, honest, agreement in energy research 

that could put this province ahead of any other jurisdiction in 

Canada because we've been blessed with resources. 

 

The demand is there in the billions.  And you are very close 

because all you want the assurance of, and you've said it here, 

is so that we don't necessarily have to use it if we don't want to.  

And I'm sure that can be written in here.  Write it in again.  It's 

already in here because all this says, is to work together to 

assess the feasibility of this research. 

 

So I won't push it any farther, but I think we're very close.  And 

I think the federal government should be aware of the fact that 

you're very, very close, and that this kind of an agreement 

would be good for everybody in Saskatchewan, let alone, and 

frankly, everybody in Canada. 

 

Could I have the commitment of the minister?  I'll table this.  

Would the minister look at this agreement again and give me 

his commitment that he would -- and I don't necessarily mean 

tonight, Mr. Minister -- but would you take it, and study and 

look at it carefully.  Look at it carefully.  And could you 

suggest . . . And you don't even have to do it in the legislature.  

Could you suggest to me words, words that would give you this 

back-stop so that it is research, and marketing, and 

manufacturing, and exporting, and all those things, but you 

don't necessarily have to use it at home. 

 

I mean, that's what you want.  I would like you to take this 

agreement -- which is a research agreement -- and would you 

give me your commitment that you would look at it carefully, 

in as genuine as you were tonight, both of us, non-partisan 

research -- big, big jobs, big money, big potential for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I mean, it would be a good 

bouquet to any 

administration. 

 

Would you look at it and get back to me on how you might 

take this agreement with as little modification as possible, or 

whatever line you might want -- and maybe you won't use 

lawyers, but you'll use somebody else -- so that you could sign 

something like this on the presumption -- and I know that it's 

real -- that I believe that the private sector and other 

jurisdictions would be just lined up to come into Saskatchewan.  

Some of them are here now. 

 

Engineering companies are here now.  They want to get into 

this research.  It's in agriculture, medicine, energy and 

recycling and all of that.  They want to do it.  They want to.  

They would come here to do it.  You know it.  And if you want 

more evidence of that, I'll give you lots of evidence of it, that 

this agreement is very close. 

 

If you want a line or two underneath this that says, but let me 

say again, we are not committed to using this, this is our 

research.  We'll study it, we'll know all about it.  We'll decide 

to use it when we want to use it.  And that's a given.  You never 

have to use anything, but to research it. 

 

And I understand how you have to say, well geez, that might be 

tempting to use technology.  Well knowledge, frankly, is 

tempting.  Knowledge is . . . I mean, we just had the literacy 

dinner and well, knowledge is very tempting.  And once people 

get that, they get the vision, they get the dream. 

 

Will the minister take this agreement and look at it carefully 

and find out what he might be able to add that says, we're there, 

we're home, except for, you know, I won't necessarily have to 

use this.  And get back to us, either in the House or in his 

Estimates, or get back to me outside the House or the 

legislature. 

 

Because I think, Mr. Minister, you are very, very genuinely 

close to getting an agreement with the federal government.  

And if AECL and the federal government could be aware of 

this conversation and what you believe -- and if you are indeed 

speaking as a minister can, for the cabinet and for the general 

caucus -- then you're very close, really close to getting an 

agreement that could make Saskatchewan extremely . . . well, 

extremely interesting and certainly profitable and with a great 

deal of vitality and viability for the future. 

 

And you would have no political problems from certainly this 

side of the House at all.  And you would have a large sector of 

the community world-wide that know this is the best place for 

research.  You'd have a load off your mind and you could be 

dreaming of the things that we could be.  It's all the things you 

said tonight were right on the money.  They were absolutely 

accurate.  You're there.  Well I'm encouraged, genuinely 

encouraged, that we could have this candid and frank 

conversation and go through this. 

 

Now I'm going to table it.  If you want to comment more on it, 

fine.  And if you've got one, you might want to comment on it 

now.  But if there's a line or two that you even want to talk 

about that says that well maybe we could maybe modify this or 

we could have another one 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

and say well I'll do all of this, but I'm not necessarily 

committed to using it, then I'd certainly like to know because -- 

I'll tell you -- I'll walk with you, drive with you, fly with you, 

or whatever it takes to put this together with the federal 

government. 

 

Because if you and I could agree on what it took, maybe we 

could together open some doors.  And it would be a win-win.  

There's no downside here.  It's a win-win for the university, for 

Saskatchewan, particularly for the city of Saskatoon, for so 

many people that are looking for jobs and exciting 

opportunities.  And it just opens up many things for the 

Minister of Economic Development, let alone your portfolio -- 

just a whole range of things. 

 

This side of the House unequivocally would certainly be 

prepared to do whatever it could to help you if you want to, in 

private or in public or some combination, say well here's what 

it would take.  This line and this line and I'll tell you, we're 

home.  It would be an exciting day for the province.  And you 

would have our commitment that I would certainly go with you 

or help you or whoever you wanted to, to help get this done 

because this is the place for it. 

 

And everybody in Canada, when you get them right down, they 

said, Saskatchewan is the place for this research, no question.  

And even though they want it in New Brunswick and they want 

it in Ontario, Saskatchewan is the place.  The scientists will tell 

you that.  We've got the largest uranium marketing and mining 

operation world-wide, and we have got a great university.  This 

is it.  This is the place.  And you know it and I know it.  So if 

we're just a line or two out, let's not lose it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, just a very brief response 

to what the member has said.  I think I have the same copy of 

the memorandum of understanding between the Government of 

Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan that the member 

has over there, that he signed and the Hon. Mr. Epp signed on 

September 13, 1991.  Same agreement. 

 

I think I indicated earlier, and maybe it's sort of gone by since 

we've had such a long discussion on this, that our government 

has accepted this memorandum.  We did not reject this 

memorandum.  The one that we rejected was the SPC/AECL 

(Saskatchewan Power Corporation/Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) memorandum of understanding of, I believe, September 

21, which was a subagreement to this. 

 

And there's some things in here that need to be done and can be 

done very quickly.  We've already talked to the federal 

government about setting up steering committees with officials 

and so on.  So this is an agreement that . . . this is not an MOU 

that we have a great deal of difficulty with.  The one that we 

had the difficulty was the SPC/AECL memorandum of 

understanding. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's very good, Mr. Minister.  I'm glad to 

have that on the record because now we can . . . and it's fair 

enough.  The people of Saskatoon, the people of the province 

can look at this agreement and know that you're in agreement 

with this agreement, this memorandum of understanding.  And 

I think it is, it's all 

research and it's as we say it is. 

 

Now if your administration agrees with this, then I honestly 

believe we're home free.  If this is fine, and we've carefully 

walked into this and we've carefully looked at the verbiage, 

carefully there -- and it's not much of a legal document, it's a 

memorandum of understanding you do research on everything 

you can do in energy.  Now if that's to bed, if that's done, then 

would you bring forward, and I don't have it with me, would 

you bring forward the subagreement and the parts of that that 

you are concerned about so that we might address that.  And 

maybe some of it's financing.  And I understand that.  And 

some of it will be something, whatever else it may be. 

 

And I know in that agreement, from my recollection, that if 

SaskPower doesn't want any part of it, it gets its money back.  

So I don't think it's financing but it might be.  But maybe we 

could work out something else. 

 

But would the minister give me -- and he doesn't have to do it 

tonight -- would he give me the specific concerns he has in the 

subagreement?  Because if this is acceptable philosophically to 

his cabinet and his caucus, enough, you know, to get us over 

the hump, then it's only the subagreement that's left.  And the 

subagreement was . . . this is the one that took the work.  This 

one . . . I mean this is where we spent the time.  And it took 

frankly years to get this one. 

 

(2215) 

 

But if you accept this, then could you just point out in the 

subagreement the things that caused you the concern, and you 

can do it tonight or you can do it some other time that you and I 

might be able to work on and see if we can get as close as we 

have on this one.  This one we got done.  And it's a good night.  

This one's fine.  It's to bed and I'm sure the public will be very 

happy about this. 

 

So would the minister take the September 21 agreement and 

just . . . if he could tonight, fine, and if not, maybe he could 

circle or write me or let me know some of the concerns he has 

in that subagreement and then we could take it from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I'm not interested here in ducking the 

question, but the September 21 agreement, as the member 

knows, was between the Power Corporation and AECL.  And 

my department . . .  I'm not the minister responsible for the 

Power Corporation, so we rejected that one and I would like to 

just leave that one because that's not within my jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well fair enough, Mr. Minister, tonight.  But 

you see the implications of what we're talking about here.  I 

mean we can wait till the minister's Estimates come up. 

 

But you're the Minister of Energy and we're close to a very 

large agreement and can you recall anything in that agreement 

that we could talk about here tonight?  Is there anything that 

you could give me some help in here so we could maybe get on 

with it? 

 

Would you talk to the minister of Power . . . responsible 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

for SaskPower and get back to us on what specifically in there 

was the biggest difficulty, the biggest stumbling block, and 

then we could take it from there?  Would you make a 

commitment to me to do that so that in fact we could discuss it, 

either in his Estimates or yours or behind the rail or in your 

office or mine or something else? 

 

I'm not going to put words in your mouth and I respect the fact 

it's not your portfolio.  But I don't recall there being all that 

much in that subagreement that was any more frightening than 

this, other than the economics that SaskPower had to come up 

with some money and then the feds come up with some money, 

and it was a joint venture.  But you get your money back if you 

didn't want to do it. 

 

Now other than that I don't recall anything that was any much 

different than here.  Can you recall anything in that 

subagreement that caused . . . that you remember discussing in 

cabinet that worried you other than the financing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I think I've 

mentioned this several times tonight but I will repeat this again.  

That the two things that we do not want at this time, we do not 

agree with: that we don't want any commitment to a reactor in 

Saskatchewan; we're not interested in any commitment to a 

waste-disposal site.  And I think these are the two issues I 

mentioned time and time again. 

 

We are interested in the research aspect of it but we cannot 

commit to those other two particulars in the document, and 

therein lies the problem.  If the member wishes to discuss this 

with me at a later time or with the minister of SPC, I'd be 

happy to do this at any time, when he has time or when we both 

have time.  I'd be happy to sit down and discuss this with him. 

 

We have really nothing to hide here.  I think we've been very 

up front.  I think I've been very up front with where we come 

from, and our position hasn't changed since last November.  

That's what we said then and our position hasn't changed, and if 

the member would like to discuss those issues with me, I'd be 

happy to do that with him, privately or over a cup of coffee 

some time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I agree with that.  Let's not 

get off on something that we both agree on.  You have said you 

have no problem with this memorandum of understanding on 

September 13, 1991.  You've said that in here.  You said you 

had no problem with it.  And all this says is that you're going to 

do research on all of those things that we've talked about here 

tonight.  Isn't that correct?  Now either you're going to retract 

what you said in here or not.  Nobody said in here you had to 

do anything other than research.  Isn't that true?  Isn't that what 

this agreement says?  We agree to do research on all of them. 

 

Isn't that what this says?  You've agreed with this 

memorandum.  You agree tonight that this is in here.  We can 

read it verbatim, and we'll go through it, but just so we know.  I 

know your concerns.  But we're trying to build something. You 

and me and the province are trying to build.  We know your 

concerns.  You don't want to be 

committed to ever using the technology on any of this, but you 

want to do the research in it.  I agree with you.  We can even 

say that again on the top and the bottom, but you agree with 

this memorandum, and you said so tonight.  I agree with it. 

 

Now in the SaskPower subagreement it also says this.  And it 

also says in there -- and we'll get it -- that if you don't want to 

even participate in this, you get your money back.  You don't 

have to use them in Saskatchewan. 

 

We're in a serious conversation.  What you and I are trying to 

do here -- and I'm sure you are -- is to have a very good 

research agreement with the federal government and even 

outside players; to research and to maybe manufacture and 

market this technology world-wide. That would be a win-win.  

Never use it ourselves until we want to.  Whoever sits in your 

chair, the premier's chair, will make that ultimate decision 50 

years from now. 

 

But we can now decide to know everything about it.  If you and 

I can come to agreement or if you and your minister of Power 

and some others, if you've agreed with this -- and it's only 

research -- then you don't have to say what you just said.  I'll 

say that.  We'll all say it.  We will only use it if we want to.  

Full stop.  Now once we get over that, then we're over the 

politics.  Because then you can say to any of your constituents, 

I'm not using that and this government won't use it until we 

want to. 

 

And what's that do?  That says, fair enough.  We do research on 

pesticides, on genetics.  We may not ever use it, but we'll know 

what to use and what not to use and how to use it, and people 

come from world-wide to find out how to use it.  I'm not going 

to give you a lecture on it. 

 

So just to get us back here, you agree with this and this is solid 

research.  And if your cabinet agrees with this, then we have to 

go to the subagreement and if it is only money, and there's no 

commitment there to use it -- you make that decision -- then 

we're very close.  And we can add to that. 

 

So if this is fine, again I would ask you for the commitment to 

look at the later document, the subagreement, and come back 

with any concerns that you might have with that agreement.  I 

don't have it with me or I'd read it, and we could get into it.  

Maybe you do, but maybe perhaps you don't because it's not 

your portfolio. 

 

Would you do that?  And if you're fine with this, then would 

you tell us and talk it over with your minister of Power, where 

your concerns are with the subagreement so that we can 

address it?  Would you give me your commitment to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat 

again the commitment I've made.  We've seen this document.  

This has been around since we've been in power, so around 

since September 13.  And we accept the contents of this 

document.  It's a research document.  It's a broad . . . we call it 

an umbrella MOU of energy initiatives and so on.  It's a very 

broad document and doesn't tie you down to any specifics. 

 

And I'll say it again: I can accept this.  This is a document 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

that we can accept.  I can give the member the commitment 

that I'm very happy to talk to my colleague, the minister in 

charge of the Power Corporation and the Minister of Economic 

Trade and Diversification.  I'm pleased to talk to him. 

 

We're not, however, talking about an agreement or an MOU 

that we rejected.  We're talking about an MOU that we are 

trying to negotiate with the federal government which is going 

to be different than that one.  There'll be differences in it than 

the one that was agreed to on September 21.  So I'll be happy to 

talk to him about that. 

 

And I make that offer to the member opposite, that if he would 

like to discuss with me privately the initiatives and the 

direction that we're going, that I'm going, if it's possible for me 

to share that information with him, I'd be happy to share that 

with him.  And I'm sure that my colleague, the Power minister, 

would do the same. 

 

So I don't think that we have a major conflict or disagreement 

here.  I've indicated several times, and I think somewhere early 

on in the conversation I already said this about the September 

13 MOU.  I think I mentioned that earlier.  And I've also 

indicated the difficulties we had with the other one. 

 

And whether the member sees them as real or perceived, we 

saw them as real.  Other people may have seen those 

difficulties as not as real as we did.  We saw them as real.  And 

it was a decision for us to make, and we made it.  And we're 

prepared to live with that, and we're also prepared to enter into 

discussions with the agencies to negotiate a new agreement. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I am going to 

get a copy to table in here so that we all know what you and I 

have talked about.  And I'm just making progress here so that 

when people are asking you, Mr. Minister, and asked your 

cabinet whether you have any problems with working with the 

federal government to evaluate the feasibility of establishing a 

nuclear research and technology program in the province of 

Saskatchewan that you don't have any problem with the 1991, 

September 13 agreement including: 

 

 the design and manufacture of Candu 3 nuclear reactors; 

 the construction and operation of a Candu 3 nuclear power 

station in Saskatchewan; 

 applications for Slowpoke Energy Systems; 

 opportunities for the safe, long-term management of nuclear 

fuel and fuel waste; 

 nuclear fuel cycle developments; 

 nuclear applications in medicine and agriculture; 

 university research programs and the enhancement of 

university programs in nuclear physics, medicine and 

agriculture; 

 related technologies, such as simulators, lasers, and 

irradiation processing; and 

 the market of nuclear technology worldwide. 

 

And to work together in all of the things in oil and gas and 

co-generation -- all of that -- that is in this memorandum of 

understanding.  This is the memorandum of understanding that 

the minister said several times tonight 

he has no problem with because it's all research.  And he has a 

copy.  I've signed it, Jake Epp's copy.  He has it in his hand so 

that we all know that this is fine.  It's a memorandum of 

understanding to do research.  It's broadly based, and he's fine 

with that.  You're comfortable.  I mean, it includes all of the 

other agriculture, economic, CO D222, co-generation, natural 

gas, solar biomass, everything else, and I've just focused on this 

so that we could clear it up. 

 

But this memorandum of understanding is acceptable to you 

and your administration.  You've said it several times.  And I 

just, you know, want to know because when we look at the 

subagreement -- I'm going to obviously have it and look at it -- 

it just adds to this.  It's just part of this.  And from my 

recollection, it has the numbers where the SaskPower has to 

come up with some money, and the feds do, and so forth, and 

you agree to do research. 

 

And they're going to move.  They're going to move AECL 

people to Saskatchewan.  That's where they take all that 

marketing, manufacturing, research, and they move those 

people here which is a nice part of the subagreement which we 

worked hard to get.  I'm sure you know. 

 

I mean when you move FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) here, 

it's some work.  I mean if the NDP win federally, I mean you'd 

know the negotiations you'd have to get into to convince the 

federal NDP Prime Minister to move bureaucrats from Ottawa 

or Toronto here.  Well we did it in AECL.  We've done it in 

Crown Life, and some other things, but that subagreement is 

about how we finance it and how we move these people out 

here.  And that's the kind of, you know, what makes it real. 

 

So this agreement that we both have in our hands and we've 

been talking about tonight, you have it.  I've signed it.  Jake 

Epp's signed it.  It's here.  You agree with that.  It's on . . . 

That's a good start for the negotiations that you and I might be 

able to get into or I could help get into with the federal 

government.  And I just want to confirm that this agreement is 

fine.  It's a memorandum.  And it's the details on the power 

agreement that you're going to get back to me on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think I have very 

much further to add to this.  The hon. member read from the 

agreement, and I just want to read into the record what the key 

words, I believe, in this section that he read in detail here.  It 

says: to work together to evaluate the feasibility.  And those are 

pretty key words, to work together to evaluate the feasibility.  

And they're general enough and broad enough that I would 

have absolutely no difficulty agreeing with something like that, 

to work together to evaluate the feasibility. 

 

So I don't think that there's any problem with this particular 

MOU.  And I've said it, and I will simply say it again, that this 

is part of the program, and we're trying to work under this 

particular agreement.  This is the document, or the umbrella 

MOU, that we're using in our conversations with the federal 

agencies.  We're using this document as a background for that 

discussion. 

 

(2230) 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I agree with you.  Here we are on 

-- what is it? -- August 13, almost a year since you were 

elected, and you are now agreeing that this is a feasibility 

study, that it has nice soft words.  It's a memorandum of 

understanding.  We can do all this research.  And it's the kind 

of thing that you're perfectly comfortable with. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't this . . . I just have to . . . I got to take a 

couple of shots here.  This is reminiscent, a little bit, of what 

we've been doing here on this GRIP legislation.  For Heaven's 

sakes, you and I agree with this.  And you've just said, it's a 

nice agreement, it's a feasibility study and evaluate the 

feasibility of establishing a nuclear research and technology 

program in Saskatchewan.  Good words.  And all the stuff that 

you have to do, fuel cycles and reactors and all of that, which is 

perfectly normal to study in research.  And you and I agree 

with this.  And the federal government agrees. 

 

And we've been fighting over it and you've been fighting over 

it and other people have been fighting over it and you've really 

nothing to fight over.  There's nothing in here that says you 

have to build them and use them in Saskatchewan.  And you 

have caused more people headaches and got more people in 

trouble and all kinds of . . . I am trying . . . I mean I . . . You 

see what . . . Just, I mean . . . I mean I could get on and say 

well you wouldn't . . . I don't think you're taking a run at it just 

because I signed it.  I really don't believe that. 

 

And I don't think you're taking a run at it because you're against 

research.  And you're not taking a run at it because you don't 

agree with it, because you say that it's a good agreement.  So 

you have to have some out for some of your constituents and I 

understand that, but my goodness that's . . . anybody watching 

this conversation tonight and anybody that's going to read 

Hansard and anybody that's going to see this agreement and 

say the NDP administration believes in this, is going to say, 

well what in the world have we been waiting on. 

 

Wouldn't you kind of agree with it?  What in the world are we 

waiting on?  You've stood in your place and you've been very 

honest, very forthright.  You want the jobs, you want the 

money.  I mean you know the money's going to come in here.  

On the fuel cycles alone it's billions.  People are paying 

fortunes to figure out how to manage the fuel cycle.  It's a big 

industry.  The president of the University of Saskatchewan has 

had people wanting to come to the University of Saskatchewan 

to study radiation, the cycles, all of this, and you agree. 

 

So I have to ask, you know, where have you been?  You want a 

line in there or something else that says you have the right to 

reserve using it yourself.  Well this is safe.  This agreement is 

safe.  And I'm sure in that subagreement it doesn't say you have 

to use it in Saskatchewan.  It just says you'll do research on it: 

operating, marketing, technology, and all of that.  And that's 

with the subagreement. 

 

But what it did say is: but federal government, if you're going 

to do this you're going to move the whole or a good part of the 

company right here to Saskatchewan.  Now 

that's good.  So you agree with that.  The feds are going to 

finance most of it.  And if you need some more money, maybe 

we can find some outside financing.  I know that engineering 

firms in other countries would come in and do that.  You'd be 

in favour of that. 

 

In fact if you and I were cabinet colleagues, I don't think we'd 

disagree on a thing on this issue.  And that's the truth.  We'd sit 

there and say, well we've got a little political problem here, but 

we'll have to deal with that.  You know.  I mean, but life goes 

on.  We have this opportunity.  We have this resource.  We 

have an abundance of it.  Let's get on with this. 

 

Well I don't know.  My colleagues in here are . . . I mean this is 

quite a remarkable evening, Mr. Minister, where you and I 

totally agree with this agreement and the memorandum of 

understanding between the federal Minister of Energy and the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I signed it.  Jake Epp signed it.  

You've essentially said you'll sign this.  Well if you sign this, 

Mr. Minister, we've got ourselves a deal.  We have ourselves a 

brand-new research package in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and I'd go with you to Jake Epp. 

 

I mean you could phone him tonight.  We'll phone him 

tomorrow.  Saskatchewan agrees with this memorandum of 

understanding.  And you've said it.  I've asked you enough 

times in here.  You've said it over and over.  I've read it to you.  

You've stood up.  You've got it.  It's locked in.  Here it is.  And 

I don't think that you're going to renege on it; I think you're a 

man of your word.  And as a Minister of Energy you must be 

given the right to say yes, this is a reasonable agreement. 

 

So we'll leave it alone.  You said you'd get back to me and you 

will on the subagreement.  Clearly, Mr. Minister, for the public 

of Saskatchewan and this Legislative Assembly and your . . . 

all of us, we know now that this is a good agreement.  And you 

endorse it which means that either you do or you don't.  And 

either you're a cabinet minister that has the authority to endorse 

it or you don't. 

 

I don't think you're going to get caught like the Minister of 

Agriculture.  I think that this is a good agreement.  It's all 

research.  There's nothing in here that commits anybody to 

anything haywire.  It's right here. 

 

So that's news, Mr. Minister.  And that's very good news.  And 

I know there's a way we can do this now.  I absolutely know 

there is.  And you can be there.  And you can take all the credit 

for it.  And your Premier can take all the credit for it but 

Saskatchewan can get that agreement.  Here it is. 

 

If the NDP administration doesn't have a problem with this 

document, and you've said it enough times, then we're home.  

And if it's finances or its the length or it's some other lines that 

say that you don't have to use it if you don't want to, there you 

go.  So that's what Estimates can do. 

 

I mean people can actually talk and they're on record and 

sincere or honourable people can exchange it.  So I take you at 

your word, Mr. Minister.  I'm delighted with your frankness 

and your candid and your legitimate concern.  But this is very, 

very useful for you. 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

I'll endorse this.  I mean I will help you sincerely get this 

agreement.  And it will be good for you and good for 

Saskatchewan, good for northern Saskatchewan, good for 

southern Saskatchewan, good for the country. 

 

Well you get me that information, or the minister can get it to 

me.  I'll tell you, I'll do everything I can to put it together, 

because from my experience there is demand for the 

knowledge that come out here that will make Saskatchewan 

one of the most wealthiest places in North America.  And I'll 

talk to you about that.  There's humungous demand, 

tremendous demand, and you're that close, and we're that close. 

 

So I'll leave it with you and I hope that you can get back and 

I'll go back to the minister myself, and certainly we've been on 

record here.  Look at the subagreement.  Anything in there that 

isn't any more than this, and if it isn't -- I don't think it is -- but 

if there is, we can perhaps talk about how we change it.  And I 

think we could set up a meeting with the Minister of Energy or 

with the Prime Minister's office, or whoever you think would 

be appropriate, because I think this is good news.  This is very 

good news for the province of Saskatchewan, the city of 

Saskatoon, for your administration.  And I appreciate your time 

tonight, your co-operation. 

 

So I'll take my place and I'll expect perhaps to talk with you 

later or you'll get me some information on the subagreement or 

I'll get it from the other minister. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

enjoyed the debate and the conversation between you and the 

member from Estevan tonight.  That was very enlightening, 

and I'm not going get into any of that of course. 

 

I just have a question that I want to ask and a few questions 

pertaining to two individuals, Mr. Minister.  They're pertaining 

to a Ronald and Raymond Bakken.  Ronald Bakken is a farmer 

from Penzance, and Raymond Bakken is his brother who works 

for SaskPower and he lives in Estevan.  These two individuals, 

Ronald and Raymond Bakken, have an application on file with 

the Department of Energy and Mines for a quarry lease on the 

north-east quarter 13-23-1-W3.  And I'd just like to ask you, 

Mr. Minister, could you tell me what the status of this 

application is at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, just to answer the 

member's question on the two gentlemen that he has indicated.  

I understand from my people over here -- and I'm not as 

familiar with the case as maybe I should be, because it's not 

one of the things that we deal with on a day-to-day basis -- but 

I understand that there is a dispute between these two 

gentlemen and another party.  Until that dispute is resolved, 

there will be no licence issued.  We will not process the 

licence. 

 

At this point, sand and gravel is still in the jurisdiction of 

Energy and Mines.  But as the member probably is aware, that 

in The Crown Minerals Act, it's been transferred over to 

another agency.  But at this time it is still with us and it would 

be within our jurisdiction to issue a licence or not to issue a 

licence. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm not aware 

of there being any dispute between two parties.  The only 

dispute that I know of is that the Bakkens have money in the 

hands of Energy and Mines for deposit with their application, 

and they haven't received the money back, or the application.  I 

don't know of any dispute for years that's ever happened with 

Bakkens versus anybody else except Energy, Mines and lands 

branch. 

 

I don't understand what you're saying, what the dispute could 

possibly be.  There's no dispute between anybody other than 

Energy and Mines and the Bakkens.  I think you have to get 

your officials to give you some different information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 

question, there in fact is a dispute.  There are two applications 

for the quarrying licence on this property that the member is 

talking about, and there is a dispute as to who is eligible to 

have the quarrying licence on this property. And my officials 

tell me that we're not going to issue a licence at this point and 

that the applicants will receive their money back with a 

rejection of the application. 

 

(2245) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, how familiar are you with the 

chronological order of the events that's happened in this here 

case?  This is a very sad case.  It's been going on for since 1983 

till now, and your officials should know that the Bakkens own 

the land.  They own this land.  They own it.  And your other 

party that has asked, applied for an application, it should only 

take your officials a matter of minutes to look through their 

own Act and years ago have told the individual that he has no 

way to get an application or get a quarrying lease because it's in 

writing in their hands.  They have the files.  That the lands 

branch who had the surface rights said there will be no further 

quarrying to this other individual, ever, because he broke 

almost every rule in the book.  And there's no way, if your 

officials would just . . . I'm going to take the time . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, do you or your officials know the entire 

story in chronological order?  What has happened in this whole 

case since 1983?  Do you or your officials know the story? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, my officials know 

the story.  I don't know the chronological order of the story, so 

I would have to be informed on that before I could comment 

further on that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I asked 

you last December when the House was sitting here, very 

nicely, if we could talk about this and you could help this 

individuals.  You got back to me and said you couldn't because 

it's now in a court case.  It's in a court case and we best not talk 

about it.  So I left it.  But then the next time I talked to you it 

wasn't in a court case and I told you how serious it was, and I 

needed your help, and you asked me to contact one of your 

MAs (ministerial assistant), a Mr. Dave Degenstein, and tell 

him the story, and go from there. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

But we run into a solid block.  But first before I . . . I'm going 

to run by the order of events just from my memory.  I haven't 

got the file.  I've had the file and I went to get it tonight when I 

found out Energy and Mines was up tonight, and realized that 

I'd left this here complete Bakken, Squaw Creek Aggregate, 

lands branch, Energy and Mines file at my home out at Craik.  

So I haven't got it. 

 

But this is the chronological order, as I recall.  I might be just 

out a little on dates.  I want this on the record and I want you to 

please, Mr. Minister, be very sincere about this as you were 

with the member from Estevan tonight.  I appreciated that and I 

would appreciate your sincerity on this case because we're 

talking about a very, very serious case. 

 

Conrad Bakken had a lease with lands branch for 

approximately 30 years, ending in 1986, and then his two sons 

purchased the land.  In 1983 Squaw Creek Aggregate obtained 

a five-year quarrying lease on the NE 13-23-1-W3.  And that 

lease was from 1983 to 1988.  I believe that it was January 

1983 to April 1988.  I don't know why the extra few months, 

but I believe if my memory serves me right, that was the length 

of the lease. 

 

Bakkens or lands branch were not aware of the lease.  They 

were not ever aware at this time.  Lands branch were the 

owners and Conrad Bakken had the surface rights rented. 

 

December, 1983 or early 1984 the Squaw Creek Aggregate 

went to lands branch and paid a fee for the surface entry on the 

quarter section NE 13-23-1 for approximately two acres of land 

to quarry rock, to crush rock to sell for private use.  This has 

nothing to do with highways or municipalities or whatever.  It 

was just a quarry lease to crush rock to resell, I believe it was 

in Saskatoon. 

 

Nothing wrong with this except that lands branch made a 

terrific error here.  It never was Energy and Mines' error, ever 

in the beginning.  It was never their error, as I'll explain to you.  

Approximately January of '84, Conrad Bakken . . . this is the 

father of the two boys that I was talking about, Ronald and 

Raymond Bakken, Mr. Minister. 

 

He's an elderly man.  He was out feeding his livestock one 

morning and heard a loud motor noise coming from the valley 

about one mile away.  This is winter-time so naturally in a big 

valley -- and it is a big valley called Squaw Valley -- and 

there's nobody lives beyond that.  When you hear a motor 

down there in the winter-time, a loud noise, you're concerned.  

So he drove as far as he could and then walked and found that 

Squaw Creek Aggregate crushing rock without prior 

knowledge.  He knew nothing about it whatsoever. 

 

At that time, they notified the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) and they were stopped from crushing at that 

moment or that . . . not that moment.  It's about 12, 15 miles 

from Craik.  And Squaw Creek Aggregate were stopped.  

Lands branch, at this time, were to blame . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  I wonder if the 

government members in the back might tone down their 

conversations and not interrupt the speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not just sure 

when my light went off so I'll repeat that.  Lands branch were 

to blame for not notifying Bakkens.  That was become very 

clear.  That it was an individual by the name of Mr. Smith at 

lands branch that admitted he did not get in touch with the 

Bakkens to notify them of a quarrying taking place on the 

property that he had the lease on. 

 

They neglected . . . and it caused a serious problem.  The lands 

branch were to contact, by the lease -- and I've read the lease -- 

they were to contact the Bakkens and make arrangement for the 

surface entry, taking care of fences, the roads.  There was no 

road in this area at all.  And I know this area very well, Mr. 

Minister, because we have the land adjoining.  Seven quarters 

of land surrounds this valley where this land is, so I know 

every detail about this case. 

 

They were to be discussing with the Bakkens and make a deal 

-- who's going to level after quarrying, whatnot.  And this 

causes serious problems with the Bakkens not knowing about 

this, between two neighbours, Conrad Bakken and John 

Watkins.  And neither one were to blame at this time.  That's 

the owner of Squaw Creek Aggregate.  Neither one were to 

blame.  It was the individuals at lands branch that neglected, 

and I don't know why but they did, and that's why we're here 

today with this serious problem. 

 

So what happened at this time, Mr. Minister, the Bakkens went 

for legal help and there was a lawsuit starting against Squaw 

Creek Aggregate and against lands branch.  But this Conrad 

Bakken being a very sincere old cowboy didn't want Squaw 

Creek Aggregate to lose the money for paying a crusher to 

come in and crushing this gravel, so they made an agreement. 

 

And some place in the files of Energy and Mines you will find 

this agreement.  And this agreement was that Squaw Creek 

Aggregate could remove the crushed rock.  They could remove 

it. 

 

But in doing so there was a letter sign by a Mr. Hoffert, the 

director at that time of lands branch -- and I haven't got it with 

me but I'm sure your officials have it; I'm sure they've read it 

many times -- that there had to be in this contract from Mr. 

Bakken: the fences must be repaired in spring by a certain time; 

the gravel and the holes must be levelled; there had to be . . . all 

the mess they made in the winter-time, coming into a man's 

pasture land, they had to . . . and he had to be compensated.  

All right.  That was the agreement. 

 

But the number third or fourth . . . the four points in the 

agreement: no further quarrying to ever take place -- no further 

quarrying. 

 

So that's the time in 1984 that Energy and Mines should have 

said goodbye to Squaw Creek Aggregate.  They didn't even live 

up to the Act, Mr. Minister.  They didn't even notify the 

Minister of Energy and Mines that he was going to go and 

quarry.  That's in the Act, they must do these things.  If your 

officials would quit leaving it to the Bakkens and the Squaw 

Creek Aggregate to iron out their 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

problems and to take care of their problems, then there 

wouldn't be any.  But they have neglected it.  And I'm not 

blaming this government; I'm not blaming the past government.  

I'm blaming the people in lands branch and some of the 

bureaucrats or workers in Energy and Mines for this all coming 

about. 

 

The next chronological order was, Mr. Minister, in 1986, Ron 

and Raymond Bakken purchased two quarters of land from 

lands branch, and the one quarter being the one in question. 

 

Squaw Creek . . . but what they did in the contract, Squaw 

Creek were to be protected with . . . until the end of the lease, 

with qualifications.  They're never going to be able to quarry 

but they just agreed.  The Bakkens agreed, well just leave the 

quarry lease in place and the caveat would go against the land 

until April 1988. 

 

So it was just left and nobody had the use of the rock, nobody.  

And the agreement was that after 1988, Bakkens would get . . . 

they owned the land and they were to get the quarrying lease 

because Squaw Creek Aggregate had no way to ever attain one.  

They couldn't.  They broke every rule in the book. 

 

And so them coming in and making an application, your 

officials, Mr. Minister, should just throw it out the window and 

look at the next one that comes next, the person, the owner of 

the land.  They now have the surface rights.  They now own the 

land.  So how could someone else get on that land?  The 

Bakkens own the land.  Squaw Creek was never to quarry 

again.  It was in their contract.  They didn't repair the fence.  

I'm the one that out there on a quarter section land beside 

seeding that spring.  It was right in the contract when the fence 

was being repaired, and I seen with my own eyes an old couple 

out there trying to fix some fence. I went over and I got . . . I 

stopped my tractor, and I went and got a post pounder and 

helped them fix their fence up temporarily to put the cattle in. 

 

There's so many things that happened here.  They didn't even 

level the ground, Squaw Creek, till away on in the 

summer-time.  The cattle could fall in deep holes.  Everything 

went wrong. 

 

All right, the next thing.  Lands branch put on a caveat as I said 

before, Mr. Minister.  Bakkens were to get the quarrying lease 

after April of '88.  Energy and Mines always said it's lands 

branch that's stopping the lease to Bakken.  Lands branch 

always said it's Energy and Mines that were at fault. 

 

So this is what happened.  It was the two . . . the problem 

wasn't between Squaw Creek Aggregate and Bakkens, it was 

lands branch and Energy and Mines, the officials and the 

bureaucrats in the departments not taking their stand and 

looking in to see what the problem really was.  The Bakkens 

were denied their lease from Energy and Mines for the last four 

years -- they were denied . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This is 

serious stuff 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don't think that that's very mannerly of the 

member from Churchill Downs and we're talking about a very 

serious . . . but he's always had such a big mouth in this place 

that he's always caused problem and I 

don't take very kindly to that member from Churchill Downs 

tonight.  I'm talking about something serious and I mean 

serious. 

 

In 1990 Bakkens had a chance to sell some rock.  They were 

given permission to sell surface rock and then not too long 

afterward, I believe it was in 1999, someone laid a complaint to 

Energy and Mines.  Energy and Mines laid a complaint to the 

RCMP of theft of rock.  Ron Bakken, in February of '91, was 

questioned by the RCMP.  Here we are, a good individual in 

the community, his brother down at Estevan never did anything 

wrong and they're questioned about theft, and whose fault is it?  

It's Energy and Mines.  It's them that let this happen. 

 

Then at election time, Mr. Minister, election time, Ronnie 

Bakken was charged, right in the election time.  Now, why do 

these things happen at election time?  Ron Bakken pleaded . . . 

he ended up he had to plead guilty and cleared up because it 

was going to cost too much money.  Ron could have won the 

case with me as a witness, and all we had to do was have a 

person by name of Ron Painchaud from Davidson, who would 

qualify his story that he give to the RCMP because he said he 

didn't understand what quarrying was, he only took surface 

rock. 

 

I talked to the RCMP.  I was questioned for three hours on this 

case myself by the RCMP.  Four or five past ministers, people 

in the departments, lands branch . . . 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:02 p.m. 

 

 


