




















































Hansard: June 05, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 915 

 June 5, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Britton, as vice-chairman of the Standing 

Committee on Private Members' Bills, presents the first report 

of the said committee, which is as follows: 

 

 Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 

petitions for private Bills, and finds that the provisions of 

rules 59, 60, and 61 have been fully complied with. 

 

 Of the Ukranian Catholic Council for the Ukranian Catholic 

Eparchy of Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan; 

 

 Of the Regina Exhibition Association Limited of the city of 

Regina, of the province of Saskatchewan; 

 

 Of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society Limited 

and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Limited, 

both of the city of Regina; 

 

 Of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills now be concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you today, and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, eight grade 11 

and 12 students from Vanier Collegiate who are seated in your 

gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These students are accompanied by their teacher, Richard 

Keleher, and chaperon, Shirley Geisler.  And they've already 

been on a tour of the Assembly building.  I'm looking forward 

to meeting them after question period, Mr. Speaker, for photos 

and a visit. 

 

I would also add that just on Saturday of last week, that the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and Thunder Creek and 

myself had the pleasure of attending the Vanier Collegiate 

graduation banquet and ceremonies.  And I would ask all 

members to wish these students well in the conclusion of their 

studies this year, to have a happy summer, and for those who 

are continuing on who are grade 12 graduates, in their careers 

to follow. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege today, along 

with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, to welcome the 

students from Vanier, and also to introduce to you, sir, and to 

all members of the House, 12 adult students from the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

adult education program in Moose Jaw.  And they're 

accompanied here to the legislature today with their teacher, 

Larry Shaak. 

 

I sincerely hope they enjoy their visit to Regina and the 

legislature.  I look forward to a very short visit after question 

period with the students.  I invite all members to welcome 

these students from SIAST Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased this 

morning to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly 

59 grade 5 students from Lumsden Elementary School which 

are seated in the west gallery there.  I've met with them earlier 

for photos, and they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 

Tourney and Mrs. Reiger.  And I know that they are going to 

have a very informative and exciting visit here and I ask you all 

to join me in welcoming them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I see in your gallery a constituent of mine and a very 

close friend, Myrna Rolfes.  And I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly, Myrna 

Rolfes.  And I think she's here today to observe the conduct of 

a certain member, so I would ask all the members here to join 

me in welcoming her here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I just want to remind the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain that she is a constituent of his 

and not of mine. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

recently the Saskatchewan representatives attended the 

Economic Research Committee meetings in Ottawa, and 

Saskatchewan was reported as the most improved province for 

the housing market.  Mr. Speaker, the ERC group has 

representatives from the Bank of Canada, the Department of 

Finance, chartered banks, life companies, trust companies, and 

housing industry reps from each province across Canada. 

 

It was indicated that our unemployment rate, at 7.9 per cent, is 

the lowest in Canada.  It was indicated as well that 10 real 

estate offices showed a forty-two and a half per cent gain from 

January through April compared with the previous year.  Mr. 

Speaker, as well it indicated that housing starts should hit 1,500 

units in the coming year.  I would want to say that housing has 

always led the economy out of tough times, and I really do 

believe that 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

this is an indication of good things to come. 

 

Along with the change of government, quite clearly there is a 

new optimism developed in Saskatchewan.  Industry and 

consumers and government are working together in a spirit of 

co-operation, and clearly we are on the road to rebuilding this 

province together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I live in the town of Unity, and of 

course Unity, the name the town of Unity should be on the 

front page today because of the conversations going on in the 

constitution. 

 

I would like to report to the Assembly that we have in Unity a 

three-day-plus rodeo weekend coming up.  This rodeo started 

out at about two days, and with the co-operation of all the 

service clubs and all the organizations, voluntarily have 

brought this into a three-day-plus very successful rodeo 

weekend. 

 

And it goes along with what the member opposite just said 

about co-operation and volunteerism.  In the town of Unity we 

practise that, Mr. Speaker.  And I would like to tell you all the 

bleachers, booths, and exhibition facilities were built by 

volunteers.  They're paid for.  And I would invite anyone that's 

close by to drop in at our town and we'll show you a little bit of 

what Unity means.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is the 

policy of this government that the best social program is a job.  

Mr. Speaker, at 1 o'clock today in our city, the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser and myself will be formally announcing the 

creation of 18 new jobs in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, these jobs are being created 

under the new and innovative community employment program 

of the New Careers Corporation through the establishment in 

Moose Jaw of two market garden projects -- one through the 

Moose Jaw native Friendship Centre, and one through the 

Moose Jaw branch of the Canadian Mental Health Association. 

 

The benefits, Mr. Speaker, of these two projects are not only 

employment. Some of the produce from the gardens will be 

provided to the Moose Jaw food bank, other produce will be 

provided to the hot meal program at the native Friendship 

Centre.  Revenues from the produce sale will assist in the 

operation of both organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 18 people a few days ago were without work and 

without much hope.  Today they are working, Mr. Speaker, and 

it's because this government does believe the best social 

program is a job. 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to draw 

to the attention of the House, the achievement of Lumsden 

Elementary School.  I have just introduced the grade 5 students 

from this school, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of Lumsden have long appreciated the quality of 

both the elementary and secondary schools in Lumsden, but it 

is especially noteworthy that the Lumsden Elementary School 

has been awarded the Canadian Association for Health, 

Physical Fitness and Recreation award for their superior 

physical education program. 

 

Not only is it one out of only eleven schools in the province to 

have received this award, Mr. Speaker, but Lumsden 

Elementary won the award two years ago as well. 

 

I'm looking forward to presenting the award later this morning 

on behalf of the Minister of Education. 

 

Educators have long known that good education requires a 

healthy mind and a healthy body.  We all would wish that the 

values inculcated by the quality of the Lumsden Elementary 

physical education program will encourage these children to 

grow up healthy and fit. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, fitness in one's youth should encourage 

health throughout life, and I congratulate the staff and students 

at Lumsden Elementary for their efforts in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to bring 

to the attention of this House a proposal that we're pursuing in 

the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency. 

 

We are trying to organize a renal dialysis unit in one of our 

local hospitals.  At present, a number of patients need to travel 

to Regina or Saskatoon for dialysis, usually twice or three 

times a week.  This is very costly in time and money to the 

patient and also occupies beds, we think unnecessarily, in the 

city hospitals. 

 

At the same time we have other patients who have home 

dialysis units.  This is very convenient for them, but it's rather 

extravagant in the number of dialysis units needed, as they only 

use it two or three days a week, and the rest of the time it lies 

unused. 

 

Our idea is that one unit installed in a local hospital could serve 

three patients, thus reducing the number of dialysers required 

throughout the province.  It would also reduce the pressure on 

renal units in city hospitals and increase the range of services 

available in our peripheral hospitals. 

 

I would like to bring this to the attention particularly of the 

rural members of this House and hope that they will inform me 

of projects that they are contemplating in their rural hospitals 

which may be of use to me . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the series of 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company good news stories, 

today I'm delighted to report that after nearly 10 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

years of very few promotions within STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company), there is a new policy at STC. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, recruitment is being done from within STC 

as a matter of choice whenever possible.  The first example of 

this new policy occurred with the following results.  

Administrative positions were reduced by four, and at the same 

time five career STC employees were promoted from within.  

This was done by STC creating for the first time a passenger 

services department. 

 

Imagine, for 10 years while passenger ridership dropped 

drastically, there was no passenger services department.  Now, 

Mr. Speaker, one department, including depot staff, dispatch, 

and operators are responsible for passenger services and 

initiatives to increase bus ridership. 

 

It is long overdue for STC employees to be recognized for their 

dedication and their very large knowledge about how to run a 

bus company.  Stay tuned for more STC good news. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1015) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm happy this morning, Mr. Speaker, to 

report that I've just returned from the agricultural employment 

conference that was held for Canada this year in Saskatoon.  

This is a conference that's held every two years to review the 

agricultural labour force and the needs of the agricultural 

labour force, and to try to find ways to ensure that we will in 

fact have a labour force into the future. 

 

I attended as a local agricultural employment board 

chairperson, a position that I hold in the Swift Current office.  

And as the representative for that area, I was there to discuss 

things like the unity of our country, which will greatly affect 

the shifts possibly in things like our milk boards and our pork 

boards. And those kinds of shifts will be very important to the 

trends of labour and the labour force in agriculture. 

 

We will also be very much dependent on what happens in the 

area of free trade, as well as labour patterns that may be created 

as a result of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade) talks and the movements in that direction. 

 

We had motivational speakers such as Bill Gibson from 

Vancouver.  And these were very enlightening speeches that 

reviewed ways that we can motivate ourselves and be more 

productive in agriculture.  We also listened to Knowlton Nash, 

a very popular person on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) television, who spoke to us about the declining 

numbers of agriculture, and thus the declining political clout 

that the farm community has.  He also reviewed with us ways 

that we can make the media become more interested in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- I ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the House a group of students from Berezowsky School in 

Prince Albert in my riding. 

 

Berezowsky School in our community is a well-known school.  

And I guess it's got a fairly close and warm spot in the hearts of 

my family, especially my daughter, who's now 19 years old, 

attended the first year of kindergarten when Berezowsky 

School was first opened.  Berezowsky was and is named after a 

former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Bill 

Berezowsky, who represented the area a number of years ago. 

 

I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with the students, the 

chaperons, and their teachers.  And hopefully we'll be able to 

answer any questions that they might have with respect to the 

operation of their legislature.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Appropriate Questions for Question Period 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I call oral questions, I wish to make a 

brief statement that relates to question period. 

 

During question period in the last two days, several points of 

order were raised regarding the practice of not allowing 

questions to be asked on details of Bills currently on the order 

paper.  Rule 38(1) regarding oral and written questions was 

referred to.  I wish to clarify my interpretation of this rule for 

all members. 

 

Yesterday when the member for Souris-Cannington referred to 

a Bill in his first question, there were immediate calls from 

some members to the effect that this was out of order.  It is not 

our practice and it is not my intent to prohibit members from 

asking questions on matters that may be the subject of 

legislation before the House.  To do so would be to unduly 

restrict members from raising very serious and contentious 

issues in this very important forum of question period. 

 

Having said that, however, it is also not my intent to allow any 

and all questions relating to Bills that may be on the order 

paper for debate.  Questions may be asked on the subject 

matter of Bills before the House, but such questions should not 

deal with the details of the Bill or clauses of the Bill.  The 

appropriate forum for that type of question is in the Committee 

of the Whole where the minister has the assistance of officials 

to provide detailed information.  Members should be able to 

frame their questions in such a way as to deal with the general 

policy behind the Bill without raising specific details that 

require detailed answers. 

 

Members will know that to apply the distinction that I have just 

made requires the Speaker to make an instant judgement call 

during the heat of question period.  I will be interpreting this 

rule in keeping with the practice of 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

this House, and in that regard I refer all members to a ruling of 

the Chair, dated June 23, 1989. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Provincial Funding for Abortion 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I direct my question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

today people are gathering on the steps of our legislature, 

demanding that you listen to the people.  You have said 

everyone knows that it is unconstitutional for the government 

to refuse to provide medically necessary services.  You have 

said that, sir.  You have de-insured insulin for diabetics, and 

you clearly believe that is constitutional. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, is it your position that abortions are 

more medically necessary than insulin? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is -- 

and the members opposite know this full well -- that it is 

unconstitutional to de-insure abortions because of the Canada 

Health Act and the Charter of Rights.  And the members 

opposite are fully aware of that, including the former premier. 

 

The fact of the matter is that with respect to some other 

services which are not surgical procedures, such as insulin for 

diabetics or optometric services, they are not within the 

definition of the Canada Health Act.  And actually some of 

these services such as optometric services are de-insured in 

other provinces in Canada whereas abortions are insured across 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And if 

the Premier is going to continue to duck the issue, I will direct 

my question then to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, 

this question is not about politics but about hundreds of 

thousands of people telling you that when times are tough they 

don't want you spending their money on abortions in this 

province.  Madam Minister, that's what this is all about. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you have determined that it is legal for 

you to take optometrists out of medicare.  You are now saying 

that your legal opinion is that abortions are medically necessary 

and eye care is not.  Madam Minister, you are now claiming 

that abortions are more medically necessary than chiropractic 

treatment. 

 

The question is this, Madam Minister: will you put your 

opinion about these things to the ultimate test and at least ask 

the Court of Appeal to make a ruling?  Will you do that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

ducked the question of abortions for nine and a half years.  

They ducked it.  They continue . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There was no interruption when 

the member asked his question.  I ask members, please let the 

minister answer her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They continued to fund abortions for a 

period of nine and a half years, and when they moved into an 

election that they knew they were going to lose, they put 

forward a plebiscite question against the advice of their lawyers 

in Justice, against the advice of lawyers outside of Justice, and 

they knew that it was constitutionally invalid.  They knew that, 

Mr. Speaker.  And instead they chose to put a question before 

the public raising the hopes of the people of Saskatchewan or 

some people in Saskatchewan.  A cruel hoax, Mr. Speaker, 

that's what I call it.  A cruel hoax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government has used this 

legislature to bring forward laws that override the rights of 

farmers, override the rights of government employees.  You are 

using this legislature to pass laws allowing search and seizure 

without a warrant and override the rights of the individual.  

And today you are using the opinions of a few of your hired 

lawyers to deny the rights of the voters. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you not admit today that the only rights that 

you are interested in are the rights of the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party.  Is that not exactly the case we are 

facing today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there are certain rights that 

are enshrined in our constitution and we call them 

constitutional rights.  These rights cannot be overridden except 

in very exceptional circumstances, and we are advised that it 

doesn't apply to a situation such as this. 

 

The members opposite however, for their own political 

purposes . . . and I think this is the height of political 

expediency -- the height of political expediency and a most 

offensive act -- to put a plebiscite to the voters that they knew 

could not be enforced and that they knew they would never 

have to enforce because they were going to lose the election.  

Instead they wanted to leave a problem that they could lobby 

on from a political point of view.  But I'll tell you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier, looking for an 

answer.  You are fighting the idea of listening to the people and 

holding a vote on constitutional change.  Now you have people 

on the steps of this legislature who say they have a right -- a 

right, Mr. Premier -- to be heard.  They voted in the hundreds 

of thousands in the last election to say no tax money for 

abortions. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you prove that you respect democracy, that 

you respect the people's vote, and you will order the Minister 

of Health to stop funding abortions in these times when you are 

taking insulin away from diabetics? 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, respecting democracy is 

respecting the law.  And respecting democracy is being fair and 

open with the people instead of perpetuating cruel hoaxes such 

as the one put forward by the members opposite when they had 

full knowledge that this act was unconstitutional.  I think it is a 

most cynical act from political leaders -- most cynical and 

offensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I must say that there are people in the pro-life 

movement who agree with us in that regard.  And I'm referring 

right now to an article by a Mr. Keith Elford who says: 

 

 The plebiscite was designed ostensibly to collect voter 

opinion but its real purpose was to create a no-win situation 

for the province's new leaders. 

 

That's the real purpose of that vote and I say it's shameful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

many people voted last fall for the NDP and also to stop 

funding of abortions.  Mr. Premier, you will take away the 

insulin that gives life to diabetics while at the same time 

spending money to take away the life of the unborn.  This 

government has no respect for the wishes of the voters.  And 

may I remind you, Mr. Premier, that while you won the 

election, more people voted to stop funding abortions than the 

number who voted for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you will not order the Health minister to listen 

to the voters, then will you at least insist on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people that the matter be referred to the Court of 

Appeal for a ruling.  Will you not respect the people even that 

much, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I wonder where the members opposite 

and the one who asked the question were in the last nine and a 

half years, Mr. Speaker.  Where were they on this issue?  They 

were hiding their heads in the sand until they came to an 

election that they knew they weren't going to win, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with respect to respecting the wishes of the voters, we 

have respect for the wishes of the voters.  And we took a 

considerable length of time to look at this issue inside out 

because we respect the wishes of the voters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If you respect the 

wishes of 360-some thousand voters, Madam Minister, 63 per 

cent of those that voted have told and they have spoken.  But, 

Madam Minister, you are ordering hospitals to perform 

abortions.  You are ordering them to do this procedure and then 

you defy the voters and you pay for that procedure. 

 

Will you confirm, Madam Minister, that with your efforts to 

increase the free access to abortions in Saskatchewan, that the 

budget for abortions in this province will be one 

of the very few areas of the health care budget to increase over 

the next several years?  Will you confirm that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I wonder if the members opposite 

ordered abortions for nine and a half years, Mr. Speaker.  I 

suggest they no more ordered them than we are ordering them.  

What we are doing here is stating the law as it has existed for 

years and as they acknowledged it existed by not doing 

anything.  There is no change in the status quo with respect to 

the law in this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is important here and what the members 

opposite failed to do on this issue was to try and get at the 

problem, and that is unintended pregnancies.  And what this 

government is doing is, it is showing its commitment to life in 

this province and it is implementing a policy to attempt to 

reduce the number of unintended pregnancies. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that is going 

to take some action to deal with this problem and to bring 

people together from all walks of life, from all religions, to deal 

with this problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to the 

same minister.  The action that you're taking, Madam Minister, 

is exactly what has the people of this province concerned.  It is 

obvious, Madam Minister, to everyone that if you order more 

abortions performed, you're going to have to spend more 

money, Madam Minister.  I think that is obvious. 

 

If your budget, Madam Minister, if your budget for abortions is 

going up while your budget for cancer patients, for example, is 

going down, you are taking money that at one time was used to 

save life and then transferring it to a portion that is going to 

destroy life. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you again in all sincerity, will you at 

least refer this matter to the Court of Appeal and then quit 

hiding behind the opinions of a few of your NDP lawyers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member's comments 

opposite are totally reprehensible.  This government and this 

Minister of Health is not ordering abortions.  And I find their 

discussion, their comments, reprehensible. 

 

This government will provide access to abortions as the law 

requires.  We are not ordering abortions.  And we will do what 

we can to reduce the number of unintended pregnancies in the 

province. 

 

And with respect to referring to the Court of Appeal, Mr. 

Speaker, what we need to do on this issue is to attack the 

problem and not spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on a 

legal action that we know what the end result will be. 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If Madam 

Minister wants to know where the people on this side of the 

House were the last nine and a half years pertaining to 

abortion, we were out there fighting for the lives of the unborn. 

 

And we sincerely . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we sincerely brought 

it to the vote to the people . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I would like to 

settle all people down on both sides of the House.  I've noticed 

there were some interruptions when the minister was answering 

her question and now there's interruption when the member 

asks his question.  I ask members, please, let them ask their 

questions, let the ministers answer. 

 

Member from Arm River, I'd like you to direct your question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

while you shriek your political rhetoric, we have people who 

had their medicine taken away on everything from medicine to 

user fees on cancer patients.  You will charge diabetics for the 

privilege of staying alive with insulin but say it is 

unconstitutional to refuse to pay the entire bill for every 

abortion. 

 

Madam Minister, is it not true that in effect what you're doing 

is diverting funds from the diabetics and cancer patients and 

funnelling that money into abortions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think your comments are . . . I said 

reprehensible, but they're becoming laughable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where were these members, where were these members for the 

last nine and a half years?  Why didn't they refer it to the courts 

in the last nine and a half years if they thought they could be 

successful on a court action?  These johnny-come-latelies 

across the way, who had nine and a half years of opportunity to 

do something about this problem if they believed there was 

really a legal solution, which I say they didn't, which is why 

they didn't do anything about it. 

 

What this government is doing is taking money to attempt to 

deal with the problem, which is unintended pregnancies.  We 

have set up a family planning committee that is very 

comprehensive.  We have people from all over the province 

who will be sitting on this committee, who have high 

qualifications, and who have a serious interest in dealing with 

the problem, because the problem is unintended pregnancies. 

 

And instead of using political rhetoric and trying to make it . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will ask the Premier if he might 

want to consider responding to this, and if not it'll go to the 

Minister of Health. 

Mr. Premier, from my knowledge there is nothing in the 

Canada Health Act which specifically refers to abortion.  I'll 

repeat that, Mr. Premier.  There is nothing in the Canada 

Health Act that specifically refers to abortion. 

 

Secondly, if you want to find out how provinces will be 

funded, a province will fund all medically necessary 

procedures done in hospitals.  The key words, Mr. Premier, are 

medically necessary.  The fact that cosmetic surgery is not 

funded provincially unless it is necessary, speaks to that point.  

This would indicate that there may be no risk at all of 

eliminating funding to abortions if they're not medically 

necessary.  What evidence do you have, Mr. Premier, that 

abortions are medically necessary and how would you make 

that judgement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, in response to 

the question, the former premier knew that abortions were 

considered medically necessary under the Canada Health Act.  

In fact, the opinion that I had referred to earlier in this debate 

during this session was found at the premier's office in 

Saskatoon and it states:  under the Canada Health Act, the 

provinces must fund all medically necessary services.  And as 

long as abortions are medically necessary, which is a Canada 

Health Act -- it's a Canada Health Act requirement, not the 

provincial government's requirement -- provincial governments 

must fund such abortions or face financial penalties for doing 

so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . and the opinion goes on.  I'm sure you 

have a copy of it, Mr. Premier, because you obviously read it 

before the plebiscite question was put. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is I want to call on the 

people across Saskatchewan, including the members opposite 

-- although I don't trust them to participate because I know 

they're being politically expedient -- to get together on this 

issue and try to solve the real problem.  If they're serious about 

this, they should join us in reducing the number of unintended 

pregnancies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before the Leader of the 

Opposition puts his question, I notice he was calling "Mr. 

Speaker".  I just want to remind him the minister took eight 

seconds longer than you did, sir, in putting your question.  So 

I'm keeping very close track of the time element.  So I ask the 

Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will say again -- and the minister 

knows and the Premier knows -- that there's nothing in the 

Canada Health Act which specifically refers to abortion.  And 

certainly abortion on demand is not required by the Canada 

Health Act. 

 

In fact, I would ask the minister if she would respond to this:  

does she think it would be difficult to make the legal argument 

anywhere, in the Court of Appeal, or the Supreme Court, that 

terminating the life of a healthy baby living in a healthy mother 

is a necessary medical procedure under the Canada Health Act? 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

the answer to that question.  He had it when he was in 

government.  The fact of the matter is, the legal advice is, is 

that it would contravene the Canada Health Act and it 

contravenes the constitution.  That is the legal advice from 

Department of Justice lawyers and lawyers outside of the 

Department of Justice.  He's read the legal opinions.  And if he 

hasn't, he should have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we see with respect that the 

Minister of Health and the Premier are skirting this because 

I've asked the question now, this will be the third time.  Tell the 

public why you think this procedure is medically necessary.  

Why do you think a court would decide that taking the life of a 

healthy baby in a healthy mother is medically necessary under 

the Canada Health Act?  Why do you think that they would 

make that decision?  Because I don't think that they will make 

that decision.  And I would like you to at least answer the 

question.  Would you give us your legal opinion of why you 

think that is medically necessary? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, why did the member 

opposite think a court would decide that for nine and a half 

years?  Because his failure to act when he was premier of this 

province clearly indicates that for nine and a half years he 

knew that's what a court would decide.  And the very opinion 

that he received states, and I will read it for his clarification in 

the event that he forgets what he read:  before the 1988 

Supreme Court decisions on abortion a woman and her doctor 

decided that an abortion was medically necessary and a 

hospital therapeutic advisory committee confirmed that it was 

necessary before an abortion could be legally provided. Since 

the Supreme Court decision did away with therapeutic 

committees only the woman and her physician decide whether 

an abortion is medically necessary.  That's who decides. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister has given no 

evidence at all why she could not take this to the Court of 

Appeal of the Supreme Court and find out if it's medically 

necessary. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why didn't you? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the Premier speaks from his seat, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Kick him out. 

 

The Speaker: -- He's not the only one that should be kicked 

out.  Please let the member ask his question and the minister 

answer. 
 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll go three questions now to the 

Premier and perhaps he would care to respond.  The 

first is, what legal arguments would suggest that a court or a 

judge would say that abortions are legally necessary.  Number 

two, does he not acknowledge that when you go to the people 

and ask them if their will is important on something on a moral 

issue that it wouldn't be worthy of at least trying to test that 

when the people said, I don't want it funded.  And number 

three, Mr. Premier, if the Act said, well I guess it must be 

medically necessary, what do you think the cost would be to 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer if they didn't fund abortion?  And if 

the Canada Health Act said . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Let some minister 

answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the courts have said over 

and over again that their access to abortions are . . . that women 

are entitled to access to abortions.  We know that's the law.  

The people opposite know that's the law.  They've known it for 

nine and a half years.  They've known it for nine and a half 

years. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why won't you test it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite shouts from his 

seat:  why didn't you test it?  Why didn't you test it?  Why 

didn't you test it?  You didn't test it because you knew . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Could we have another 

questioner.  This debate between members in question period 

simply cannot continue. 

 

And I ask somebody to ask a question, then please let the 

minister answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The question with respect to a penalty, Madam 

Minister.  If the Canada Health Act said it was medically 

necessary and you're not funding it, therefore the penalty will 

be we won't fund you for it.  What would that be?  How many 

hundreds of thousands of dollars might that be if that was the 

penalty? 

 

Would the minister confirm that the penalty, even if it was a 

penalty, is very small compared to the health care budget and 

certainly in terms of the will of the people who stood in this 

province and said:  stop funding it.  They said:  it's not my 

moral decision that I would fund somebody else's decision 

here. 

 

So if it's a small amount of money, and you're not going to 

receive it, could you confirm that it's not the money and it's not 

the law; it's your lack of courage that is making you take this 

position here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, talking about lack of 

courage.  For nine and a half years that man lacked the courage 

to stand up on this issue and chose to do it only when he moved 

into an election he was going to be decimated in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And he had no courage to do what 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

he could to reduce the number of unintended pregnancies in 

this province.  No courage at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- He ducked the issue, Mr. Speaker, for 

nine and a half years.  And instead, instead he tried to 

perpetrate a cruel hoax on the people of this province. 

 

And he knows it's not only a Canada Health Act issue.  It's also 

a constitutional issue.  It's not simply a Canada Health Act 

issue. 

 

So the member opposite still tries to use this issue for his own 

political expediency.  Because if he believed in it, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'd like leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1045) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

you, and through you, to the Assembly, 17 grade 4 students 

from Assiniboia Park School in Weyburn seated in your 

gallery.  I'd also like to introduce their teacher, Kelly 

Hilkewich, and several chaperon parents: Lorna Katschke, 

Dennis Gervais, Donna Mryglod, Brenda Harder, and Judy 

Weiss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to congratulate the students from 

Assiniboia Park School for participating in environmental 

green school program.  This is a program which heightens 

environmental awareness and encourages students and teachers 

at Assiniboia Park to participate in reducing, reusing and 

recycling school supplies used in their school. 

 

I have requested my colleague from Assiniboia . . . or I should 

say, Bengough-Milestone to act in my place to host my 

students since I have to meet another delegation.  And they will 

be attending to this shortly.  And I ask my colleague to do this 

on my behalf.  And I'd like to welcome everybody and request 

everybody to join in with me in welcoming my guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Introduction of guests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly 

27 grade 4 students from Montmartre, Saskatchewan who are 

seated in the west gallery.  The 

students are joined by their teacher, Sandi Brown, chaperons, 

Diane McCall, Vida Stevenson, Linda Knoll, and Celine 

Giroux and their bus driver, Keith Eberlé. 

 

I hope they enjoy their visit here today and also their visit to 

Regina for the day.  And I'll be joining the group shortly, and 

ask if members join with me in welcoming this group to the 

legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Progress Towards Reducing Unintended 

Pregnancies 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to report on the 

progress my government is making towards solving one of the 

critical problems facing our society -- unintended pregnancies.  

We now know that informed family-planning decisions can 

have a major impact on the health, overall well-being, and 

socio-economic status of individuals and families.  We also 

recognize that there is a need for more accessible, culturally 

sensitive, family-planning programs in our province. 

 

As I've said before, my government is committed to working to 

reduce the number of unintended pregnancies and thereby 

reducing the number of abortions obtained by Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say we have taken the first step in 

meeting this commitment.  I would like to announce the 

appointment of a provincial advisory committee to study 

family-planning issues in Saskatchewan.  The role of this 

committee is twofold: to make recommendations on the 

development of comprehensive family-planning programs, and 

to examine economic and social issues contributing to 

unintended pregnancy and abortion in Saskatchewan. 

 

The committee will explore options for improving access to 

and delivery of effective family-planning programs for all age 

groups, but particularly for adolescents.  The committee will 

also examine approaches to family planning and family life 

education which promote the co-operation and involvement of 

government, schools, parents, adolescents, and religious and 

cultural groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the knowledge and experience 

the people I have appointed will bring to this committee.  Most 

importantly, I am pleased with the level of compassion which 

these people will bring to this important issue. 

 

The committee will be chaired by Ann Schulman of Saskatoon.  

Ms. Schulman has extensive experience working with children 

and adolescents both in her current role as executive director of 

the Saskatchewan Institute on the Prevention of Handicaps and 

in her previous role as a pediatric nurse. 

 

The other members of the committee bring with them a wealth 

of experience and involvement with health, family planning, 

social, and aboriginal issues.  They are health care 

professionals, clerics, social workers, and 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

educators. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that there are a number of 

young people on this committee who will bring with them the 

firsthand knowledge and experience of dealing with this 

sensitive issue.  This committee represents a cross-section of 

our society and shows a commitment to finding a solution to 

the problem of unintended pregnancies. 

 

My government believes that family-planning programs are an 

essential part of any comprehensive health system.  Effective 

family-planning programs will allow Saskatchewan people to 

make better reproductive health choices and will play a vital 

role improving the well-being of our families.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise first of all to commend the minister for taking 

some direction, but I also would like to remind the people of 

this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that it would 

appear to me that the ministerial statement today is another 

way of trying to deflect the criticism that is coming at the NDP 

Party by many people across the province for their lack and an 

inability to answer questions, or unwillingness to answer 

questions. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would appear to me that the 

statement is just another ideologically driven statement by the 

NDP Party to deflect this criticism.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would like to remind the minister of the fact that regardless of 

all the work and efforts that they would make in trying to 

counteract teen-age pregnancy, I do not believe that teen-age 

pregnancy is a big problem out there regarding the abortion 

question.  And I don't believe that it will stop all teen-age 

pregnancy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in light of the fact that . . . I'm 

not exactly sure what the numbers are, but I notice in our 

community that of the teen-age pregnancies, many young 

mothers have chosen to keep their child because they believe 

that that is a human being they are responsible for, and it's our 

responsibility to support them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we raised in question period today, 

what we are bringing and asking the minister to do is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . the minister is telling the people of 

Saskatchewan that need insulin that diabetics of this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly people I talked to yesterday, 

that the cost of their having a healthy life-style is going to be 

challenged in the fact that they must pay for all their insulin 

now. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are programs out and about in 

this province, and if we would ask the government to first of all 

allow the courts to make a decision, to make a ruling and let 

them know that they can indeed de-insure abortions but also 

support programs like teen aid that are giving a wholesome 

view and approach, taking a wholesome approach to teen-age . 

. . not only pregnancy but teen-age sexuality in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in one case we can support the program, but, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we must also stand up and criticize the 

minister for using this forum to try and promote their ideology. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

wish to rise in this House and very much commend the 

government on their taking a stand to deal with family life 

issues in the province of Saskatchewan.  Every single part of 

our world must do its part to ensure that all children are wanted 

children who will be raised with love, security, and stability. 

 

The realities of our planet -- and we can call this our home 

sphere, our ecosphere -- are such that at this time we have 

almost five billion people on Earth.  And by the year 2025 we 

will have 11 billion people on our planet.  What we need to do 

is to ensure that we can in fact sustain this kind of population, 

that we can be concerned about the quality of life of each and 

every person who comes on to our planet. 

 

I am truly concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the approach 

that is being used here, and I feel that there is an enormous 

amount of denial or total ignorance on the part of the official 

opposition.  I have not met anyone in this province who is not 

pro-life.  We all care about life, and I find it quite reprehensible 

that this is reduced to two extremes . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- . . . of either being pro-life or pro-choice.  

And quite frankly I find both of these groups, whether it be 

pro-life or pro-choice, using language which in essence 

becomes a violent kind of language.  It is as equally unfair to 

talk about murder and killing as it is for people in the 

pro-choice movement to refer to a fetus as though it has no 

value whatsoever. 

 

And what we need to do is to understand that this is an 

enormously complex situation with no easy answer.  If indeed 

what happened, what the official opposition wants, that 

tomorrow there is no access to abortion, if they are so ignorant 

as to believe that there would therefore be no abortions in this 

province, they've got to be kidding, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  All it 

means is these things will go underground and we will not deal 

with this horrific issue of abortion. 

 

The real problem is indeed unintended pregnancy.  The 

symptom of that problem happens to be abortion.  And for 

those of us who find it appalling to have to have abortions in 

this province, we should all be working in a concerted way to 

ensure that there will be no need for abortion. 

 

What I do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is refer everyone in this 

legislature to become educated about this issue.  They should in 

fact examine the works of Dr. Matejcek, the only person on 

earth who has done longitudinal research into this for 28 years 

-- 28 years -- and a gentleman who could truly educate all of us 

in ensuring that there has to be a far, far better way of dealing 

with this issue than politicizing it or trying to make decisions 

on this issue based on emotion. 

 

I would like to conclude, if I may, that we indeed do have a 

terrible problem in this province with teen-age 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

pregnancy.  And if we are concerned about the quality of life of 

our children, our children are having children, and I'd like to 

remind the official opposition that in fact teenagers in this 

province, the younger they are, the more likely they are to keep 

their children, which hardly provides stability and security for 

them. 

 

I'd like to ask the government to in fact look into the fact that 

we could have family life programs that would take place after 

school, that could include parents, that would help them in 

increasing communication within the family.  What we indeed 

need to do is to ensure that people who get pregnant can have a 

quality of life and support and security that if they choose to 

bring their children to term, that in fact would they have a 

support system in place to give everyone some kind of form of 

future. 

 

So there are several things going on here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I really find it appalling that people somehow make this 

divisive when we should be working in concert to ensure that 

all of the people in this province, children especially, are going 

to get the kind of quality of life they deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Products 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I move that Bill No. 38, An Act to amend 

The Pest Control Products (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

The amendments to this Act will contribute to the protection of 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan's environment.  The Pest 

Control Products (Saskatchewan) Act regulates the use, 

distribution, and handling of pesticides in Saskatchewan.  

There are regulations in place that require commercial pesticide 

applicators in Saskatchewan to be trained and licensed.  

However there are no regulations in place to ensure that the 

business people who sell agricultural and industrial pesticides, 

the pesticide vendors, are trained and licensed. 

 

Saskatchewan is the only Canadian province which does not 

require vendor licensing.  The Western Fertilizer & Chemical 

Dealers Association and the Crop Protection Institute have 

requested that mandatory vendor licensing be introduced, and 

retailers generally support it. 

 

The industry feels that it is important for vendors to be trained 

and licensed.  This amendment will establish regulations 

requiring that vendors of commercial and restricted pesticides 

be licensed.  Vendors of domestic pesticides for use in the 

home or garden will not be required to be licensed. 

 

One particular benefit of this amendment will be the increased 

availability of correct information about the 

use of agricultural and industrial pesticides.  Farmers 

frequently consult their pesticide vendors for information about 

pesticides.  This amendment will result in improved 

point-of-sale information regarding the safe and effective use 

of pesticides.  Mr. Speaker, this amendment also demonstrates 

the government's commitment to protection of the public and 

the environment of the province. 

 

(1100) 

 

The second amendment we propose for The Pest Control 

Products (Saskatchewan) Act is a change in terminology from 

the word permit to the word licence.  The Act allows for 

regulations respecting permits but not respecting licences.  In 

order to be consistent with new national standards for pesticide 

vendor and applicator certification, a change in terminology 

from permit to licence is required.  This is a housekeeping 

change. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, these two changes respond to needs 

indicated by the industry and will ensure that Saskatchewan's 

regulations are in concert with those in other provinces of 

Canada.  It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I'm pleased to 

bring forward these amendments to The Pest Control Products 

Act, and I ask all members of the House to support them.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in responding to the minister's comments on Bill 38, 

the official opposition agrees with him on most of the points in 

the Bill.  There are a number of areas that we are going to want 

to consult with.  Certainly the people that are in custom 

applicating, people that are in the storage business of chemicals 

need to be talked to and consulted on this issue.  I am sure that 

the minister's department staff have.  We would like an 

opportunity to do that consultation. 

 

One of the things that farmers across Saskatchewan have been 

telling me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that their ability to access 

farm chemicals on a continual and reliable basis is one that is 

of some concern.  People in the farming area have heard the 

media talk about moves by individuals in our society to take 

the ability of farmers to manage certain chemicals perhaps 

away from them. 

 

And in this province it's very fundamental that as we move into 

a new era that is environmentally conscious that we also don't 

prohibit our farmers from being able to make sound, economic 

and environmental decisions in regards to chemicals.  One of 

the things that they have to do is have a secure access to those 

chemicals, that the people that they talk to on a daily basis are 

knowledgeable, and, as the minister said, meet all of the 

licensing requirements that are coming into force across 

Canada. 

 

As I said, we don't have a lot of problems with what the 

minister said in the House today, but we would like some time 

to consult with various people in the industry.  I would move 

adjournment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Act and 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

to enact a consequential amendment related to the 

enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 39, The Pest Control 

Amendment Act, 1992, is an amendment to The Pest Control 

Act. 

 

The amendments are primarily administrative changes that 

clarify the pre-eminence of specific legislation, expand the 

regulation-making powers of the Act, and provide for 

exemptions from the Act in the regulations.  The changes are to 

section 12.1, 12.2, and section 32. 

 

Section 12.1 gives the Dutch elm disease control regulations 

made under The Pest Control Act, pre-eminence over all other 

Saskatchewan legislation dealing with Dutch elm disease. 

 

This is necessary in order to prevent potential conflict between 

this Act and The Urban Municipality Act, which allows urban 

municipalities to make bylaws respecting Dutch elm disease 

control. 

 

Section 12.2 requires urban municipalities to send their Dutch 

elm disease bylaws to the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

within 30 days of the bylaws' enactment. 

 

This allows the Minister of Agriculture and Food to be aware 

of all legislation that speaks to Dutch elm disease and to 

determine whether or not these bylaws are in conflict with 

other provincial legislation, specifically the Dutch elm disease 

control regulations under The Pest Control Act. 

 

Section 32 and 32.1; the former section 32 is repealed.  The 

new section 32 expands the powers of the Act with respect to 

making regulations. 

 

Section 32.1 is a new section which allows for exemptions 

from The Pest Control Act and any regulations made under it.  

Section 32.1 exempts landlords from being forced to control 

Dutch elm disease and elm stands where the disease is deemed 

uncontrollable.  In some river valley situations, it is very 

difficult and very expensive to attempt control measures.  In 

many cases the cost of attempting control measures is 

prohibitive. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, these changes respond to 

administrative needs of the legislation.  For this reason, Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to bring forward the amendments to The 

Pest Control Act and I ask all members of this House to 

support them.  Therefore I move that Bill No. 39, an Act 

amending The Pest Control Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It seems 

that the House comedian is at it again. 

 

Mr. Minister, your attempts at controlling Dutch elm disease 

are laudable.  You will have no disagreement from members 

opposite on that point.  I am wondering in this particular Bill, if 

that is the essence of it, why there was no reference to it. 

 

Obviously this amendment places all urban municipal 

jurisdictions under some changes.  Those municipal 

jurisdictions do many things besides control Dutch elm disease. 

 

As I read the Act, this will apply to each and every bylaw, be it 

Dutch elm disease, be it the eradication of certain insect pests 

like grasshoppers, rodents, that type of thing, where their 

bylaws will have to comply with your regulations because it is 

not specific to it.  And I think because of that, we would like to 

have the opportunity to talk to some of our towns and villages 

to see exactly what their thoughts are on this Bill, if it will in 

any way impact on the rate base of those jurisdictions. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask for 

adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Consumer Products Warranties 

Amendment Act.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act removes the 

provision permitting the consumer protection branch to provide 

mediation services to assist consumers and businesses to 

resolve product warranty disputes. 

 

The Consumer Products Warranties Act provides a good level 

of product warranty protection for consumers.  The consumer 

rights and protections granted by the Act will in fact continue.  

While mediation services for consumer products will no longer 

be provided, the consumer protection branch will continue to 

deal with complaints under licensing statutes which the branch 

administers.  This includes legislation dealing with the service 

in various industries such as direct sellers, motor dealers, 

collection agencies, agricultural implements, and auctioneers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those comments I therefore move second 

reading of An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  While this Bill 

may appear to be innocuous, it removes some of the protection 

that the government has provided to consumers.  Mr. Speaker, 

a consumer will no longer receive assistance in mediating 

consumer warranty problems.  Rather, Mr. Speaker, a 

consumer with a concern or a problem must now take the issue 

to the court.  While it may seem cheaper to provide no 

mediation services, the cost may in fact be greater by forcing 

these issues into the court system. 

 

I would ask the minister to review the costs associated with this 

Bill, both of mediation services and the cost of taking the 

complaints to the court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also important that the consumers of this 

province have an opportunity to study the implications of this 

Bill and to comment on the implications as they see them.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move we adjourn debate on 

this Bill. 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act to repeal The Hospitals Tax Act and 

respecting certain consequential amendments resulting 

from the repeal of that Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  I rise to move second 

reading of Bill No. 43, The Hospitals Tax Repeal Act.  The 

Hospitals Tax Act imposed a tax on certain gaming activities 

such as lottery tickets, bingos, raffles, for several months in 

1989.  Oh, they'll remember that; there'll be painful memories 

for members opposite. 

 

While in opposition we opposed this tax because of the 

disastrous effect it had on lottery ticket sales and other gaming 

activities.  The public's refusal to provide their past monetary 

support to gaming activities resulted in declining sales and 

profits for the charitable and non-profit organizations operating 

gaming activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public's rejection of this ill-conceived Act 

brought about its removal in November 1989, -- only four and 

a half months.  The imposition of the hospital tax was 

suspended by the former government which passed a regulation 

under the The Financial Administration Act to provide a 

general exemption from liability to pay the tax.  The repeal of 

The Hospitals Tax Act is more legally appropriate than the 

current exemption regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also includes consequential amendments 

to remove the references to The Hospitals Tax Act from the 

The Revenue and Financial Services Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 43, 

The Hospitals Tax Repeal Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Business Corporations 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm  pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of The Business Corporation 

Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of the amendments proposed to be 

made by this Bill are housekeeping measures that will improve 

the service given to businesses by the corporation branch.  For 

example, in a number of situations, these amendments reduce 

filing requirements to ensure that corporations are not being 

required to file the same information or documentation with the 

government more than once.  The policy proposal and this Bill 

update the legislation to reflect current business practices in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 42, which sets out the rules that a 

corporation must comply when it intends to provide financial 

assistance to its shareholders, directors and employees, is 

modified to provide clearer direction to corporations as to what 

is and what is not permissible. 
 

The provision respecting the names that corporations may or 

may not use are amended as well.  Where a person 

 intends to incorporate a new corporation, a search of federally 

incorporated companies and trademarks will be carried out in 

addition to a search of Saskatchewan corporations to ensure 

that the person's right to use that corporate name is protected as 

much as possible. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where a person is granted a corporate 

name in error, the directors requires to change the name, the 

director is given authority to compensate it for actual expenses 

incurred without the need for it to resort to court actions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, extra-provincial corporations are given 

the option of adopting a second corporate name for use in 

Saskatchewan where it is a registered name is too familiar to 

the name of a Saskatchewan corporation.  This practice has 

worked well in Alberta to reduce public confusion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the requirement for Saskatchewan 

companies to have at least one director resident in 

Saskatchewan is eliminated.  This will, for example, allow 

corporations to remain registered in Saskatchewan even if the 

principals move out of the province.  To protect the public, 

such corporations are required to appoint a representative in 

Saskatchewan who can be served with documentation on 

behalf of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes will correct a number of 

deficiencies in the Act that have become apparent over the last 

few years.  They have been put together in consultation with 

the Canadian Bar Association to ensure our corporate law is 

kept up to date.  Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading 

of An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

say at the outset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are all in favour 

of housekeeping measures that make business more simple and 

more straightforward in our province. 

 

However, we have to be cautious in a Bill that deals with 

corporate entities, especially in this Assembly, because of 

course the people of Saskatchewan know that the philosophy of 

the government involved is not intended to assist corporations 

in a general way.  And so we are sceptical that perhaps there's 

more to this Bill than we have been able to get the time to 

examine just yet. 

 

We want therefore to take a little time to run the Bill past some 

legal people.  Especially I note that the term municipalities is 

used here and we think it is proper that we run this Bill past the 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

to see what their opinions are. 

 

I also note in section 6 in general it refers to out-of-pocket 

expenses being paid.  I think on the outset I should say that we 

generally favour that idea because it has been the experience in 

our past to have friends and neighbours who have had 

problems with people in the department 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

making a mistake and allowing the same name or one very 

similar to be allowed to two separate corporate entities. In 

which case there ensued considerable amount of expense with 

lawyers and that sort of process before the mess was 

straightened out.  The people who legitimately had the right to 

the corporate name had to spend several of hundreds of dollars 

to in fact get what they should have had to begin with.  And to 

get those out-of-pocket expenses back is more than right. 

 

However the question should be considered, who should be 

paying for those kinds of mistakes?  Should it just naturally 

come out of the pockets of all the taxpayers or should we be 

looking at some kind of accountability within that department 

to make sure that they don't just treat these things frivolously 

and that they attend to their work in a proper manner. 

 

We find ourselves agreeing to a large extent to those kinds of 

ideas in here.  In section 12 I note that there could be some 

legal problems with that and I think again there we've got to 

have people take a look at it.  Section 13 is also rather 

complicated in terms of reference to The Income Tax Act, and 

I believe that we in all fairness should have some legal people 

from the tax department take a look at what those implications 

really are. 

 

I believe in section 15 we're referring to an increase in fee and 

there's no set fee there.  I wonder if it's proper to just give a 

department the right to arbitrarily decide what that amount is, 

or should we in fact perhaps have some suggested rate or fee 

schedule thrown in here for public debate in this Assembly or 

somewhere else where people who are affected by those costs 

in fact will have some input some place as to what those costs 

should be and whether it's fair or not -- at least an opportunity 

to debate and argue about whether or not they should be 

charged the new arbitrary fees that would be set. 

 

It's a rather lengthy document going on for several pages here, 

and because of that, and seeing that the costs of searches and so 

on could be going up considerably, and the implications that 

are set out in some of these explanations being rather legal in 

explanation, there's a good possibility that there may be more 

to this Bill than I have been able to determine at this point. And 

for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask that we move 

to adjourn debate until another day. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It gives me pleasure to move second reading of the Bill to 

amend the income tax.  As announced in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, steps must be taken to reduce Saskatchewan's deficit.  

The Government of Saskatchewan must depend upon its 

residents to help restore the financial health of Saskatchewan.  

Both individuals and corporations are being asked to 

contribute. 

 

Income taxes are one of the fairest means of reducing the 

deficit and restoring the financial well-being of Saskatchewan.  

This is because income taxes are largely 

based on the ability to pay. 

 

The Bill introduces the deficit surtax.  It's levied at the rate of 

10 per cent on the sum of Saskatchewan basic tax including the 

flat tax, commencing on July 1, 1992.  Tax withholdings will 

reflect the introduction of the deficit surtax on July 1, resulting 

in an effective rate for 1992 of 5 per cent.  Also commencing 

on July 1 will be a $50 increase in the child reduction from 200 

to 250 per child.  This will protect lower income families from 

the additional taxes resulting from the introduction of the 

surtax. 

 

Larger corporations are being asked to contribute to the 

province's recovery through an increase in the general 

corporate income tax rate from 16 to 17 per cent, commencing 

January 1, '92.  This is in addition to the increase introduced by 

the previous administration and represents an increase 

accordingly. 

 

The Bill also clarifies the eligibility of shelf corporations 

incorporated to benefit from the Saskatchewan tax reduction 

for the small businesses. 

 

While income taxes are one of the fairest means of levying 

taxes, this government is not satisfied with the present tax 

system where provincial income taxes are collected on the 

province's behalf by the federal government.  

 

There are many benefits to have one collector and 

administrator of income taxes, particularly the reduced 

compliance cost for provincial residents in the preparation of 

tax returns.  However Saskatchewan is required, along with 

other provinces who have similar arrangements, to accept 

federal control over the conditions under which provincial 

income taxes are levied.  This severely hampers the province's 

ability to enhance the fairness of a tax system.  For example, 

the province cannot integrate our income tax programs with the 

income tax system to ensure fairness and efficiency in 

provincial social policy. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan continues to press the 

federal government for increased flexibility in provincial 

income tax, so the provincial income tax system can become 

fairer and more equitable.  I'd be pleased to answer questions 

concerning the amendments when discussing the Bill in 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

It therefore gives me great pleasure to move that a Bill to 

amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I'm sure that the minister I think had a little difficulty 

in saying that he had a lot of pleasure in introducing the Bill in 

the Assembly today. 

 

Certainly as I took a quick look at the Bill before us, I believe 

the Bill is addressing a number of the things in the budget or 

areas in the budget where the government is looking to increase 

taxation.  And on that aspect, certainly many people across this 

province would just as soon see this Bill die on the order paper.  

Because I'm not sure that 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

people across Saskatchewan are all that interested in paying 

more taxes. 

 

Yes, people in Saskatchewan are interested in addressing the 

debt.  And in talking to a lot of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

have found that people have been throwing out a lot of 

suggestions and ideas as well.  And as I look through the Bill, 

there are areas in the Bill that will recognize low income 

families and put a few more dollars into the hands of low 

income families.  And we commend the government for 

recognizing that need. 

 

But we will also want to remind the government and bring to 

the government's attention the fact that there are many people 

across this province that are going to be in more severe 

financial difficulty because of measures in the budget.  And on 

the basis of a number of the pieces of information we see in 

this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly are going to want to 

review it a little closely, as it does put an added tax burden and 

load not only on corporations, but certainly on personal people 

right across this province through the personal income tax and 

increases we see in a number of areas. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member for 

Shellbrook-Torch River on his feet? 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Mr. Speaker, I've got some guests from P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Carlton which is a buddy riding to 

Shellbrook-Torch River.  I'd like to introduce 20 grade 5 and 6 

students from Arthur Pechey School in P.A.  I will be taking 

pictures with them at 11:30 and drinks at 11:35.  I wish you 

students had a good trip and a safe trip home.  Would you 

please help me welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to repeal The Health Research Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move second 

reading of the Bill I want to welcome the students as well.  I 

know they'll find their visit to the Assembly today interesting 

and I wish them a good stay and a safe return home. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Health Research Repeal Act.  This Act will transfer all rights 

and obligations, assets and liabilities of the Saskatchewan 

Health Research Board to the Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission. 
 

When the commission was established in February, Mr. 

Speaker, it was given a broad mandate.  The commission 

has been asked to review usage patterns in Saskatchewan to 

determine how and why services are used and provided in the 

province.  These findings will be made public. 

 

Research information will become the focus for public 

discussion on changes needed to the health system to improve 

the quality of health care in Saskatchewan.  One of the primary 

activities of the Saskatchewan Health Research Board was to 

provide grants for health research.  Mr. Speaker, let me assure 

the House that the commission will continue this practice as 

part of its mandate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Health 

Research Repeal Act. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have looked at this Bill and we don't have a lot of concern with 

it as we read it.  We need to know a little bit more, Mr. 

Speaker.  This Bill takes into consideration, as I read the Bill, a 

complete transfer of responsibilities and assets and so on into 

another department. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would like to have a little more time 

on this.  The changes to the health care administration as a 

whole is acceptable on this side.  However, we'd like to know 

how the commission will be structured.  We would like to 

know the parameters of the new commission, their powers.  We 

speak of powers in here and so, Mr. Speaker, in order to get a 

little more information from the people that this may impact 

on, we now beg to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1130) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

The Chair: -- I'd ask the minister if he would like to 

reintroduce his staff to the members of the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Seated beside me is Ray Smith, and 

directly behind me is Mary Kutarna. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the day before yesterday when we were on PCS, I gave a list of 

questions that . . . requests that I was asking for.  And I said 

you could either get them from me afterwards or take them out 

of Hansard, and I just wondered how you got along with those 

questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps the House will indulge me 

for a moment while I find the member's comments in Hansard 

of . . . was it June 1? I guess it was. 

 

Thank you.  I say to the member, I don't see a problem with 

part of it.  Part of the information we don't have.  Let me reread 

this for your benefit: 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

Now to the rest of the Public Service Commission I want a 

list of the actual names of any persons who were terminated, 

their salaries . . . 

 

And I think that's okay.  What might be more difficult is with 

respect to those who were hired, you asked for the list of 

names, that's okay; job title, that's okay.  But what I've got a bit 

of a problem with is the balance -- the job description.  In many 

cases there is no formal job description.  It's simply understood 

and will depend upon the area the person is employed. 

 

So I don't know whether this would satisfy the member or not.  

With respect to those who are hired, we can give you the 

names, the job titles, the salary that is with the position, and 

such job descriptions as might be available . . . as might be 

reasonably available. 

 

I know that's a little bit iffy, that last one, but we don't always 

have job descriptions.  So if that would satisfy the minister, we 

could agree to provide that . . . if that would satisfy the 

member. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, maybe we'll just leave that for 

a few moments because I understand that there's been a 

suggestion made from your department of how we can get 

these questions answered. 

 

I'll be leaving shortly, or after a while, to go to talk to the 

pro-life people, and the member from Morse will be asking 

some questions.  So I'm going to get a photocopy, Mr. Minister 

-- which I'm sorry that I didn't get; I was busy here this 

morning -- and give you the . . . I have about 38, 39 questions 

here that I'm going to be asking you, and we'll give them to you 

and then you can go through them and give me some comments 

on ones that you can answer and the ones you can't and why 

not.  And we'll do that.  The member from Morse will be 

asking some of those questions while I'm gone. 

 

In the meantime I'd like to ask this question, Mr. Minister: the 

Public Service Commission, how many jobs or how many 

personnel got a pink slip that's involved with the Public Service 

Commission -- and I don't mean the people that work for the 

Public Service Commission -- that they have knowledge about 

or involved with throughout all government?  How many pink 

slips? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There was one individual whose job 

was terminated -- the former chairman, John McPhail.  That's 

the only person with the Public Service Commission whose 

position was terminated.  There were, as you know, 390 

positions throughout government which were terminated on 

May 7. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, I understand that there wasn't many in 

the Public Service Commission. I understand that.  It's, Mr. 

Minister, the personnel that's involved with all government that 

is involved with the Public Service Commission.  How many 

pink slips since November 1 or October 21 until now?  How 

many pink slips have been given out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As we discuss it, we may have to 

agree to give you that. 

We can supply the member with the numbers and the names of 

public servants who left the public service by reason of 

termination, retirement, I suppose in the odd case, death.  We 

can give you the names and the numbers of people who left the 

public service.  We can't do that today but we can agree to give 

you that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You mean, Mr. Minister, that you don't have 

the numbers of all the people, Public Service Commission, I 

don't . . . let's say today the numbers.  And give me the 

personnel and the names afterward.  How many numbers 

would there be that's had a pink slip in all of government since 

November 1.  You should have the numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We sent that to you the other day.  

And that list is . . . we still stand by that list; it's still complete.  

We sent you the numbers of people who had left the public 

service since November 1, '91. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So that list that you provided me, it had I 

think it was around 4 or 500 names on it, or positions.  And 

you're saying, Mr. Minister, that's all the pink slips that have 

been given out to November 1 for all of government, for all of 

government that the PSC (Public Service Commission) is 

involved with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  Except it does not include 

orders in council which you'd have to get from Executive 

Council, and does not include service contracts which we had 

nothing to do with. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, I understand that.  All right.  How 

many of those individuals that got a pink slip was rehired like 

immediately, or whatever, that has been rehired.  Still working 

for government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We don't yet have that information.  

However we'll undertake to give it to you when it's compiled. 

 

The member may or may not be aware that with respect to 

out-of-scope employees they go on a re-employment list and 

some are re-employed, although it isn't always easy to match 

skills and positions. 

 

With respect to those who are in scope, they have a bumping 

process.  The officials tell me that that takes about two to three 

months before the thing settles out. 

 

And I'll give you my undertaking that -- you pick the time -- at 

a given time in the future, we will supply you with the names 

of all persons who were rehired through re-employment or 

through bumping. 

 

I would suggest October 1.  By October 1 we'll give you a list 

of all the people who are rehired.  It wouldn't make much sense 

before then though. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, that won't be acceptable.  

What I want, Mr. Minister, is the people . . . and I know it's 

happened in many departments of government where they got 

their pink slips and never missed a day's work, were rehired the 

next day.  And that's happened in many departments of 

government. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

So when you give out a pink slip and they're fired, and that's 

the number that's recorded in the papers and publicly and by 

yourself, that they've had their pink slip, and they're back 

working the next day -- maybe not the same job but in the same 

department with just a little different job title.  You must know 

and your staff must know exactly who those people are. 

 

I'm not expecting you, Mr. Minister, and I'm quite willing to 

wait till a certain date to get the ones that have the bumping 

rights and haven't got a job back yet and the ones that don't 

know where they're at.  I want the list of the people that have 

been hired back in government and where they're at and what 

their classifications and what their new job description is, 

because they're out there.  We must have that information, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The officials tell me that they suspect 

that the answer would be nil.  However I'll give you this 

undertaking.  Within a relatively brief period of time we will 

canvass the departments and answer the question accurately.  If 

there's any, you'll get the names and positions.  So I undertake 

within a reasonably short period of time to tell you how many 

people were immediately re-employed, reasonably 

immediately. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I mean is there some other 

way that someone could have a pink slip, have a job the next 

day, never missed a day's work, and are still working, because I 

know of individuals.  And to protect their names, I'm not going 

to use them in here.  I know it's happened.  For sure I know it's 

happened.  Is there some way that it could happen and not 

come through the Public Service Commission, or you wouldn't 

have got a recording on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's technically possible they might be 

given a pink slip and then rehired as a casual.  I'm told that 

that's technically possible.  We'll canvass the public service and 

we will give you our assurance that that did not happen; or if it 

did, we'll give you the names and the positions where it 

happened. 

 

The officials think it's extremely unlikely it happened, but we 

will undertake to ask the departments and get back to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, could you undertake to have 

someone of your staff contact Rural Development, like this 

morning?  Like someone go out and phone them now?  

Because somebody over there, the deputy minister or 

somebody in that department, because this is one of the 

departments where they're not coming back as casual labour; 

they're coming back as the same job or . . . I'm sorry, maybe 

not exactly the same job description but doing the same work 

after they've had a pink slip. 

 

If you would undertake to have somebody contact them now or 

somebody in your own department should know this.  I can't 

believe that the Public Service Commission where you have to 

go through . . . you've got to go through the Public Service 

Commission to be hired in these positions.  They must have a 

recording, they must have, Mr. Minister.  With all due respect 

to you, they must have a recording of someone that got a pink 

slip and is back to work the next day.  They must have. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm frankly quite sceptical of that 

kind of information they get over the phone.  I wouldn't 

necessarily be sure it's accurate.  It has been my experience in 

government when you phone someone and say, now I need an 

answer real quick, here's the question -- the answer is given 

without proper thought, and it may not be accurate. 

 

I'm prepared to get that information and get back to you.  I 

frankly don't feel very comfortable in phoning up someone's 

office and asking for it quickly.  Moreover -- I'm not asking 

you to do this; I'm prepared to have the staff of the Public 

Service Commission do it and get back to you at a reasonably 

early date -- but you could also ask the Minister of Rural 

Development when his Estimates came if you have some 

specific suspicions as would appear to lie behind the question. 

 

But we'll get it.  I do not think it's a very wise practice to be 

running out to the members' lounge, phoning someone, and 

treating that as if it were accurate information.  My experience 

has been it's often inaccurate. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it shouldn't be a big job 

when your officials are telling you that it's very unlikely there's 

any, when I think there's been like maybe dozens and dozens 

and maybe a hundred or more.  And what I suspect it is, Mr. 

Minister -- and I said it the first day we were on PCS and 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) -- 

that these people that you're firing and they're leaving 

government, they haven't any job.  But you're going to take 

care of your own political people. 

 

And we will not be getting off this here department.  We have 

to have commitments.  We have to have commitments in 

writing, wherever.  We have to know the people because I've 

made a vow to you, Mr. Minister, that we would follow the 

people through to see if your political people are still working.  

It's only the people that are non-political that got moved from 

their jobs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have a suggestion.  Assuming the 

member's comments were found to be substantiated, that would 

be the end of the conversation.  I couldn't begin to discuss it.  I 

wouldn't know why. 

 

Why don't I give you this undertaking: we will supply the 

answer to that question before the Estimates for the Minister of 

Rural Development come up.  So you'll have the information 

and then could discuss it with him.  As I say, supposing they 

were found to be true, I could not justify or explain it or deal 

with it.  Why don't you just accept my undertaking that we'll 

get back to you before those Estimates come forward? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we might be able to make an 

agreement like that.  We might be able to.  But we'd have to 

have it in writing that all information that we're going to leave 

that way . . . because we're not going to just let the vote go.  

We'd have to just leave it on vote 1, if we're going to do a 

commitment like that.  Or else if I got it in writing from you on 

several questions we have here, 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

like maybe a lot of questions, that we'd have it in writing that 

we would get this information when it gets to the department.  

But we can't get to the department, Mr. Minister, and then the 

minister says, you should have got it in the Public Service 

Commission. 
 

I mean, we're not going to be left hanging out to dry here.  We 

want this information.  We want to know because I do believe 

that pink slips have been given out and the people are back to 

work the next day.  And I want to know their names, who they 

are, and that should be something that you should be able to 

provide just like that.  Your officials should know if they 

handed out . . . the Public Service Commission working with 

the departments must know exactly how many people got pink 

slips and they must know exactly how many people went back 

to work. 
 

That shouldn't be a difficult question.  When could you 

undertake to have that particular information? 
 

The Chair: -- Why is the minister on her feet? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- With leave, I would like to introduce 

some guests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you.  I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of this Legislative 

Assembly 10 students in grade 8 from St. Brieux School in my 

constituency, sitting in your Speaker's gallery.  They're here for 

a tour today to watch the legislative proceedings in this 

Assembly. 
 

I have met with them.  Their teachers are Randy Boyko and 

Lucille Assiés the chaperon.  And I would like to welcome 

them and have members of the Legislative Assembly join me, 

hoping that they will have a good visit to Regina this afternoon. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me make this suggestion to the 

minister.  You have my assurance as a member of a treasury 

bench and as Assistant House Leader that we will have the 

information to you before Rural Development Estimates come 

up.  I'm told, two or three days, so I give you my commitment, 

we'll have it to you by next Friday. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

going to be going out now to spend some time with the 

Pro-Life people that's out in the House and the people that are 

opposing government on the funding.  I'm going to be spending 

some time with them and the Leader of the Liberal Party is 

going to ask some questions, I understand, and then when the 

member from Morse comes up, he has 

the information -- the questions to table.  And then we'll be 

coming back on later.  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, in the budget the 

government announced the cut back of some 500 civil service 

positions, and on a number of occasions I've heard in this 

legislature from various ministers that many of those people 

affected by the cuts will be given an opportunity to engage in 

bumping of other employees if they have the adequate level of 

authority. 

 

I ask the minister, how much do you believe that this process 

will cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member probably knows that 

bumping is something that has been negotiated under the 

collective bargaining agreement.  There are no direct costs 

associated with it in the sense there's no additional staff hired, 

and offhand I see no direct costs. 

 

There's certainly some indirect costs because people are . . . an 

employee who may understand the job is then bumped and 

moved out and you get someone in who doesn't.  So there's 

probably some indirect costs.  Frankly they'd be very hard to 

quantify.  The indirect costs would be the cost of losing trained 

people, replacing them with people who are less familiar with 

the job.  Those are indirect costs.  I don't know how we would 

quantify them.   That, I think, however, would be the only cost. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, if you could assist me then.  

What you're saying is that people with more authority and more 

seniority are going to be bumping people with less authority 

and seniority, which means that those individual salaries that 

they're bumping would be less.  So the individuals who are 

taking over these positions, would they not be being paid more 

for the similar positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  If they bump what is called a 

lateral bump, which means a secretary 4 who has more 

seniority is then given the right under the collective agreement 

to bump another secretary 4 who has less seniority, been there 

less time, in that circumstance they might maintain their 

present salary, maintain their present state in the grid. 

 

But if the only person they can find to bump is a secretary 3, 

then it's a demotion and the salary goes down. 

 

So yes, when they bump they may well lose salary.  That's 

thought to be preferable to being unemployed. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So is it also the case, Mr. Minister, that if 

they bump in a lateral way that they'd have more seniority, that 

their salary may stay intact?  Or is it automatic that they would 

have to take a lower salary if they're bumping someone of 

lower salary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, that's automatic. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- How much of an increase in work-load 

does bumping involve? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Very hard to quantify.  Undoubtedly 

some increase in the work for supervisors 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

who must spend more time with an employee who's less 

familiar with the job that they're doing.  So there'd be some 

additional work for the supervisors.  I think that's probably all, 

as I think about it.  I don't think there'd be any additional . . . 

and probably some . . . yes, I was going to add what Mr. Smith 

suggested, and that is that there's some work for the PSC as 

well who must process all of this, and to some extent assist the 

departments in managing the bumping. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Okay.  Mr. Minister, have you budgeted 

then for any additional work-load?  Does this in fact additional 

work have a sum attached to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, they do the additional work in 

addition to the duties which they'd otherwise do. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In the annual report, 1990-91 annual 

report, the commission announced that one of its major 

activities in which they're involved is what they call a five-year 

strategic plan.  Given the sharp changes, I think, that are 

occurring in the public service, will the work done on this plan 

remain relevant, in your view? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the five-year plan was a 

program to revitalize the public service.  It obviously needs to 

be revisited in the light of the staff reductions.  But the goal of 

revitalizing the public service and creating a public service 

which is professional, free of political interference, and thereby 

with a high morale, remains the current goals. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In the last annual report as well, Mr. 

Minister, it was noted that the commission was devoting new 

strategies, incorporating equal pay for work of equal value.  

Can you tell me how many departments were affected by these 

initiatives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The reference was to an internal 

study that was being done within the PSC.  It did not get 

beyond the PSC in the sense that it involved departments who 

actually implemented it.  So it did not involve any departments 

apart from PSC.  It was an internal study. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Are there then 

any employees who actually benefitted from equal pay for 

work of equal value? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer is no. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Do you have any intentions of, in fact, 

spending on these programs, and how many departments have 

you targeted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes it remains a goal of this 

administration.  There's no question but what there is an 

inequality within society generally, and that is reflected within 

the public service.  No question but what women are paid less 

than men for work of equal value and in some cases work that's 

remarkably similar. 

 

I think it is fair to say as well that the primary reason we didn't 

continue was simply a matter of finances.  This was an 

extremely difficult year to begin this program which is costly. 

When will we commence it?  Well that will depend I guess on 

commodity prices.  When the financial health of the province 

improves, we will start it.  It remains a goal of this 

administration and the party of which I'm a member.  But like 

so many other of our ambitious goals, it could not begin this 

year. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And, 

Mr. Minister, would you please define for me the personnel 

responsibilities of the Public Service Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In general terms, the Public Service 

Commission seeks to ensure that rules for hiring of employees, 

reclassifying employees, and the dismissal of employees, that 

those three activities follow certain rules which are designed to 

ensure fairness, to ensure an absence of patronage, and thereby 

a professional public service, and is designed to ensure that the 

workers are as productive as possible and that -- and this 

should not be lost sight of -- and that, in terms of ergonomics 

that the work place is as pleasant to the employee and as 

productive for the employee as it can be. 

 

So in general terms, it's the role of the Public Service 

Commission to develop and enforce rules which ensure that the 

public service is as productive, as professional, and competent 

as it can be and that the work place is as pleasant for the 

employee as can be done. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess one of 

the things I was hoping to find out is a breakdown of the 

various kinds of employment relationships.  And if I may, I 

have tried to understand this myself, and I would just like to 

put this to you, and then you can correct me if I'm not right. 

 

The way I've looked at it is that there are types that belong to 

both classified and unclassified service.  Within the classified 

service there's in scope and there's out of scope.  That there are 

also what one would term labour service employees, those who 

work seasonally, like year after year in our parks, and 

highways, ferry operators, etc., and that unclassified service are 

those who are appointed by order in council.  Am I correct in 

that so that I can proceed with my questioning? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, that's very good actually.  That's 

precisely correct. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I know that 

some of the questions posed by the critic in the official 

opposition are similar to these, but they really are specific to 

what I've just asked you about.  Do you know how many 

people have been dismissed from the public service by 

employment category and department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We generally expect that when we 

give information to an opposition member, they share it with 

other members of the party, but of course you're not part of that 

caucus. 

 

I think what we'll do is give you the information which we 

gave to the member from Arm River, and it will answer 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

that question.  In fact, as the musician says, I happen to have 

the music with me.  If I can get the assistance of a page, we'll 

give it to you right now. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I appreciate that very much, Mr. Minister.  

Of anyone who has been dismissed in the various categories 

and departments, do you know if there have been any 

severance packages granted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, there certainly have been.  For 

out-of-scope people who are . . . in fact there'll be in a sense 

severance packages for virtually them all who don't bump or 

aren't rehired through a re-employment list.  So yes, there 

would be. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- At what expense did these severance 

packages come to the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What's done at taxpayers' expense 

and was budgeted for -- do you want the figures? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I would.  I guess my sense is that any 

government dollar is a taxpayers' dollar, so I would appreciate 

if you could come up with a sum for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- At the moment it's only an estimate, 

and I perhaps should respond in writing.  One of the problems 

is it depends what happens.  It depends how many you 

re-employed, how many go, how many go on a re-employment 

list.  So at the moment it's an estimate.  I think it was a six-digit 

figure.  So it was not a terribly large sum of money but 

certainly a significant sum of money. 

 

Yes, it's done at taxpayers' expense. But I remind the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone that all enlightened employees, 

including private employees, now do this.  It is true that where 

employees lay off employees temporarily, there's normally no 

severance, because they expect them to be recalled.  But where 

a company which is at all enlightened does a permanent 

down-sizing with no intention of re-employing the employees, 

private people pay severance as well. 

 

It has in the 1980s and 1990s become established practice by 

enlightened employees that where employees spend a 

significant portion of their life contributing to the enterprise, or 

the government in this case, they should be fairly compensated 

when their jobs are terminated.  And I think we're doing 

nothing . . . we're not spending taxpayers' money in any 

different way that private corporations don't spend the 

shareholders' profits I guess. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I do wish to in fact agree with the minister 

that it's only appropriate that people be compensated through 

severance.  And in fact I don't know if he'll recall the late hour 

during the first session just a few days prior to Christmas, but I 

was in fact pleading with the government about severance 

packages and honouring contracts with individuals and dealing 

with unfair contracts on a one-by-one basis rather than passing 

legislation that was blanketed. 

 

I do have a rationale behind my questions and they are leading 

somewhere, I want the minister to know.  How many 

dismissals, in fact do you have any, that have not 

been settled with severance packages to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, there's all kinds of . . . there's a 

fair number of them, actually, which have not been settled. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Will you be able to provide in future to us 

the amounts of dollar value involved with those severance 

packages? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the minister probably heard the 

exchange between myself and the member from Arm River.  

Certainly we'd be prepared to give you say on October 1, a 

reasonable period of time when this settles out, the cost of the 

severance packages as we calculated them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  That's most appreciated, Mr. 

Minister.  As a result of the provincial budget, do you know -- 

and this is in direct relationship just to the budget -- do you 

know if there are people who have lost their jobs due to the 

budget cuts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There were 390 positions eliminated 

on the date, on the budget date, and that was directly budget 

driven. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, how many of these were in 

the classified service?  And I'll just finish this because you 

could answer each one of these short questions individually, I 

believe, easier.  The first, the classified service: how many 

were orders in council, how many were labour service, and 

how many were temporary employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think the simplest thing to do is to 

simply share this document with you.  It sets out all of the 

information you want and actually a little bit . . . and actually 

more than what you want.  If the member has any difficulty in 

following this, because it's in a Public Service form, please ask 

and we'll assist you with it. 

 

I'll ask that you give this to the . . . This was already provided 

to the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder, Mr. Minister, in 

order to provide that the balance, whether the decision to give 

it to both of the oppositions or whether to table it would the 

most convenient, and then have it brought in here, then 

everybody would have an opportunity to get it.  And that would 

probably solve her problem of getting information on what we 

have, and our problem on getting information that she is 

wishing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's just one problem with tabling 

it.  The House may not be in session when some of the 

information comes back.  I will assure you that it will rain on 

the just and unjust equally.  Why don't we agree that anything I 

supply to the official opposition, I will supply to the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, and vice versa. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I actually thank the member 

from Morse for raising that, and I'm very grateful to the 

minister for including me. 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

I'm just wondering, from what you've given to me stating 

tentative employee staff cuts, I wonder if you'd be willing to 

bring forward some more specific information -- namely, I'm 

interested in the employees by name, by department, indicating 

the salary level and the number of years of service. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  This has already been supplied 

to the member from Arm River, so if I can . . . 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm going to be leaving with an inordinate 

amount of extra paper today, Mr. Minister.  I thank you for the 

information.  I am interested as well in . . . have you been able 

to calculate an estimated severance package cost of these job 

deletions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They don't have it here today.  We 

can supply that to you in a very few days.  It's just not 

physically present in the Chamber but we will give it to you in 

a few days. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Since your 

government has taken over, how many people have been hired 

from outside of government, by category and by department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I could have one of the pages, I 

will send over to the member the answer to her last question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for this information and I hope that you'll be able to 

provide me with something a bit more specific.  What I would 

appreciate is to have a list of the names, the salary of those 

hired in out-of-scope classified service by order in council or 

by contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The number is included on the list.  

Order in council and contract do not fall within the Public 

Service Commission at all.  By definition it's right outside the 

ambit of this department.  Order in council should properly be 

received from Executive Council Estimates when they arrive.  

The labour service contracts are done strictly by the 

department, and you would have to ask those questions of each 

individual department.  We don't have it; it's not done through 

the Public Service Commission at all. 

 

So order in council, you can get a global picture of that from 

Executive Council, but the labour service contracts, I regret to 

tell the member, you've got to ask each department. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm wondering 

then if for those who are hired by the Public Service 

Commission, if you could give me the names of those and their 

salary levels? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes we can give you that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm wondering if there is an 

intention on the part of the government -- and I'm sure that you 

may choose not to answer on behalf of the whole government 

-- but is there going to be a place whereby there will be a 

co-ordination of this for people to be able to have an 

understanding of how much monies and the 

hiring, the salaries, the kinds of things that I am asking for 

here. 

 

I guess there is a part of me that kind of wonders about having 

to go to each and every department to find out about temporary 

hirings or contract hirings.  Would the Associate Minister of 

Finance not find it to be of value to have one place to where all 

of us could go and find this information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It can certainly be . . . certainly assist 

the members in their work in the Assembly.  The problem is 

that it is almost, by definition, a very decentralized process. 

 

Casuals by definition are something that the deputies can hire 

when they need them.  They are limited to specific kinds of 

work and they're limited to a period of time.  But by definition 

it's something that's left in the discretion of the minister to 

handle -- the exceptions, the overflows, the particular 

problems. 

 

So it would be useful for members of the Assembly but in fact 

by definition this is a very decentralized process designed to 

allow deputies to manage their departments in the most 

efficient manner possible and with as little "red tape" from the 

central agencies, of which this is one. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm wondering if 

you could tell me if you have any plans for an early retirement 

program that is going to be put in place or . . . I mean is there 

anything like this contemplated by the government for those 

employed by the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we have no present intention at 

this time to introduce any early retirement programs. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I know that there has been 

some discussion in these deliberations about patronage.  And of 

course it was a very major concern with the former government 

and I think generally conceded that the quality of the public 

service in Saskatchewan relative to other jurisdictions and any 

other government in fact -- federal or provincial -- in the 

country, that we were not left with a particularly good 

reputation. 

 

What measures are you taking to ensure that this doesn't 

happen in the future? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This was one of those areas where the 

law never changed.  In quite a number of areas the quality of 

public services deteriorated.  The laws were never changed; 

they were simply not enforced.  That's what happened here.  

The regulations and the laws were really never changed.  It's 

just that they were not enforced.  They were ignored and 

circumvented by the most transparent means. 

 

What we have done is to . . . We have a new chairman.  Before 

appointing her I assured myself and I assured the members of 

Executive Council who concurred in the 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

order in council appointment, that she was going to be running 

an independent public service free of patronage. 

 

So the best answer I can give the member, which you may or 

may not find very satisfying, is that in the person of Ms. Bailey 

who actually is away today, we sought someone who would 

ensure that patronage would play no part in the hiring.  And it's 

reasonably certain that's happened. 

 

And I remind the member of the summer student program in 

which we took steps to ensure that it was done at random by a 

computer.  That caused some problems because some students 

who had done well in past years weren't returned and so on.  

But it did rid the system of patronage and it was designed by 

her. 

 

So I guess the best answer I can give you is that that's one of 

the reasons why we have Ms. Bailey who is the chairman of the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, that leads me, I 

think, to come back to a question that I've had earlier and had 

forgotten to pose.  The former chairman of the Public Service 

Commission was fired and I'm wondering if you would provide 

a reason to this House for his dismissal and the cost to the 

taxpayers, of this action. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is very delicate.  Because I want 

to be candid with the member, at the same time I don't want to 

make some comments about anyone, because we have a 

platform to make these comments; they really have no platform 

to respond to them. 

 

Suffice it to say that the hiring practices of the former 

administration -- I am being delicate -- the hiring practices of 

the former administration were not ones we wanted to 

continue.  We felt that the change to a professional, competent 

public service, free of patronage, could best be accomplished 

with a new chairman. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, will there be any opportunity 

for people to know more about what happened with this 

situation and in particular the cost to the taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There was a . . . I think there may not 

be.  There was a confidentiality clause in the contract when it 

was settled.  Those things have become common.  They don't 

necessarily serve the purposes of the members of this 

Assembly very well because members want to ask questions on 

behalf of their constituents and the taxpayers. However, they 

do serve other purposes and they are common in severance 

contracts.  And I'm told by the officials that there was a 

confidentiality clause in the contract.  So I regret to say to the 

member that I'm probably not ever going to be in a position to 

answer that question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now as we 

know, a new appointment has been made.  As minister for 

Public Service Commission, I'm wondering if you'd be able to 

provide me with a statement outlining her educational and 

employment background, as well as salary and prerequisites, 

such things as perhaps provision for a vehicle. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- She gets the same vehicle everyone 

else does.  And that was the subject of a fair amount of 

publicity recently.  The member will recall, give an option of 

$100 or a vehicle costing the government less than $19,000, 

and that is a different figure than you or I would pay if we 

purchased an automobile privately.  So she gets the same as 

any other permanent head. 

 

I don't have her education.  It wasn't paramount in her hiring.  I 

don't think it's necessarily relevant to the discussion.  She had 

been in the public service since the '70s; had worked under 

both governments and had been promoted under both 

governments -- indicating, I think, a fair level of competence 

and a degree of impartiality as far as . . . 

 

I'm going to give you this employment background in a second.  

She began in 1976, was promoted under both governments, and 

under all three governments -- the Blakeney administration, the 

administration led by the member from Estevan, and the 

current administration.  Her background has always been in 

personnel and personnel issues. 

 

She's basically an employee who worked her way up through 

the system and is now at the top, I guess.  But it was her 

employment history and her personal qualities, and really not 

her education which was a factor.  I'll give this to the member, 

and I'll ask the member, before so doing, to make a copy for the 

member from Morse. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm interested in 

the administration and information services of the Public 

Service Commission and could you provide a breakdown of 

functions?  Nearly a third of the staff located appears to be 

located in overhead.  In my point of view, just looking at this, it 

appears very excessive.  I'd like your comments, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a reasonably complete 

description on page 12 of the annual report.  I could read it into 

the record if the member wanted or . . . I'm not sure what's 

desired here.  But I might perhaps refer you to page 12.  There's 

a fairly complete description, I think, of the administrative 

information services division. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I'm hoping that what you 

will do is just comment on the fact that I really do feel that 

having a third of the expenditures is rather excessive in one 

area.  That's really what I'm most interested in having your 

comments about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As page 12 points out, the division of 

the Public Service Commission provides administrative 

services to the entire Public Service Commission.  This isn't 

just information or sort of propaganda.  It's much more 

extensive than that. 

 

We have mixed here two functions:  information and 

administration.  And it provides administrative services for the 

entire Public Service Commission.  I think that's not out of line 

with other agencies in government.  That ratio is not out of line 

with other agencies in government when you look at the 

totality of its functions. 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, it appears really as though 

the public service is presumably going to have fewer and fewer 

jobs.  I think what we're watching is a shrinking of the public 

service.  And I think that it would make some sense then if the 

Public Service Commission would shrink itself in direct 

correlation to the fact that more employees of the Public 

Service Commission are in fact becoming unemployed.  And 

part of what I am looking at here is that we need to look at 

what these people do and their direct correlation with the fewer 

numbers of people that they would be dealing with in the 

province overall. 

 

So I'm wondering if in fact many of the functions that are 

indicated in this annual report could not be taken into other 

departments, just as you've indicated earlier are done with 

temporary positions and contract positions.  Could we not have 

some of this responsibility picked up in other places? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. In fact I say to the member 

opposite, this is an area where we're going to be putting 

increased resources, not fewer.  It is accurate that the total 

people employed by the public service may well decline at a 

slow rate.  However without being partisan -- and I promised 

myself I wouldn't engage in the partisan comments I did the 

other day -- but suffice it to say that the whole function of the 

Public Service Commission was derailed under the former 

administration. 

 

And we now face a serious problem of morale in the public 

service, a problem with its . . . And they, the members of the 

public service, are more concerned than anyone about their 

professionalism and the competence and efficiency.  We can 

only address those problems with increased resources in the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

This is one of the key areas for this government to tackle and 

challenge.  If I were to list the five most serious challenges that 

this government has, I would put the public service -- not the 

Public Service Commission -- the public service as one of 

them.  The morale of the public service is one of our key 

problems.  We're actually going to be putting additional 

resources into this area in an attempt to develop a public 

service which is professional and which has a high morale and 

which is therefore productive.  So we'll actually be putting 

additional resources into the area because of the horrendous 

mess which was left behind by the former administration. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, having been involved 

with the Public Service Commission, I couldn't agree with you 

more.  And I'm wondering why we don't have whistle-blower 

legislation and a lot of other things that could empower people 

who are members, actually employees of government who 

could help us and feel safe in being able to bring forward 

incidences that they believe are being unjust to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm now going to turn to employee relations.  The average 

wage, what I'm able to see in the annual report, including 

clerical, is $57,000.  I'm wondering if you would provide me 

with a list of people and their salaries who make over $50,000, 

what it is they actually do as well. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You're asking for a list of people in 

the Public Service Commission who make more than $50,000. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't see any problem with that.  

No, we'll certainly provide that to you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I also am interested in what 

staff development actually means.  There is a section on staff 

development.  And I'm wondering if you would be able to 

define for me what that refers to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Staff development means that we 

seek to develop the full potential of each employee at whatever 

level.  That would be done in a variety of ways.  The most 

obvious way is through staff training.  Sometimes there are 

organizational changes.  Sometimes changes are ergonomic in 

nature; it's the work place.  Sometimes television or a computer 

monitor and the chair set at proper angles will do a good deal to 

improve productivity.  But it basically involves improving and 

developing the full potential of each employee, to the extent to 

which that's possible. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll now be more 

specific about this.  I'd like to know how many courses are put 

on; what they actually entail; do the departments pay for 

attendance; what are the other expenses that may be incurred 

with staff development; what follow-up is done to see whether 

these skills are applied once the training is completed, in other 

words, ongoing evaluation; and how are training needs 

identified. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know whether the member 

will trust this undertaking.  There are hundreds of courses, and 

I think if we actually gave you all of the information, it would 

be an unmanageable.  First of all, it would be a lot of work for 

us, but it would also be an unmanageably large amount of 

information you'd be getting -- something the size of a New 

York telephone book. 

 

We will undertake to give you a description, a more complete 

description of the kinds of courses, the nature of courses, the 

global costs in what would be a reasonably complete and yet 

usable fashion. 

 

(1230) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I would appreciate that.  In fact its 

seriousness is pointed out by the fact if it's going to be the size 

of a New York telephone book, then we've got too many 

courses and not enough evaluation of how we can streamline 

some of these and make them of more help to the province. 

 

I have some quite specific questions that I don't know if you 

could provide me here, but I have two things that are going to 

come with these questions.  The first is not only acquiring 

some actual numbers, but it's also a message that I would like 

to get to you.  And in turn I hope that you'll be able to provide 

for me, at least in some short 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

time in the future, some information on this. 

 

How many women are in senior positions that have been hired 

through the PCS . . . or pardon me, PSC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we do.  I think this may answer 

a number of questions in addition to the questions with respect 

to women.  You may want more specific detail, but this will at 

least . . . 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm wondering what actions you intend to 

take to ensure that women, that people of native ancestry, those 

with disabilities, are given opportunities to compete for public 

service jobs in all areas and levels. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have targeted these groups for 

their fair share of government jobs, and both are 

under-represented.  I think it's fair to say that during the '80s 

when the former administration were in office, they did make 

some progress with respect to the employment of women in 

senior positions.  The figures did rise appreciably, and there's 

some modest degree of congratulations due to the members 

opposite.  The number of women in senior positions did rise 

actually. 

 

The number of natives employed just was absolutely static and 

at an unacceptably low level.  And we have targeted this latter 

group, people of native ancestry in particular, as a group which 

we need to work on.  We are working with native groups, and 

we're getting their input.  In fact I'm meeting with a group of 

these people next week.  I just recall talking to my appointment 

secretary about it.  We are also working with the native 

secretariat -- let me get the name correct here -- the Indian and 

Metis Affairs Secretariat.  We're working with them. 

 

We have targeted both groups, and we're working with 

women's groups and the Saskatchewan Action Committee on 

the Status of Women and so on.  We're also working with the 

Women's Secretariat, which the member from Regina Hillsdale 

is the minister for.  So we're working with both groups. 

 

We've got a lot further to go with people of native ancestry 

than we do with women.  We have made some progress 

actually with respect to women. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  And what I do 

want to have on record is the fact that I appreciate something 

where I can see next year the kind of growth that has taken 

place. 

 

Do you have stated anywhere some specific goals, or how are 

you approaching this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know that it has been stated.  

The annual report this year was prepared really in many ways 

before we actually came on-stream; the work in this was done.  

Another year I would like to see in the annual report a more 

complete treatment of our progress with respect to equity 

employment -- employment of people with disabilities, 

employment of people of native ancestry, and employment of 

women. 
 

So another year I'd like to see in the annual report a statement 

of our goals.  And I'd like to give members of the 

Assembly an accounting of how well we're doing.  But I think 

at the moment I don't know that I could readily lay my hands 

on an official statement of our policy in the area. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think you will be relieved to know that 

I'm almost finished.  There are two other areas on which I'd 

like to make comment.  The first is on student employment 

programs.  And I was very concerned about what has 

happened.  It appears that the entire budget cut in the PSC 

seems to be on the backs of students.  And these are the people 

who can least afford it.  Not only are student employment 

programs cut back, but of course the government is now 

forcing the universities and technical institutes to impose large 

tuition increases as well. 

 

I'm wondering if you could tell me how many person-years of 

employment does this actually represent, the cuts to students?  

I'd like to know how many students it represents and what is 

the decrease from last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Actually the member's not informed 

correctly.  There was a decrease in student employment hiring 

but by no means much more catastrophic than the decrease in 

spending elsewhere. 

 

I'll give you the breakdown of the student summer employment 

budget by department.  Again, if I could have the assistance of 

a page.  And the member from Morse also wants a copy.  He's 

reminding me.  So I'll have you make some copies. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- If I may, before I get a copy -- is it going 

to show what the percentage was last year compared to this 

year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now my comments that I'm going to close with are really not 

done specifically to be critical.  They are not.  They're to be, I 

hope, constructive.  And I found some of the budget very 

unimaginative, particularly given these times. 

 

Rather than cutting back on the public service, was there any 

consideration given to reducing hours among larger groups of 

employees?  In other words, work sharing so some people 

wouldn't be so hard hit and lose their jobs entirely.  In this way 

it's my belief, as retirements begin to take place, that people's 

hours would be able to increase over time and that things 

would be normalized again. 

 

The way it is now it appears as though very experienced public 

servants are out on the street, and I think that the province has 

lost their knowledge and their training as well, the expensive 

training to which the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have 

contributed. 

 

So I guess if there's anything that I would like to have 

commented on here is: was there a think-tank, a discussion? 

 

And I'm not stating that we shouldn't down-size the Public 

Service Commission over time, but I think that it in fact should 

be done in a very planful, thoughtful way, given the particular 

serious financial situation of the province.  I think that to have 

people completely 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

unemployed, not being able to pay taxes and contribute to the 

province, is not a way to be able to help in the long run.  That 

all of these things fit into the bigger picture. 

 

So I wondered if some thought had been given to a way of 

keeping people in the circumstance of being able to pay taxes 

rather than simply losing their jobs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Some thought was given to that.  It's 

one of those ideas which has some attraction at a distance and 

becomes very awkward when you get up close. 

 

For one thing, job-sharing in-scope would have to be 

negotiated with the public service unions.  There's not a lot of 

enthusiasm for job-sharing among the unions. 

 

And I remind you again -- I may not need to remind the 

member from Greystone, but I constantly need to remind the 

official opposition -- union leaders are elected by their 

membership and they lose elections.  And the membership do 

change them; these are democratic structures.  And I think by 

and large union leaders do speak for their members. 

 

There isn't a lot of enthusiasm for job-sharing.  The practical 

effect of that is that the number of permanent jobs decreases 

and the number of temporary jobs increases.  That's actually 

what happens.  Temporary jobs and they may become casual 

jobs then, are not anywhere near as attractive, so that there isn't 

a lot of enthusiasm by employees for that.  And certainly from 

the point of managers, they would sooner have permanent 

employees, rather than a whole lot of temporary employees and 

casual employees. 

 

Also, I'm going to say as well something else quite outside the 

bounds of your question:  that we are actually moving to 

convert temporary positions and casual positions to permanent 

positions.  The structure of the Estimates were such that only 

permanent positions were reported.  And so the former 

administration engaged in cheap games at the expense of 

employees actually, by leaving all sorts of jobs temporary so 

they weren't reported in the blue book, but which in fact were 

permanent.  Where we have, when we arrived, we had people 

who had been on temporary for a decade, which didn't strike us 

as being terribly temporary.  We're actually moving to have a 

number of those moved in as permanent, where they ought to 

be.  The sole reason they weren't, as I say, was some rather 

cheap games done by the former administration at the expense 

of employees. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I wish to thank the minister for answering 

my questions today.  It's novel; I hadn't been hearing it most of 

the week.  And furthermore one of the things that I'd like to 

state is I'm quite convinced that the people of this province, 

whether they are union leaders or those who are business 

leaders, and the leaders of government, could indeed come 

together and come up with a way in which people of this 

province can stay employed. 

 

And I don't want to suggest for a moment that I don't think that 

the public service of this province cannot be down-sized over 

time and that we can take a very 

different approach.  But I do say, in these economic times, that 

I would very much encourage the minister to meet with union 

leaders and to have a labour-business council to come together 

and look specifically at the issue of employment and services 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I thank you for your time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I do meet with both on a fairly 

regular basis.  I don't know that I meet with them in the same 

room on a fairly regular basis.  That might be a useful 

suggestion. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I've got a list of 

questions here for you, Mr. Minister, that the member for Arm 

River was talking.  I'll send them over.  I'll also give a list of 

them to the member from Greystone. 

 

And if you don't mind, I have a couple of questions relating to 

this.  Are you planning on providing . . . you said, I think, by 

Friday next week you'd have the answers available to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just for some of them.  Some of 

them, the member will recall that it wasn't possible to provide 

the answer for some time.  The ones we were going to . . . I did 

undertake to provide . . . I think the page was supposed to give 

one of these to the member from Saskatoon Greystone actually. 

 

I think we undertook to provide you with the information about 

people who were laid off in Rural Services being re-employed 

in casual.  I think we undertook to provide those in a week's 

time.  I don't think we undertook to provide everything in a 

week's time, but we did undertake to provide it as soon as is 

possible. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have a 

couple of questions that I want to ask you in relation to an 

observation that was made about staff development.  Is this 

where you have the program that is called Coaching for 

Results?  Is that the area where you have that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer to your question is yes.  

The member probably has some more specific questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could I have you inform the Assembly how 

many Crown corporations and departments are using that at the 

present time? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's being used by all government 

departments. The Crown corporations are not involved in this. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not sure whether that's entirely 

accurate because prior to the election I was using them through 

Ag Credit Corporation and I'm not sure just . . . Probably it was 

to increase the opportunity for providing a good, solid 

work-force within the Crown corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am informed by the officials that it's 

not used in the Crown corporations.  I will recheck 



June 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

that answer and confirm it or otherwise, shortly. 

 

I've been told that part of Ag Development Corporation in fact 

is part of the Public Service Commission and that may be why 

the program found its way into that corporation.  But unless the 

Crown corporations are a part of the Public Service 

Commission, and most of them are not,  Coaching for Results 

is only used by the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That, Mr. Minister, is maybe the reason why 

it was used in Ag Credit, because Ag Credit is a part of the 

Department of Agriculture and is a  vote of Agriculture, and 

that's probably the reason. 

 

I want to make an observation about that.  I think, from what I 

recall in the Department of Agriculture, it was an excellent 

program that dealt with providing an opportunity for people to 

establish themselves and establish a mandate for themselves.  

And I think it helped the Department of Agriculture to do that.  

And I want to just compliment the Public Service Commission 

on their role there.  They did assist us to some extent. 

 

You didn't answer the question that I had.  Are you doing any 

other departments now under that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All departments are involved in it. 

 

I can say to the member as well, while I'm on my feet, that 

we've glanced through this.  At first blush there doesn't appear 

to be any reason why these questions can't be answered.  And 

so far as reasonably can be done, I give you my undertaking to 

do so. 

 

It will not be done . . . Some of these will take some time; some 

can be done more immediately.  I give you my undertaking 

they'll be answered so far as is reasonably possible, and it'll be 

done as soon as is reasonably possible. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The question that I have on process, Mr. 

Minister, is . . . the answer . . . we'd like to maybe perhaps have 

an opportunity to question you on some of the answers.  Would 

we have an opportunity to ask you to appear before the 

committee at a later date for some observations on the 

answers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know what the process for that 

would be.  Once the Public Service Estimates are voted on, 

they're not brought back.  I'm not sure what the process would 

be actually.  You could, I suppose, question us another year.  

But I don't know offhand what the process would be for that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

some time ago when we were on SPMC -- and I thought we 

were through -- we had asked our last questions and you didn't 

go through the subvotes and you said you wanted to leave it for 

a later date so your colleagues could ask questions, and which 

they had indicated they wanted to ask questions.  So I think it 

would be most fair maybe that we can just let this go with your 

commitment that you're going to answer as many of those 

questions as you can.  And the ones that you can't, explain 

to us why you can't.  And we can do that at a later date.  Just 

leave it on this vote it's on now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I suppose that's possible.  We do 

prefer to have some finality to this.  I know that PCS Estimates 

were adjourned and I was the one who did that.  In retrospect 

I'm not entirely sure of the wisdom of that.  We need to begin 

dealing with these.  I'll give the member my undertaking that if 

you have any questions about it, I will answer them either 

orally or in writing, and attempt to provide you with all the 

information we can. 

 

I've taken the position with respect to the Public Service 

Commission that we will give you any information which 

would be available to you under the freedom of information 

Act, and that's an awful lot.  We're going to do that.  We're 

going to answer these so far as it's possible to do so.  I think we 

have nothing to hide.  And if you have any supplementary 

questions following up on that, we'll answer in writing. 

 

But it is awkward to start adjourning all of the Estimates.  Yes, 

I think that's a bit awkward. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree it's a bit 

awkward, and it's not necessarily going to be our practice.  

However, what you did and what we had tried to accommodate 

is that answers were supplied.  We asked . . . you asked us 

specifically for a verbal response so that you could respond to 

it.  And I don't think that that's out of order for this committee 

to do that.  And we would like to have a response that we could 

respond to. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we could ask you these questions and ask 

you to not only table them here but to respond to them.  And in 

order to expedite the time, we'd just like to have an opportunity 

to respond to it at a later date.  And that's the reason for it.  It's 

not to defer or delay.  We just wanted to know what 

opportunity we would have to respond to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not entirely sure I know what the 

member is suggesting.  We're prepared to vote off SPMC.  In 

retrospect I think that's what should have happened.  There 

were some members who had some questions and they weren't 

here, and in retrospect I think that was unwise.  We need some 

finality to this. 

 

So we'll vote them both off, and I think that's maybe what we 

should do.  I also want to take . . . to respond to you.  We've 

agreed to a very lengthy list of questions.  We've agreed to 

respond to them.  We'll answer any supplementary questions in 

a timely way, and it seems to me that that's a fair and 

reasonable response to your questions. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish leave for 

the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1992 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly 25 grade 6 students from the Cut Knife Elementary 

School.  On behalf of my colleague from the constituency of 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster, I'd like to welcome them here to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I understand 

where you want to get to a conclusion of this estimate.  But, 

Mr. Minister, we could've taken the time in a deliberate fashion 

and asked all these questions and asked you verbally to respond 

to them all.  And you could've taken the opportunity to not 

respond.  But it would've taken a lot of time in this committee 

to do that.  So we are providing you with the questions.  Can 

you give us an opportunity at some later date on a chance to 

respond to the answers that we get? 

 

And if we want to do that, we're going to have some very 

substantial Estimates here to do.  And I can just think of Health 

and Education and Agriculture as being some of the ones that 

we are going to take some time.  And we want to have the 

answers for them.  And we're not here to promote any kind of 

deferment of time, extend the time.  We're here to get some 

answers to some questions, and we would like to have you give 

us an opportunity to do that at a later date. 

 

And those that are ones that we will be dealing with very, very 

thoroughly, we will want to have those kinds of answers.  And 

this happens to be one of those that we will be dealing with 

thoroughly because we have a serious concern about a number 

of things.  One is the response that you've got, the replacement 

of people in the public service with other people who we think 

you probably are back-filling with people who are your 

supporters.  And we have a tendency to want to investigate 

that.  And we believe that we have to have some answers. 

 

So in view of that, we want to have, for the public of 

Saskatchewan, an opportunity to revisit this with those 

questions being answered. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay, I understand the member's 

concern.  Let me put it this way to you.  With respect to 

positions which have been back-filled, as you put it, I 

undertook earlier -- I don't know if the member was in the 

House -- I undertook earlier with the member from Arm River 

to get back to him in a timely way.  That should only take a 

few days.  You'll then have those when you deal with the other 

departments. 

 

Let us suppose that what the member from Arm River believed 

were true, that there were some back-filling being done.  All I 

could do is tell you it's done; I couldn't give you any 

information about why, whether or not there's any justification.  

I'll undertake to get you that in a  

timely way.  The officials tell me a week should be ample.  I'll 

undertake to get the back-filling question -- if I can put it that 

way -- in a timely way.  Then you'll have it when you deal with 

other departments and it would be there that you would raise 

those questions in any event.  So if that's the member's concern, 

we'll certainly get you that in a very timely way. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the list of questions that we give you, the written questions, 

now so we can maybe speed up Estimates throughout the 

whole process of all the departments, those questions that 

you've received -- not all of them but the broader questions in 

there -- are going to be coming, the same questions asked in all 

departments.  So maybe to help things, you could circulate that 

to all your ministers because I understand you're the 

department that this is kind of come upon you, the kind of 

questions we're going to ask, and maybe you can save us a lot 

of time. 

 

So in these two departments, SPMC and Public Service 

Commission, we do ask you to, at the end of another week, to 

bring it back on for an hour or two or something like that.  And 

we'll give your commitment, we won't be holding it up.  If we 

can just . . . when your questions are answered, we want the 

written . . . we want the answers in writing, tabled in the 

House.  And then just give us an hour or two to ask you some 

questions on it.  That's all we ask for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  Let's be clear about what 

we're doing.  This is not a terribly good place to be negotiating 

this, but with respect to SPMC and PCS we will get you the 

back-filling questions within a week.  I can get that; I'm told 

that's not a problem.  What is a problem is this lengthier list.  

Some of that's going to take some time. 

 

We'll get you that within a week.  We'll get you that next week.  

Then let us agree that next week as well, both of these, PCS 

and SPMC will be brought back and finalized within an hour 

each. 

 

And if that's the agreement, I think as assistant House Leader 

we can agree to that and the commitment's done and we'll vote 

this wretched thing off. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

yes we give you that commitment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just before the officials leave, I 

would like to thank the officials.  It is conceivable that, given 

the nature of the information, they might not be back at all.  I 

say it's conceivable.  If you want them, they'll be back but in 

case they're not, I do want to thank the officials for assisting the 

members of this Assembly in their deliberations. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


