




















































Hansard: August 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2485 

 August 14, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

CLOSURE MOTION ON TIME ALLOCATION 

MOTION 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before the orders of 

the day is called for resuming adjourned debate on the motion 

to allocate time for the proceedings on Bill No. 87, I move, 

seconded by the member for Churchill Downs: 

 

 That the debate on the motion to allocate time for the 

proceedings on Bill No. 87, An Act respecting amendments 

to Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation, and on any 

amendments or subamendments proposed thereto shall not be 

further adjourned. 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:03 a.m. until 9:13 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Keeping 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Bradley Jess 

-- 28 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion for Time Allocation 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Muirhead. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:16 a.m. until 9:26 a.m. 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson McPherson 

Mitchell Keeping 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Bradley Jess 

-- 28 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to take this opportunity to, for the last time, try to make the 

government members realize the significance of what they are 

embarked upon.  And when I look over the group, Mr. Speaker, 

this morning, all I can think of is how the mighty have fallen, 

how the mighty have fallen. 

 

We find, Mr. Speaker, that here we have a government that 

received an overwhelming mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan in this last election.  And they make light of it.  

They make light of it and they poke fun at that.  But I want to 

remind members opposite of how they have deceived the 

people of Saskatchewan in the fall of '91 and got elected on the 

premise that they would be an open and forthright, honest 

government and respond to the wishes of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are witnessing now the travesty of this 

government's actions.  We are witnessing right now the time 

allocation motion which is going to inhibit us as members of 

this Assembly to legitimately debate issues.  But travesty upon 

travesty, we have witnessed this morning further that they have 

put closure on that time allocation, Mr. Speaker -- closure on 

closure.  That is what we are witnessing here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is so damning to the government is the 

essence of what the time allocation motion is all about.  The 

time allocation, Mr. Speaker, the closure, the throttling of free 

speech in this Assembly begins by saying: That, 

notwithstanding the rules of this Assembly . . .  

Notwithstanding the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In other words, what they are saying is, we don't care two hoots 

about the rules of this Assembly.  We don't care two 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

hoots about the constitution of Saskatchewan because we are 

going to have our way.  Why are they going to have their way, 

Mr. Speaker?  Because they have been found with their hands 

in the cookie jar. 

 

When we look at the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

situation that has precipitated this entire travesty, we find out 

that they did not abide by the rules of this province.  They did 

not abide by the rules of the constitution of this province.  They 

broke contracts.  They were found out.  And the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Justice and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan say, we don't care.  If we broke the rules, we're 

going to change that.  We're going to change it retroactively.  

And we're going to make any changes that are necessary. 

 

And if the opposition here, the members in the opposition are 

going to stand up and speak for the rights of the people of 

Saskatchewan, they say, notwithstanding the rules, we don't 

care.  We're going to get our way anyway.  That is what this is 

all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan that yes, 

closure has been used sparingly over the last 75 years . . . 

pardon me, 85 years, 87 years in the history of this province.  

Yes, it was used twice.  Once it was used in the potash debate.  

After 120 hours of debate, closure was used.  Second time it 

was used during the E&H (education and health) tax debate 

after two months of debate, Mr. Speaker, I remind people.  

After two months of debate, it was used. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask members opposite, when was the time 

allocation?  When was the closure introduced by members of 

the government opposite?  I'll tell you when it was introduced.  

It was introduced after one member had spoken -- one member.  

And the opposition stood up in his place to defend the rights of 

the people of Saskatchewan and immediately we find the 

Government House Leader saying, that's enough folks; we 

want our way. 

 

And then he says, notwithstanding the rules of the legislature, 

notwithstanding the constitution of Saskatchewan, 

notwithstanding the rights of the people of Saskatchewan, we're 

going to do away with that.  We're going to do away with 

debate in this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not the only situation that we have 

found in this Assembly that is doing away with the rights of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  We find now that this is not the first 

or second time in one morning that we have witnessed closure, 

where we have witnessed the throttle of free debate.  This is the 

fifth time already, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 

throttled the opposition and said, you don't stand up for the 

people of Saskatchewan; we won't let you speak in this House. 

 

We find out that they did that for the rules changing -- 

bell-ringing on rules.  We found that out under interim supply 

-- same thing.  We found that out on the introduction of GRIP, 

and we found that out on the time allocation that was given, 

and we found that out on closure this morning, on the time 

allocation -- closure on closure. 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is not responsible to the people 

of this province.  Their ministers are not responsible to the 

people of this province.  We found that out last fall.  This is the 

first budget that this government, in almost a year in office, has 

had the nerve to bring down.  We recall last fall, Mr. Speaker. 

Did they come down with a budget?  No.  They piggybacked 

on ours.  Were we given, as the opposition, the opportunity to 

question their ministers?  No.  We were throttled.  The Premier 

said no, my ministers will not speak; you go through the 

Minister of Finance.  And this opposition was not allowed to 

ask any questions of the ministers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now that we've had an opportunity to address a few of 

them for a few moments, we're finding out why, Mr. Speaker -- 

why the Minister of Finance and why the Premier of this 

province was not allowing us access to the ministers because 

we're seeing the debacle of what is happening. 

 

We're seeing the mistake of putting ministers up to answer for 

their own . . . just for their own actions.  Mr. Speaker, we will 

find that the justification that the Government House Leader, 

that the Premier, that the Minister of Justice gives for this act 

is, well we have to get on with the business of this House.  

What nonsense, Mr. Speaker.  What nonsense. 

 

Any time that the government has had the courage to bring 

forth legislation and business in this Assembly -- any time -- 

that business has taken place forthrightly, lickety-split.  There 

was no obstructionism because this opposition is not intent on 

obstructionism. 

 

We have seen the business of this House move forward rapidly, 

Mr. Speaker.  Because if you take a look at the Votes and 

Proceedings you will find out that we have already passed 48 

Bills, Mr. Speaker -- 48 Bills.  Two more Bills are waiting for 

Royal Assent as I speak -- 50 Bills literally taken care of in 

spite of the government's insistence on ramming through GRIP. 

 

We are a co-operative opposition that will extend that spirit of 

co-operation as far as we can.  It does not extend to the extent 

of diminishing and extinguishing the rights of the people of this 

province.  We are not prepared to go that far, Mr. Speaker.  

Then we will stand up and then we will be counted. 

 

Yesterday, as an example of a co-operative spirit, once we 

were off GRIP, what happened, Mr. Speaker?  We took care of 

government business where four or five Bills were passed into 

the Committee of the Whole through the adjourned debates so 

rapidly that when we went into the Committee of the Whole, 

the government was caught completely by surprise.  They did 

not even have their officials from Energy and Mines ready. 

 

The Assembly was held up for 20 minutes yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, because the government did not have their business 

ready.  We were ready to work.  We had to sit.  We had to wait 

until the government was finally ready.  We're ready to work, 

members of the government, that is what I am saying. 

 

Our beef, Mr. Speaker, our biggest beef is perhaps not  



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

even with GRIP at this stage.  Our biggest beef is not with 

GRIP itself. What we are saying is, to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and to the members opposite -- and 

particularly to the Minister of Justice and to the Premier of this 

province -- we are saying you are wrong, fundamentally wrong 

in removing the rights of the people of Saskatchewan.  You're 

removing their rights to have their day in court.  What you are 

doing with that Bill is you're putting yourself above the law.  

You know that you broke the law.  You know that you broke 

contracts.  Now you're saying, that doesn't matter.  

Notwithstanding the rules of the legislature, we're going to 

continue it and we're going to legitimize that process.  And 

we're going to ask the legislature of this province to legitimize 

that process. 

 

And we're saying, you won't do that with our co-operation.  

Because it's wrong.  You are not above the law.  You are 

saying to the farmers of this province, you can't take us to 

court.  You're not going to have your day in court, because we 

don't want to go to court.  That's what you're telling the people 

of this province.  And what's so damning about it, Mr. Speaker, 

is that this is just the first step.  Farmers are only the first step. 

 

We know full well . . . Look at the example of closures.  Once 

you use closure, it's like water running off the back of a duck.  

It becomes easier and easier and easier every time you do it.  

We've seen it twice this morning.  In the first 12 minutes of this 

legislature this morning, we experienced closure already. 

 

That's what we've done.  That's what we've seen.  So what I'm 

saying to you and the people of Saskatchewan, the province has 

seen fit to raise themselves above the law, in conjunction and 

in cahoots with the Premier and the Minister of Justice, whom 

we have consistently over the last while asked to stand in his 

place and justify this.  You are breaking the constitution of 

Saskatchewan.  That's what you are doing. 

 

And you are saying no, we're not.  But at the same time you're 

extinguishing the rights of farmers to take you to the court.  

And we're saying, you're breaking the charter of rights.  And 

we're saying, do what we did in '89 with the boundaries Act.  

Do what we did.  Take it to the Appeal court -- Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal.  Let it go to the highest court of the land, 

because ultimately it's going to wind up there anyway. 

 

And you've got to take that stand.  And you've got to say, 

people of Saskatchewan, we know we're right, and we're 

prepared to take this step. 

 

Now what you're forcing them to do is, a group of farmers at 

high cost to themselves is going to have to come forward and 

do it on their own against the government.  That's the flaw in 

this whole process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the irony of the situation as I see it, the irony of the 

situation is that while we see the jackboots of dictatorship 

echoing down the halls of this democratic institution, when we 

take a look at who fills those boots we find, Mr. Speaker, that 

it's none other than the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Because what I find so devastating is that the Minister of 

Justice and the Premier of this province are spending literally I 

don't know how many thousands of dollars of taxpayers' money 

to go to Ottawa.  Why go to Ottawa?  To uphold the 

Constitution of Canada.  To keep Canada together. 

 

And that's a noble effort, but the irony of it is that in the mean 

time the constitution, the constitution of Saskatchewan is being 

wrecked by these selfsame individuals.  And therein, Mr. 

Speaker, lies the great irony of the situation, and therein is what 

I find the greatest disappointment in this government right 

now. 

 

And to GRIP, as I have said on a previous occasion, to me is 

not the significant issue, but rather the larger, all-encompassing 

issue what we are dealing with. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that when we take a look at some of 

the situations that have developed previous to this, and I have 

already alluded to the two, we find that government members 

actually agree with what I'm saying.  Government members are 

sitting back in their seats right now and reflecting deeply about 

what is about to happen in this legislature.  And I appreciate 

that because it is a serious, serious situation that we're 

addressing.  And you folks over there, I know recognize that.  I 

know from the back-benchers and the front-benchers who are 

new, who have not experienced this before in the Assembly are 

thinking and reflecting deeply about the consequences of this 

Act that is going to be perpetrated upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know for example that the Government House Leader is 

exactly in tune with the words that I am speaking right now.  

He understand them; he knows them, and he knows that they 

are doing right because on August 7, Mr. Speaker, on August 7, 

1989, the Government House Leader said: 

 

 Well I say that the closure is the most despicable rule that this 

government could invoke . . . 

 

That's what he said, and I believe that he believed it -- he's an 

honourable man.  He would not have said those words if he did 

not believe them.  But I guess when circumstances warrant, 

when you're caught betwixt and between, we're seeing what 

this government is capable of doing -- going against their own 

principles, going against what they believe in because of the 

ulterior motive of political decisions for political expediency of 

the moment. 

 

Well I say to you, the political expediency of the moment is 

going to come at a high cost to you, at a high cost. 

 

I want to further, Mr. Speaker, do one more quote.  That's all.  I 

know we've had lots of them, but I think this one bears 

repeating time after time because it so eloquently summarizes 

what I believe this is all about.  The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, August 7 from Hansard, said: 

 

 I'll put my name on record against this limiting of free speech 

in the Saskatchewan legislature.  And 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

when the day comes and I no longer have a right to sit in this 

legislature and (to) speak here, when that day comes, I will at 

least not go away with the shame of knowing that I was part 

of a group of men and women who sought to limit those 

rights in this House. 

 

Those are the words of the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, spoken in a great deal of sincerity, no doubt, that 

he will not be part of the shame of a group of men and women 

who will limit the free speech in this Assembly. 

 

(0945) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, times change, emotions change, moments 

change.  But I wonder if the sincere thoughts of that member, 

spoken in 1989, have changed.  He has the opportunity now to 

rise in his place and put his thoughts on record once more, 

where he will say to his Government House Leader, where he 

will say to the Minister of Justice, and where he will rise and 

say to the Premier of this province -- don't, don't heap the 

shame upon us of limiting free speech for political expediency. 

 

Because I say to the Minister of Justice and I say to the Premier 

that the events this day are going to go down in infamy.  Your 

record on the history books is not something that you're going 

to want the school children of the future generation to read 

about.  Your legacy, your legacy is going to be something that 

is going to be shameful, as the member for Wakamow Moose 

Jaw has so eloquently put. 

 

That is what the people of this province, that is what the people 

and the future children of this province will never be able to 

forgive you for, for that betrayal of the trust that you asked the 

people of Saskatchewan in the fall of '91 to give you.  And they 

believed you and they gave you that trust.  And now you are 

turning around and heaping shame upon the legislature of this 

Assembly. 

 

So I would ask members opposite to at this last moment before 

the dark hour, to give it some serious thought, serious thought.  

And let's go back to that amendment that we have put forward 

in the GRIP legislation, where it will be brought forward to the 

Court of Appeal and to the Supreme Court of Canada so that 

indeed we can uphold the Constitution of Canada and the 

constitution of Saskatchewan that your Premier talks so fondly 

about. 

 

That is the challenge, ladies and gentlemen, that I put forward 

to you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

there's no pleasure being in this place this morning, with 

closure upon closure.  There's no pleasure being here to try and 

speak on behalf of my constituents, on behalf of the taxpayers 

of Thunder Creek.  There's no pleasure in participating in this 

charade that we see, this mockery of democracy that is being 

perpetrated in this House this morning. 

 

There's no pleasure, Mr. Speaker, because people throughout 

our history have spoken out against procedures like this.  

People from the time that this province has had the right to 

have its own democratically elected Assembly have spoken out 

loudly, often, against 

procedures such as we see in this House this morning. 

 

Every single member of the New Democratic Party that sits in 

this House from prior to 1991 spoke out very strongly against 

procedures like this.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, as we enter this 

very limited, this constrained, this strangled debate this 

morning that we should remember some of those words. And I 

have often quoted, Mr. Speaker, the words of the members of 

the New Democrats, the hypocrites that sit, evidently, across 

the floor from us this morning. 

 

But I think there's once again one that I would like to quote 

because it sums up so eloquently what we're doing here this 

morning.  And this is the Premier, the member from Riversdale 

on May 11, 1989: 

 

 What new-found democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

What new-found democracy is this?  What kind of charade is 

this? 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a charade does the member 

from Riversdale perpetrate on this Assembly this morning?  

The Premier of the province who, for the last month has 

criss-crossed our land, spends innumerable hours and days and 

weeks in Ottawa and other places to defend the constitution of 

our province, while here at home in these very hallowed halls 

his political party perpetrates on the people of Saskatchewan 

exactly the opposite. 

 

This member from Riversdale who has been off saving the 

constitutional rights of the people of this country for the last 11 

years, formerly as the attorney general and the deputy premier, 

sitting up all night long in hotel kitchens to make sure that our 

constitution was brought home so that we all had our day in 

court; this member from Riversdale who has sat in this 

Chamber for nearly a quarter of a century -- and now in this 

next round of constitutional negotiation, he goes to Ottawa day 

in and day out and he says, I'll stand and fight for western 

Canada.  We'll have a Triple E Senate.  We'll make sure that 

western Canadians' voices are heard in the halls of power in 

Ottawa. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there's a group of western 

Canadians whose voice is not being heard at all.  They are 

being denied their right to their day in court.  They are being 

denied their right to have their representatives speak on their 

behalf -- that very member from Riversdale, the Premier, who 

can spend all sorts of time in the national limelight defending 

the rights of Canadians. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale 

should come home, should come home to this Chamber and 

spend whatever time is necessary to protect the rights of 

individuals in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- To come home and spend some time in this 

Chamber and protect the rights of the farming families of this 

province who signed a contract, who signed a contract that said 

that they would abide by certain rules, and they expected their 

representatives and the federal 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

and provincial governments to abide by theirs.  And I don't 

think any one of them, Mr. Speaker, ever thought that the 

member from Riversdale, who so eloquently defends the rights 

of people in other parts of Canada, would not want to come 

home and do it here. 

 

How can farm families believe that the member from 

Riversdale would say that everything that has happened since 

January 1, 1991 is void -- it's gone; it's disappeared -- when 

every farm family in this province knows that in 1991 they and 

their families went out and by the the sweat of their brow 

worked hard to make sure that there was the financial 

wherewithal to pay their bills, to be members of their 

community, to support Saskatchewan. 

 

And now they've been told that all of that endeavour is void, 

that because certain ministers of the Crown, ministers chosen 

by the member who's from Riversdale, have not been up to the 

mark, have not been up to the job, that now the heavy hand of 

the Legislative Assembly has to be used to set aside their 

rights, their day in court, their ability to be equal citizens in our 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a travesty that those that so eloquently defend, 

so eloquently defend everywhere else in Canada, don't want to 

defend at home. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, I'm wondering seriously that 

those people out there that either didn't vote New Democrat in 

the last election or because of the constitutional problem that 

we have with Bill 87, if they said tomorrow, I'm not going to 

pay my taxes any more to a government that would strip away 

my day in court, what would happen to them? 

 

If they said, I don't feel like paying the salary of an Attorney 

General, the highest lawgiver in our province, I don't feel like 

paying the salary of someone who won't stand up and defend 

me, who won't give me my day in court, I wonder where they 

would be. 

 

There's a lot of people out there today, Mr. Speaker, who feel 

like that, that they shouldn't as taxpayers have to contribute 

from their hard-earned money, from the sweat of their brow, to 

these individuals who would take away their constitutional 

rights, who would take away their day in court. 

 

And it's very frustrating to stand here this morning, Mr. 

Speaker, under this time allocation, under this double closure, 

knowing that there are only a few minutes available to speak on 

behalf of these people, a few minutes to know that the Minister 

of Justice, the Attorney General, will go on day after day after 

day purporting to represent these people in their constitutional 

rights, the Premier will travel across the land day after day 

spending these taxpayers' dollars, but they aren't here to defend 

them, to defend them in their own Legislative Assembly, to 

defend them on that basic right. 

 

And I say to the members of the NDP (New Democratic Party), 

this government that came to power on all these promises of 

openness and accountability and the rights of the small person 

being protected, what is so scary to these people about a court 

room?  What is so scary about a judge and 12 of their peers 

sitting in judgement?  Why 

does the minister from Rosetown-Elrose fear a judge and 12 of 

his peers? 

 

Is not that the system that we have all ascribed to through the 

generations, that our forefathers have fought and died for, that 

people through consensus rather than conflict have judged to be 

the way that decent men and women, that people that believe 

strongly in citizenship, have sought to settle their differences, is 

that they would get someone -- a judge, a member of the 

judiciary, someone much like you, Mr. Speaker -- who sits in 

impartiality over a presiding, and then there are 12 peers, 12 

peers chosen from society, who sit and analyse, analyse the 

debate.  And at the end of that debate, those 12 peers bring 

forth a verdict. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the system has not been 

absolutely perfect over time, but it has proven to be better than 

any other system developed by mankind to sit in judgement 

and sit in judgement fairly.  And now we have a government 

that says that that is a flawed system, that says that that system 

we walk in fear of, that we walk in fear of having 12 of our 

peers pass judgement on us.  And because we got elected to the 

Legislative Assembly, because we had an election where we 

can basically promise anything in the world, where there is no 

truth in advertising laws, because on a given day we stood as a 

member for this Assembly and were elected, we no longer have 

to subject ourselves to being judged by 12 of our peers.  That 

we are better, that we are smarter, that that process becomes 

inconsequential, it becomes insignificant. 

 

That is what the members of the New Democratic Party, the 

Attorney General of this province, the Premier of this province, 

are saying to us, to the taxpayers I represent -- that there is 

something to be feared in a court; there is something to be 

feared from 12 of my peers.  That they aren't capable of 

judging me because I am a New Democrat MLA (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly). 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's a sad, sad day for the province of 

Saskatchewan when all of the taxpayers' money can be turned 

around and used against that very taxpayer in a court of law.  

But it's even sadder when the taxpayer, given all of those odds, 

can't even get into the court of law. 

 

I mean it is a tough row to hoe, I'm sure, for the five farmers in 

Melville to even think about taking on the entire taxpaying 

body of this province through their duly elected government.  

But when you're willing to go that extra mile, when you're 

willing to pony up out of hip national to take on the 

government, and then the government says you don't even have 

that right, it must make people stop and wonder. 

 

(1000) 

 

And I say to the newly elected members of this Assembly, the 

ones that weren't here to make those eloquent speeches in 1989 

in defence of democracy:  are you ready, are you ready to say 

that that system that allows 12 of your peers to sit in judgement 

of you . . . are you ready to throw that system out?  Are you 

ready to cringe every time that someone says, I think that we 

should have our 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

day in court, to cringe and have this Assembly use its weight to 

override those rights, so early as elected members of this 

Assembly? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the opportunities have been numerous.  The 

amendments have been numerous.  The solution is very simple.  

It could have occurred three months ago.  This open, 

accountable government could have sought that reference a 

long time ago. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that ruling 

probably would have been down by now and out of the road 

because it has been done in the past.  That reference to the 

constitutionality of that particular piece of legislation could 

have been out of the way.  And instead of running around this 

country looking after the constitution in other provinces, maybe 

we should have thought about looking after the home front 

first. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, while that reference was on, and I've 

clearly looked at the particular piece of legislation . . . It says: 

while that reference is on, that the court action in Melville has 

to stop, that the government can no longer be sued while the 

reference is on, that the five farmers have to desist in their 

action, therefore the costs to government stop, there are no 

government lawyers engaged in that particular action any more, 

that that action must stop, and that any reference in this 

Legislative Chamber probably could have stopped while that 

reference was on. 

 

In other words, that became a non-entity, Mr. Speaker.  All the 

rule changes, all the precedent-setting actions that have 

occurred in this Assembly in the last five months would have 

not occurred because that reference would have been on.  And 

if we had had a caring, open, and accountable government, that 

is a very logical conclusion. 

 

When you have a Bill, and I don't have it here, Mr. Speaker, 

this morning, that has 10 whereas's in the preamble -- 10 

whereas's -- I can assure you that every one of those whereas's 

has a constitutional reference attached to it.  Every one of those 

whereas's is there for a very specific reason.  Every time it 

goes, "Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan . . ." there 

will be a reference attached to it.  There will be some body of 

precedent that the Government of Saskatchewan is trying to use 

in order to subjugate any constitutional challenge. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when a government takes the time to put 10 

whereas's in place, they know that there is a serious, serious 

problem with a Bill such as this.  And that reference to the 

Appeal court would have either proved that this Bill, in the 

Appeal court's opinion, was totally legitimate and should come 

back before this Legislative Assembly, or it would have said, 

Government of Saskatchewan, you have seriously infringed 

upon the rights of individuals.  You have not shown enough 

precedent, you have not shown enough reason to set aside the 

God-given constitutional rights of individuals.  And in either 

case, both parties have the right to go to the Supreme Court of 

Canada. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, from what I have 

seen under section 7 of the charter, that there is enough 

precedent, probably, that that court would want 

to see this piece of legislation.  But in either case, all of the 

things that have transpired in this Assembly, that have 

transpired in court rooms, all of that could have been put aside 

if this government had truly believed, truly believed its own 

rhetoric, had truly believed the speeches made in 1989, had 

truly believed that the words of the member from Riversdale 

that are mouthed on the national television almost every night 

in this constitutional debate, that the words that are mouthed 

for the consumption of the taxpayer in this province were true, 

they were believed, they were heartfelt; that had some soul, 

that weren't void, as the legislation says -- that weren't void in 

the hearts and minds of these New Democrats, these new-found 

democrats who stand in this legislature and bring in closure 

after closure, who fear the judgement of 12 of their peers.  

Those words that are mouthed by the member from Riversdale 

each night on our television screens, how can they possibly be 

believed when in this Assembly the absolute opposite occurs? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you today, I can tell you today 

that this void, that this void that the government wants to 

perpetrate on 60,000 farm families, this void will be filled with 

anger.  This void will be filled with people who say, I don't 

want to be represented by people who say one thing and do 

another.  This void will be filled with a will and a 

determination to give back to this Assembly the rights that it so 

richly deserves.  And it will give back to this province a 

government that will believe in the right to be judged by 12 of 

your peers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is nothing else left for this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

since the day this NDP government has been elected, they have 

been intent on pushing through their own political agenda by 

whatever means is available.  This government has resorted to 

closure three times and now on this motion they have used 

closure to end debate on closure. 

 

Closure on closure.  Before this session, closure had been used 

twice in 85 years.  In the last four and a half months, this 

government has used it five times.  We know how many times 

it has been used up till now, but, Mr. Speaker, how many times 

will it be used before this session is finally over? 

 

Closure had been used only twice by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, twice in 85 years.  The former government used 

it twice in nine years to end debate of 120 hours of the 

privatization of the Potash Corporation, and once to end two 

and a half months of debate on the Education & Health Tax 

Act. 

 

The NDP are using closure to ram legislation through this 

House.  They've used closure five times this session and this 

session, Mr. Speaker, is not yet over.  The first time was to 

change the rules on bell-ringing.  The second time, after only 

five hours, was on interim supply, and the third time, Mr. 

Speaker, was to force the introduction of the 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

GRIP legislation.  Now they are using time allocation to push 

this Bill through.  They're ramming it through the various 

stages -- closure on second reading and on Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

It is very disappointing, Mr. Speaker, that closure is used to 

limit the questions that we could have asked in Committee of 

the Whole.  There are 16 pages in the GRIP legislation and 

over 20 clauses that we need to go through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We're not surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the government is using 

such strong-arm tactics.  This government's style is and can 

only be to ride down anyone who does not agree with them.  

This arrogant government during the first sham that the NDP 

have called a session, a sham in December of '91, it was then, 

Mr. Speaker, that the NDP made a historical move -- a move of 

becoming the first government in the history of Saskatchewan 

not to pass a budget, but instead to pass an Appropriation Bill. 

 

At that time, the NDP introduced a motion unprecedented to 

this province, a motion that stripped opposition members of the 

right to freedom of speech.  This motion only allowed members 

to question the member from Regina Dewdney.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we didn't want to question the member from Regina 

Dewdney.  We wanted to be able to ask question of the 

ministers on where they were spending the money.  Where 

were the members for the various departments spending the 

Queen's money?  That was the questions we needed to ask and 

find out.  We received many times answers from the Minister 

of Finance: sorry, I can't answer that question.  We were 

stopped from asking those questions.  The NDP proponents of 

open and honest government did not want their ministers to 

answer any questions.  The NDP were very successful at 

ramming their appropriations Bill through this Assembly. 

 

Now the NDP are ramming time allocation motions through on 

GRIP.  The NDP, Mr. Speaker, must be tired, they must be 

tired of listening to logical and reasoned debate.  They don't 

like to be reminded of how devastating their retroactive GRIP 

legislation is.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is why they insist on 

limiting debate.  That is why they keep forcing motions such as 

time allocation on this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they want their summer.  They want their summer 

vacations.  But, Mr. Speaker, if they wanted summer vacations, 

why did they run for this Assembly?  There is work to do here, 

Mr. Speaker, and we are willing to stay in this legislature and 

perform our duties.  We too, Mr. Speaker, would like to be at 

home with our families, but we won't sacrifice the needs and 

the rights of farmers in order to do so. 

 

Is it ethical, Mr. Speaker, to repeatedly impose closure and 

time allocation on debate in this Assembly?  Is it moral?  Do 

the members opposite even care?  I think not, Mr. Speaker.  

The NDP government bullying a motion through this House 

like this abuses their majority and it's reprehensible.  The NDP 

government has become so caught up in its power that they are 

willing to push through any legislation that suits their needs, 

even if that legislation is destructive or infringes on the 

individual 

rights. 

 

The NDP government has included measures in the various 

laws it has passed that will take away the rights from groups 

and individuals and increase the powers of cabinet ministers to 

act without scrutiny.  GRIP is not the only Bill in this House 

that strips away individual rights. 

 

So far the NDP have introduced or announced plans to 

introduce Bills that will allow government employees to enter 

private property without a search warrant, as in Bill 3, An Act 

to amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act; 

or in Bill 83, An Act respecting Pension Benefits.  A minister 

to divulge personal records to the public, NDP Party members, 

or anyone else that a cabinet minister may choose to reveal that 

information to -- and this is under Bill 14, An Act to amend 

The Child and Family Services Act.  A minister can forbid a 

court of law from hearing or receiving evidence held by a 

government employee that might be relevant in determining a 

person's innocence or guilt -- Bill 13, An Act to amend the 

Adoption Act. 

 

A minister to retroactively increase taxes on oil, gas, or mining 

companies -- Bill 10, An Act to amend the Crown Minerals 

Act.  A minister to deem that a company or person in the 

mining or energy industry has wilfully avoided paying royalties 

and on the strength of the minister's opinion only, send that 

company or person a bill for the amount the minister deems 

appropriate -- again Bill 10, An Act to amend the Crown 

Minerals Act. 

 

A minister to take over the role of the labour board to 

determine proper union certification in the construction 

industry, a recommendation of the NDP's hand-picked labour 

committee. 

 

(1015) 

 

The member from Riversdale's government justifies its moves 

to increase the power of cabinet ministers at the expense of 

individual Saskatchewan voters by saying that the measures are 

necessary to protect the public from unscrupulous or 

unacceptable practices.  Of course the Minister of Justice has 

not commented on the trend to reduce individual rights and 

there have been no legal opinions or studies released indicating 

what impact the various measures will have on the justice 

system. 

 

These moves to cut individual freedoms are frightening.  The 

government will go to any extreme to carry out these actions, 

as we have seen by the use of closure repeatedly in this House.  

The NDP think we should allow them to break into private 

property without a warrant because it will protect the 

environment; that we should allow them to remove the rights of 

miners because the mining companies are evil corporations; 

that we should take away legal rights of farmers entrenched in 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms so that they won't lose in 

court, so that the government won't lose in court. 

 

The government should be providing the public with opinions 

and outside advice from the legal community providing that 

these reductions in civil liberties are absolutely necessary and 

not harmful to the citizens at large. 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I feel for the NDP back-benchers.  They are being 

led around by their nose and they think they know why.  I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the back-benchers, that they go 

home to their constituencies and find out exactly what the 

people think of their government.  This heavy-handed 

government is so intent on pursuing its own political agenda 

that it is blind to the concerns and to the opinions of 

Saskatchewan people.  The labour legislation that will be 

presented is a pay-back for election favours in 1991 but it 

doesn't assure the government an election in 1995. 

 

So I say to the government, legislation like GRIP '92 is your 

ticket back to the opposition benches.  You have had ample 

time to start acting like a government of the people for the 

people, not just for NDP MLAs. 

 

Soon Progressive Conservative economic initiatives will have 

taken hold -- FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) and Crown Life, 

as the example, moving to Regina -- and you will have to offer 

something of your own to the Saskatchewan people. 

 

You promised to be open.  You couldn't say it often enough 

during the election.  An NDP government will be open, honest, 

and a non-partisan administration.  Your leader said that, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Premier from Saskatoon promised that over and 

over like a broken record. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for a government to pledge to be open, the 

public is running into closed signs everywhere they turn -- 

closed meetings, closed agendas, closed commissions, closure 

on debate, and the most appalling and glaring example of 

tyranny we see here in this House today, closure on closure. 

 

One wonders if the Premier keeps a copy of Machiavelli at his 

desk, because in that book, the Prince says deceit, hypocrisy, 

and perjury are necessary and excusable for the sake of holding 

on to political power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this sentence exemplifies the leadership being 

provided by the government opposite.  That is not what the 

people of Saskatchewan voted for; that is not what they were 

promised on October 21, 1991.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to voice a 

few remarks of my own in relation to this closure debate on 

time allocation, and I want to point out to the House and to the 

people of the province and to those in my constituency those 

things that I think are disgusting about the actions taken by the 

government here today. 

 

In the discussion in the throne speech as we had it read to us by 

Her Honour, the government agenda set forward its vision of 

itself.  And there are three statements in that vision that are 

being contradicted today. 

 

 People want (my) government to be more open, honest and 

fully accountable. 

That was a statement made by the Lieutenant Governor on 

behalf of Executive Council.  The second statement says: 

 

 People want my government to be fair and compassionate in 

all its actions. 

 

The third statement says: 

 

 People want my government to rekindle the Saskatchewan 

spirit of community and co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have and what we're witnessing through 

this whole session is exactly the opposite of that.  Where is the 

co-operation?  Where is the sense of community?  Where is the 

sense of compassion and fairness, accountability, honesty, and 

openness? 

 

We have today closure on discussion on a Bill that is going to 

limit the capacity of individuals in the province of 

Saskatchewan to have their day in court.  It is going to limit the 

time that people will have and the opportunity in a free and 

democratic society to take the opportunity to take the people 

that they believe have wronged them and allow the court to 

decide. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess in making my observation I want to 

point out a number of reasons why I think this government is 

afraid.  I think this government is afraid, Mr. Speaker, and it's 

evidenced by the very Bill itself.  When in presentation to this 

Assembly, they put down a number of terms of reference for 

themselves, and they say, whereas and whereas and whereas, 

they are trying to defend the position of the Bill in its content 

so that they know that they will have to deal with it in the 

matter of a court ruling, a court ruling that will be in the 

Appeal court and the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whereas's as it relates to this Bill have 

significance.  They have a great deal of significance because 

ordinarily that's not done.  Ordinarily that's not done, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the reason why it's not done is because on the 

majority of the Bills there isn't a constitutional reference 

required because people will have an opportunity to qualify the 

decisions made by this Assembly in a court of law. 

 

And what do we have today?  When the province of 

Saskatchewan in 1989 decided that it was going to put into this 

Legislative Assembly a Bill that would change and structure 

the electoral boundaries in the province of Saskatchewan, this 

Assembly passed that Bill -- and there was a lot of debate on it.  

They passed this Bill. 

 

And the minister of Justice and the attorney general at the time 

said, what we will do to make sure that everyone has his day in 

court . . . because there were professors at the University of 

Saskatchewan or university here in Regina that said, this is not 

dealing with the fundamental rights of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan for equal representation.  The 

attorney general and the minister of Justice said, I will allow it 

to go the Court of Appeal. 

 

And the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan were 

allowed the opportunity to have a court decide.  Well that 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

court decided that the people in the University of Regina were 

correct.  They decided they were correct. 

 

And what did they do then?  Then, Mr. Speaker, the decision 

was made to go to the Supreme Court.  Why to the Supreme 

Court?  Because the very essence of justice and freedom for 

representation was in some ways being infringed on and that 

was the thought of people and a viable thought.  It was being 

infringed on.  And, Mr. Speaker, when that process was 

completed, the justices of the Supreme Court in Canada said 

that the Bill was good as it related to the constitution.  It would 

stand a constitutional scrutiny because they had decided it 

would. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, who did that?  Who did that?  The 

government of the day did that, Mr. Speaker.  And why?  They 

wanted to present themselves as being open, honest, and 

accountable.  In a court of law where people say what they 

logically believe to be the facts . . . was given an opportunity in 

the Appeal court and in the Supreme Court.  And the 

government said to the people of Saskatchewan, because there's 

a legitimate point being made by professors at the university, 

we will take the opportunity to do that. 

 

What have we got today, Mr. Speaker?  Today we have a 

government, number one, it's afraid to go to trial.  It's afraid to 

go to court.  And why are they afraid?  Why are they afraid, 

Mr. Speaker?  Why do they put the whereas's in here and then 

void incidents happening, and the Minister of Agriculture will 

make regulations that stipulate the kinds of things that are 

going to be done?  Why? 

 

It's my contention, Mr. Speaker, that the people in this 

government and this executive branch of government know 

they're wrong.  They know they're wrong.  Mr. Speaker, if they 

were required to testify on the basis of fact in a court of law, 

they would have to tell the truth or perjure themselves. 

 

In my view, Mr. Speaker, they would not be able to say what's 

in the Bill and say it was the truth.  They would not be able to 

say what was in the regulations and say it was the truth.  And I 

believe that the individuals who would have to testify would 

have to tell the truth or they would face the consequences of 

not having told the truth. 

 

They don't want to, Mr. Speaker, stand in a court of law and 

have their peers judge them.  They don't want to have their day 

in court to have to testify under oath.  They don't want their day 

in court where the Minister of Agriculture is going to have to 

testify under oath about the facts and the events that occurred.  

They don't want to stand in the court, Mr. Speaker, and testify 

under oath and hear under oath the testimony of other people 

who were directly involved in the actions taken by the 

individuals from 1991 to today. 

 

But this Minister of Agriculture is going to deem that events 

occurred as he sees them.  Where does the court come in, Mr. 

Speaker?   And where does reference come in and where do the 

people of Saskatchewan get an opportunity to be heard?  

Where, Mr. Speaker? 

It is in only in this Assembly as this opposition has made its 

case before this Assembly that they have had any opportunity 

to have their voice heard -- not in a day of court, Mr. Speaker, 

because these people with their overwhelming majority have 

said no, we're going to take and change all that.  We're going to 

change history.  Make this, the events that happened, void. 

 

To top it all off, Mr. Speaker, what they're also going to do is 

they're going to extinguish the rights of individuals to appear in 

court -- extinguish rights.  Mr. Speaker, they didn't even have 

the presence of mind to put a notwithstanding the constitution 

of the individual rights of individuals; they didn't even have the 

courage to put a notwithstanding there. 

 

They didn't.  They just said blatantly, not any rights.  No rights 

in a court of law.  Extinguished.  And we will tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, 

what happened from 1991, January 1 and on.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what this Minister of Agriculture is going to 

do. 

 

He doesn't want to have the people who have no connections to 

government today, because they were fired in Crop Insurance 

for example, or in Department of Agriculture, stand in their 

place and tell the court, under oath, what really happened.  He 

doesn't want that to happen, so he puts in the Bill and says, 

we're not taking it to court.  We're not going to allow it in 

court. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he doesn't want to have the GRIP 

committee.  He doesn't want to have the GRIP committee who 

made recommendations, some as participants and some as 

individuals who believed that they were doing right when they 

confronted him with some of the problems that were involved.  

And the Minister of Agriculture said on June 17, we'll get 

around it somehow. 

 

(1030) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have discovered somehow.  Whereas, 

whereas, void, extinguish rights, no legal cause of action 

against anyone.  The people of the province of Saskatchewan 

have lost their rights.  And my basic question to the people of 

this Assembly and to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan is this:  who is next?  Who is going to be the 

next one that has his rights extinguished in a court of law?  

Who?  Who will have that right taken away from them to 

challenge a decision in a court of law on a civil action? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's my contention that the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan better be wary because there are 

going to be other places and incidents occur with this 

administration and they're going to say, I'm going to extinguish 

the rights; I'm going to make void the action. 

 

We had a case like that in December.  In December of 1991 we 

had exactly the same kind of thing.  The people in the province 

of Saskatchewan were in a position where they were going to 

take the government to court, and that was taken away from 

them.  The rights of the individuals were extinguished.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're talking about. 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

This Minister of Agriculture wouldn't want to stand in a court 

of law and said that he hadn't put a review committee together 

to deal with forfeiture of rights of an individual in a contract 

made with the federal government.  In the agreement that the 

province of Saskatchewan has with Canada, there is a section 

in there that the Minister of Agriculture should put into place a 

committee to review the process and procedure of individuals 

who have not had their rights dealt with.  And he has not done 

that, Mr. Speaker.  He hasn't done that. 

 

And he would have to testify in a court of law that he has not 

done that.  Forfeiture of rights is exactly what the agreement 

says, and we have had a forfeiture of rights in this contract that 

has been made with individuals across this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have had individual things happen in this 

Assembly in the last four months that cause me a great deal of 

concern.  And the concern, Mr. Speaker, is this:  who will be 

next?  Who is going to be next in this overwhelming thrust for 

power?  Who is going to be next?  Is it going to be the teachers 

in their pension plan because it's got an overwhelming liability?  

Is it going to be the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union) and their pension fund?  Who's going to be 

next is the question.  Who's going to be next? 

 

And in my mind, Mr. Speaker, it is our opportunity as the -- 

responsibility -- as the opposition, Mr. Speaker, to stand in our 

place and tell the people of this Assembly and the province of 

Saskatchewan what we have done.  And I want to point out one 

more item.  We have had a very significant thrust, I believe, by 

the media to uphold the opportunity that has been granted to us 

as opposition to tell the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan what this was all about -- a reduction in the 

rights of the individual, of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They have told it, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

accurately through the whole process of time. 

 

As the Leader of the Opposition went through those items a 

few days ago, it became more and more obvious to me that not 

only is this opposition being stubborn; they're being absolutely 

foolish -- absolutely foolish.  And the reason I say that, Mr. 

Speaker, is this.  I say that because when the court will 

determine that the Bill is not in order, when that determination 

is made and the people in the province of Saskatchewan have 

their right to their day in court, it will seriously, Mr. Speaker, 

seriously jeopardize not only the judicial balance that there is, 

but it will seriously jeopardize the economic opportunities in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Do you know why?  Because the court will determine how 

much this government, Crop Insurance, will owe the farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  They will decide.  They will 

decide, Mr. Speaker, how much money this government owes 

those farmers who have been short-shrifted.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is why we have stood in our places and said this is 

wrong.  It's wrong on two accounts, Mr. Speaker.  It's wrong 

from the justice side, and it's wrong from the economic side.  

And, Mr. Speaker, the justice far outweighs the economics, but 

we all realize what it's going to cost the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan when the court decides in the 

favour of the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unquestionably, it is my opinion that we in this 

debate have been absolutely right.  And that's been verified, 

Mr. Speaker, it's been verified by the very fact that the Premier 

of the province of Saskatchewan has said it.  He said, on the 

basis of principle, the people . . . the opposition is correct.  The 

PCs (Progressive Conservative) are right.  On the basis of 

dealing with it as a fundamental right for the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, we are right. 

 

I'm saying to the members of this Assembly, you are going to 

choose whether you are going to be on the side of justice or 

whether you're going to be on the side of an injustice, a serious 

injustice perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan by a 

decision that you made -- a decision that you made, ladies and 

gentlemen, to uphold a mistake made by the Minister of 

Agriculture, a mistake that's been made by the Minister of 

Agriculture in dealing with rural people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The irony of it all is, Mr. Speaker, is that that individual has 

already said that he's going to make changes for '93.  He's 

already said it.  And we are in a place today where that minister 

is jeopardizing the integrity of all of the individuals in this 

Assembly. 

 

My challenge to you as individuals in this Assembly is this: 

why don't you do the right thing?  Why don't you stand on the 

side of freedom; why don't you stand on the side of justice; and 

why, why, why don't you stand on the side of farmers for the 

first time in this session here today?  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 10:38 a.m. until 11:08 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson McPherson 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Bradley Langford 

Lorje Jess 

Pringle  

-- 29 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 72 -- An 

Act to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to be 

taking a look at The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

here.  And not only we as the opposition but certainly many, 

many people of the province have dire concerns and worries 

about the impact that this proposed Act is going to have on 

their ability to control their own lives.  And we are getting a 

fair amount of response, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province, 

in fact all areas of the province not only in the south-west 

where the major concerns seem to be stemming from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this basically is going to be doing is 

depriving the ranchers and the farmers from making their own 

decisions as to the wildlife habitat . . . ability for the 

government, the ability for the minister to once again 

unilaterally make a decision as to what parcels of land are 

going to be put into The Critical Wildlife Habitat Act.  Now the 

Act itself, Mr. Speaker, obviously is a mammoth book full of 

contorted land descriptions and so on -- very, very pervasive 

throughout the province -- and obviously is going to impact on 

very many, many farmers and ranchers.  And those farmers and 

ranchers are coming to us.  They are writing to us, and they are 

saying to the minister, to this government:  please don't do that. 

 

Now I have a copy here, Mr. Speaker, of a letter written to Mr. 

Wilfred Campbell and to Mr. Ed Begin from the Minister of 

Natural Resources.  And the minister at this particular stage 

seems to indicate a willingness to be co-operative and a 

willingness to be consultative because he is suggesting to these 

two members that an employee of the department, Mr. Doug 

Cressman, his deputy minister, is willing to sit down with 

members of the stock growers and members of the 

organizations of these cattle ranchers to work out some kind of 

a settlement.  And he's suggesting that a group be set up, a 

working group be set up, to pursue the resolution of some of 

the outstanding issues. 

 

Now that sounds well and good, Mr. Speaker, but by the same 

token he says:  after we have taken a look at the process, after 

we have investigated and examined the regulations and policies 

as a group, that they are going to be making recommendations.  

And he goes on to say that the government is convinced that 

The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is compatible as 

opposed to being irreconcilable with the cattle ranching 

industry.  He says: in spite of that, in spite of the fact that I'm 

going to set up this committee, I . . . and I'd like to quote from 

this letter, says:  in accordance with this, we intend to pass the 

current amendment to the Act.  Well what else is new, Mr. 

Minister.  We intend to pass the current amendment to the Act.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is what the minister is saying. 

We make a big ballyhoo about consultation, about getting the 

involvement of the affected people, and we're going to listen to 

you, but in the final analysis we intend to pass the current 

amendment. 

 

Now we have lots of letters coming in.  I have a particular 

letter here from RMs (rural municipality) are coming in, Mr. 

Minister, and I'm sure you're getting these letters as well, 

although this particular one is not addressed to you.  But it is 

addressed to the member from Maple Creek who is getting a 

great deal of pressure from local people, from councillors and 

so on, and RMs, saying, Mr. Minister -- Mr. Minister, they are 

saying: we have been taking care of this land for years and 

years and years, for generations and generations, and we've 

been doing a good job of it.  And we will continue to do a good 

job of it.  We don't necessarily want some bureaucrat making 

the decision as to which land is going to be put in and which 

land is not. 

 

(1115) 

 

Because it ultimately, Mr. Minister, will be the bureaucrats that 

will be deciding it, even though the minister has that ultimate 

responsibility, because you're going to take your advice from 

them.  And that's what you're going to base your decision on. 

 

The basic paragraph in this particular letter that I want to bring 

to your attention, Mr. Minister, is that the folks from Middle 

Lake, the rural municipality of Three Lake, RM 400, say that 

they feel the RM in which the land is located, as well as 

adjacent land owners, cattlemen, etc. should be involved in the 

process of designating this land as wildlife habitat rather than 

the minister being able to do so unilaterally.  That is their 

concern, Mr. Minister. 

 

Another example of the concern that this opposition has with 

the whole repertoire of your legislation where you give 

unprecedented powers to ministers to search, to walk in, to do 

what they want, to make unilateral decisions. 

 

This again, Mr. Minister, I would point out to you, is not the 

opposition expressing this concern unilaterally, but rather we 

are passing on the concern from the RMs themselves, from the 

peoples, from the ranchers, from the folks out there. 

 

And they are saying that we are supposed to let this Act go, this 

amendment, if you will make an amendment to that 

amendment, providing that assurance, that ranchers, land 

owners and RMs will be the deciders of what is good for that 

land, rather than your bureaucrats, Mr. Minister. 

 

And if you can make your commitment to us that that is what 

you would consider, then this Bill is going to get speedy 

passage through this legislature.  Failing that, Mr. Minister, I 

would suggest to you that a very plausible alternative for you 

would be to table this legislation, stand it on the order paper, 

wait until the fall session, wait until you've done proper 

consultation with these people and drawn a conclusion and an 

Act that is going to be acceptable to the people out there. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'm asking you one of two things then: to 

make the appropriate amendment to this amendment Act 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

or withdraw it from the order paper until such time as a proper 

resolution has been resolved between you and the people out 

there who are going to be affected by this Act.  Those are the 

concerns we have, Mr. Minister, and those are the requests that 

we will be bringing forth in committee when this Bill comes 

forward. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As my colleague 

has pointed out, this Bill and the repercussions of this Bill will 

have a serious impact on my constituency and on many of the 

people that live in my constituency and in the surrounding 

constituencies.  Because of that, I feel I must contribute to this 

discussion for the minister's consideration.  We are hoping that 

he will give serious consideration to the matter and to the 

pleading of the cattle producers in all of the province because, 

while there is a concentration of land affected directly within 

my constituency, there are parcels of land all through the 

province that are apparently going to be quite significantly 

affected by this Act. 

 

I want to read a couple of letters to make the point of how 

serious the people are taking this matter, Mr. Speaker, and I 

hope that the minister will take account of these requests from 

the people themselves.  And I quote: 

 

 I am sending you a copy of a letter I wrote to Saskatchewan 

Parks and Renewable Resources who wish to take away . . . 

 

There are three parcels of land here.  I won't give the land 

descriptions because I think this person has a right to remain 

anonymous to this Assembly, but I will pass this information 

on to the minister in private. 

 

 I am not in favour of their plans (as the letter indicates).  I 

really hope that by sending this to you that you may be able 

to help me (as a representative of the people.) 

 

And it goes on: 

 

 I am writing to you in regards to three quarters of land . . . 

 

They are then listed.  And it goes on: 

 

 . . . which I originally leased through the Saskatchewan Land 

Bank Commission and am now leasing from Saskatchewan 

Rural Development.  The wildlife habitat is trying to take 

these three quarters of land.  I, on the other hand, want 

desperately to keep them.  If the wildlife take away these 

three quarters, it will leave me only four quarters.  Therefore, 

it will no longer be classed as a viable farm.  This farm and 

land have cost me financially and emotionally.  And it has 

been a fight from the beginning. 

 

 First the Land Bank Commission gave it to us, then they took 

it away.  We had to fight to get it back.  In 1978 we moved 

onto the farm and worked hard so it would eventually be 

ours.  We put a lot of blood, sweat and tears into this farm to 

make a go of it.  West of the present farm house, just over the 

edge of the hill, there is a plateau with a perfect view.  I 

want to make a house and building site on this plateau.  It is a 

dream, but one that will come true.  Something for me to look 

forward to and something I have wanted and dreamed and 

worked for from the very first time we saw this place. 

 

It then gives the land number. 

 

 In 1988 we had survived 10 years on this farm.  A lot has 

happened in this time.  I have done the farming mainly by 

myself since 1981.  I didn't even know how to 

summer-fallow before then.  I had a lot of good neighbours 

and a lot of good friends that showed me how to farm.  My 

husband became a drug-addicted alcoholic and in January of 

1988 he packed up and left us.  After he left us, he declared 

bankruptcy and I had to fight for what we have, our main 

source of income being the farm. 

 

 Everything was in (and it gives the first name; I will delete 

that) my ex-husband's name except for the lease for the farm.  

In 1988 I did the farming and he kept the income, saying it 

belonged to him.  The kids and I were left with no income. 

 

It gives the name of one of the sons who was eight, and the 

other one was five. 

 

 I was finally able to borrow $20,000 just to operate the farm 

and feed the kids.  It was an extremely skimpy year, but we 

made it.  This farm not only means a lot to me, it means a lot 

to my two boys who are very interested in farming. 

 

 When we wanted to buy the farm, it cost us $100 a quarter 

just to find out the price.  The NDP Government of 

Saskatchewan's Land Bank Commission paid $63,000 for 

this land but expected us to pay a half a million dollars to buy 

it back.  Not exactly what you would call fair.  A few years 

ago, wildlife decided they wanted this land.  I refused, and 

now you are after it again. 

 

 I have only seven quarters of land which is barely enough to 

survive on with what the price of wheat has been.  If you take 

this land, I am not sure if I'll make it.  I've had to fight for 

everything the boys and I now have, and I am not about to 

give it up.  We have dreams and futures and this farm is part 

of both. 

 

 I work part time plus do the farming while still raising my 

family and save to put them through school.  To make the 

farm viable I need all seven quarters.  My taxes and land 

payments are not in default, and I see no reason why I should 

have to give up this land. 

 

 I enjoy wildlife as much as the next guy, possibly more than 

most.  I have not, nor do I intend to kill or harm any wildlife.  

As far as an endangered species of any kind, they would be 

safe around my boys and myself.  I believe wildlife and 

people can live in harmony and should.  I would consider a 

compromise on another parcel of land as 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

indicated by number, provided I can lease back the land for 

the same price and for the same length of time. 

 

 But I will go to court over this if we can't reach a viable 

agreement.  I have sunk my heart and soul into this farm and 

don't intend to give it up. 

 

I don't note with much pleasure that the minister is laughing at 

this particular time, Mr. Speaker, because I don't think that this 

is a laughing matter. 

 

I want to reinforce the position that the ranchers and cattlemen 

and farmers have taken on this by reading a couple of excerpts 

from another letter.  This one is addressed to Mr. Romanow: 

 

 Changes in the designation of Crown lands into The Critical 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

 Please find attached a resolution which was passed at a 

meeting held May 25 at Ravenscrag.  Notations from the 

meeting are also enclosed for your perusal.  I trust that you 

will give this resolution the serious consideration that it 

requires.  If you wish further information, please contact me. 

 

It's signed by David Saville.  And I don't think he'll mind that I 

used his name because he's quite well known in the cattle 

industry. 

 

 A public meeting of the concerned leaseholders was held at 

Ravenscrag community centre Monday, May 25.  This 

meeting was called to discuss with the leaseholders the 

possible implications of The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act.  There were 75 people in attendance.  The 

meeting was chaired by David Saville of Ravenscrag.  MLA 

Glen McPherson was invited to attend this meeting and the 

time and date of the meeting was set up on his terms, then he 

refused to attend. 

 

 Syd Barber, supervisor of habitat programs, attended, as well 

as Glen Provencher, Saskatchewan Parks, Maple Creek, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 The main concern of those leaseholders present was the 

consultation practices of Saskatchewan Parks and Renewable 

Resources.  Leaseholders were notified by form letter and 

were not given an opportunity to have any input into the 

decision to place all this land in critical wildlife habitat.  Each 

individual leaseholder should be able to have a one-on-one 

input into the management and status of his lease.  The term 

"critical" misleads people as this land is very well managed 

by leaseholders.  They have developed and improved these 

leases over the years and good management is to their benefit 

as well as to the wildlife's.  The attached resolution was 

passed at the meeting: 

 

 Whereas the province of Saskatchewan has recently 

undertaken to include large amounts of 

leased land under The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act, which has not been included before; and 

 

 Whereas present lease contracts require written departmental 

permission before breaking or altering of lease land is 

permitted thus protecting wildlife habitat; and 

 

 Whereas at present there is a viable evidence that the past 

system was working reasonably well vis-a-vis ample game 

supply; and 

 

 Whereas this much increased designation only adds fuel to 

the controversy of grazing domestic livestock on public 

owned lands and thus serves to increase urban-rural 

alienation; and 

 

 Whereas calling these lands critical wildlife habitat misleads 

the general public as to the combined use of these lands; and 

 

 Whereas lessees feel that this will eventually eliminate the 

grazing of livestock on these lands; 

 

 Therefore, be it resolved that The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Act be dropped completely and that this be made retroactive 

on land already designated because of unethical proceedings 

that were used. 

 

 (b) Be it further resolved that any designation be a 

co-operative effort amongst local Parks and Renewable 

Resources personnel, municipal government officials, 

individual lessees, and the Department of Rural 

Development; 

 

 (c) And be it further resolved that the present sitting of the 

legislature put a stop on any further proceedings with this 

Act. 

 

And it was carried unanimously. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is accompanied with the signatures of all of 

the RMs and all of the individuals that were present at that 

meeting.  And for the minister's benefit, I will thumb through 

them so that he can peruse them from his seat.  They are all 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a letter from the rural municipality of 

Maple Creek, number 111.  And in this letter . . . and I will just 

summarize it because it basically says exactly the same thing in 

essence as the previous letter. 

 

It is a letter to the Premier of our province.  And it gives as 

well a resolution for consideration by the government as to 

what the people in that municipality, through their elected 

representatives, want to have done with regards to this critical 

wildlife Act.  And basically it outlines the same proposals that 

were outlined in the previous letter that I read to you. 

 

I want to read a very short letter in response to these letters that 

was made by the Leader of the Opposition, just to note where 

he is coming from.  And it's addressed to the administrator of 

the rural municipality 111: 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

On behalf of Mr. Grant Devine, Leader of the Opposition, I 

would like to thank you for sending him a copy of your letter 

to Mr. Romanow regarding The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act.  Mr. Devine appreciates being kept informed 

of your concerns and would certainly appreciate knowing 

how the government responds to your resolution.  Thanks 

again for keeping us informed. 

 

And that was sent to the rural municipality to assure them that 

we were listening.  And that was followed up by several phone 

calls back and forth. 

 

(1130) 

 

Just to make a point for the minister, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

not restricted only to the south-west corner and to those 

municipalities in that area that have contacted me, of which I 

have given you one example.  There have been contacts from 

several of the RMs in this regard.  I'm giving one example of 

each that will be recorded in Hansard here today. The others 

are listed in my office for later discussion. 

 

I want you to know though that this goes throughout the 

province and I'll give you one example of that.  The rural 

municipality of Three Lake No. 400. 

 

 In response to your letter of July 29, 1992, (and I'm quoting) 

the council of this municipality would like to express their 

agreement with your comments regarding lands targeted to be 

designated as critical wildlife habitat.  They feel that the RM 

in which the land is located, as well as the adjacent 

landowners, cattlemen, etc., should be involved in the process 

of designating this land as wildlife habitat rather than the 

minister being able to do so unilaterally. 

 

And that is signed by the administrator there.  We are getting 

several letters, Mr. Speaker, from several municipalities going 

along that very same line.  I use this one as an example of that 

group.  We have from the Saskatchewan stock growers' a letter 

that I think has to go into the record. 

 

And I'll try to do this quickly because I know we have to get on 

with other business of the day.  "Ranchers close land to 

hunting" is the title of this letter.  And I quote: 

 

 Concerns of rural municipalities and ranchers in south-west 

Saskatchewan over the addition of 1.5 million acres of 

Crown-leased land to The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act has resulted in a movement that will close a large portion 

of the area to hunting this fall. 

 

 Wilfred Campbell, chairman of the Saskatchewan Stock 

Growers' Association lease and land use committee states:  

"The closure of this land is not meant to antagonize the 

hunting community or to cause confrontation between 

hunters and land holders.  Rather it is a protest against the 

provincial government's failure to adequately address the 

very real concerns of ranchers.  As stewards, the 

leaseholders feel they are partners in the operation of these 

Crown lands.  As partners they feel very strongly of the need 

to be involved and consulted regarding any legislation or 

regulation affecting these lands. 

 

 It adds insult to injury when after three generations of 

ranching on these Crown lands, the government doesn't see 

the importance of consultation with the caretakers of the land, 

the ranchers," concluded Campbell. 

 

End of quote from that letter, Mr. Speaker.  Then we have, very 

quickly, the list of concerns that the cattlemen of the province 

have expressed.  And I think it's important for the minister to 

note these concerns.  Although I'm sure that he has heard them, 

we will put them on the record to make sure that he is aware of 

them.  From a meeting held in south-west Saskatchewan, at one 

of the cattlemen's homes, we have the agenda from the meeting 

that outlined basically what their concerns were.  The agenda 

started: 

 

 (1) deal with the word "critical" 

 (2) primary use of Crown land 

 (3) process to appeal 

 (4) roads and accesses 

 (5) security of lease 

 (6) compensation 

 (7) comments -- what are the feelings? 

 (8) purchase of private land by wildlife federation 

 (9) others; hotels 

 

This was the land and lease committee of the Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers Association.  Wilfred Campbell of Tompkins, 

Saskatchewan submitted that list. 

 

We go on with the changes or additions to The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

 (1) (they suggest) The word "critical" be stricken.  To the 

public eye, this is very misleading. 

 

 (2) The primary use of these Crown lands are agricultural.  

All others are secondary. 

 

 (3) Ongoing process of appeal.  All parcels of Crown land 

where the lessee has substantial investment are to be 

taken out of the Act (example buildings, corrals, 

water development).  Therefore any new 

development on Crown lease, these parcels of land 

need to be taken out of the Act. 

 

 (4) Roads (in brackets) an example, the RM of Val Marie, 

no. 17, all roads and access roads be under the 

control of the municipalities.  These are the people 

who know the needs in the area.  Wording in the 

Act to be changed. 

 

 (5) Security of lease. 

 

  Lessees deal only with lands branch.  These are the people 

who know what is going on and have been involved 

for many years. 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

  (b) lessee will not accept to be administered by other 

departments who do not have the expertise or 

management qualifications.  People in Parks 

department will admit they don't know how many 

deer this land will sustain or the amount of browse 

that is needed. 

 

  (c) the great concern of this Act is that the lessee will now 

be dealing with another landlord. 

 

  (d) the lessee is the only person who pays to use this 

Crown land.  It must be remembered that municipal, 

school, and hospital tax is also paid by the lessee. 

 

  (e) the lessee must have the security by the way of 

long-term leases of 33-year minimum. 

 

  (f) the Act cannot interfere with the transfer of lease from 

one generation to another or a purchase of a ranch 

unit. 

 

 (6) Compensation. 

 

  (a) ranchers leased the Crown land in the raw state.  All 

development is a lessee expense.  Lease fees are 

being paid for deer and adjustment is needed. 

 

  (b) lease fees increase when the land is developed. 

 

  (c) the ranching industry is the reason that the wildlife are 

here.  Deer browse where livestock graze, with easy 

access to water.  Ranchers need to be recognized for 

the good stewardship of the land.  They are the 

managers of wildlife as well as their livestock. 

 

 (7) The ranching industry has been here for three 

generations with the abundance of wildlife.  The 

lessees are insulted, to say the least, that this 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is even 

necessary.  This is a slap in the face for good 

stewardship. 

 

 (8) Purchase of private land by wildlife federation. 

 

  (a) do they pay taxes; do RMs lose tax base? 

 

  (b) this land is taken out of agricultural production.  Deer 

and elk do not browse in land that is not grazed. 

 

  (c) no compensation is paid for hay or cereal crops that 

join these lands. 

 

  (d) wildlife federation have money to purchase land but no 

money for wildlife damages. 

 

Now that is their list of concerns, Mr. Speaker.  And I hope that 

the minister will seriously take note of those concerns of the 

people in all of Saskatchewan who are concerned as a result of 

this amendment to the Bill. 

We are suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that there has been talk about 

a meeting between the wildlife people, the cattle men of the 

province, as well as the department people.  We are suggesting 

that that meeting should definitely be held.  We are somewhat 

of a notion that it might be held this coming week.  If that be 

the case, the only argument that has been put forward for 

passing this Bill is that there isn't enough time to get 

amendments passed and that it would take too long, that we've 

gone too far into the process. 

 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, for the minister is this:  if those 

groups get together and come up with reasonable solutions to 

their problems, if they present those to the minister and he 

wants to make amendments next week, after he hears from 

them and talks it over them with . . . if they want to make those 

amendments, this opposition can absolutely guarantee that 

those amendments can go through lickety-split in one day, 

however much time it takes, and a few minutes to read them 

into the process. 

 

That cannot be an excuse for passing this Act and amendment 

in its present state.  The time factor is not the excuse that can 

be used to put this through and promise cattle men that 

something will be done in the future to alleviate their concerns.  

The reality is that their concerns can be addressed here and 

now in this Assembly.  And we will not hold it up as an 

opposition.  We are pledged to the cattle men. 

 

And we have some remarks that my colleague also wants to 

make on this.  But I want to say to the government, do this:  

table this legislation, stand it, amend it, and bring it back next 

session, and it will not have trouble getting past this Assembly 

if it truly does assess and take into consideration the wants and 

the needs, not only of the cattle men, but of the wildlife people 

in our province.  They can live in harmony and they will live in 

harmony.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few short 

comments regarding the Act and I'd like to make these, in view 

of the conversation I've had with wildlife members in my area, 

namely, Mr. Ed Kinnet who has been very . . . who is very well 

known in the wildlife community and is a farmer himself, and 

an individual who recently along with, I believe, Mr. Ed Begin, 

met with the stock growers, and had a very -- as Mr. Kinnet 

indicated -- a very productive meeting. 

 

Through the meeting they went over a number of the concerns 

that were raised by the stock growers and the cattle men in the 

south-west and people who were concerned regarding the Act.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I was informed by Mr. Kinnet that certainly 

that the wildlife federation doesn't have a major problem with 

some of the concerns that were raised by the stock growers, 

and they've asked if the government, the department and the 

wildlife and the stock growers or the cattle men could get 

together.  Mr. Kinnet has and the wildlife have sent some 

suggestions to my office as well, as well as the stockgrowers, 

and I'm asking the minister, too, if he would . . . We're 

proposing that we would look at some of the suggestions made 

by these groups.  And I understand that meeting is supposed to 

take place next week, but we will take the time necessary to get 

some proposed 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

amendments.  And I'm suggesting that we can send them to the 

minister, converse with the minister as well, and have the 

minister and his department take a look at these amendments in 

view of the recommendations coming from these organizations 

whose major interest is in this Bill.  And possibly by working 

together through a co 

_operative effort, Mr. Speaker, we can alleviate all of the 

concerns and certainly address the needs of the Bill.  Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a pleasure 

and honour to have the opportunity to speak in support of Bill 

72, The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act. 

 

When passed in 1984 by the former government, the members 

opposite, The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was 

landmark legislation accommodating the interests of 

agriculture, wildlife, and the public.  I would like to 

congratulate the previous government, including some of the 

members opposite, for their foresight and commitment in 

creating The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

The Act merely prevents the sale and breaking and clearing of 

public lands that are important to wildlife.  Mr. Speaker, we 

only need to look at what has happened to the landscape of 

southern Saskatchewan to appreciate the need for protecting 

natural habitat on our valuable public lands.  With 85 per cent 

of the land base south of the forest fringe privately owned, 

Saskatchewan has one of the lowest ratios of public lands of 

any jurisdiction in North America.  Much of the best remaining 

wildlife habitat on Crown land . . . is on Crown land.  These 

lands are critical for maintaining existing wildlife populations 

-- thus, they are called critical wildlife habitat lands. 

 

Because of our extensive agricultural industry during the past 

century we have seen over 75 per cent of our natural landscape 

disappear to cultivation and other developments, including 

roads, towns, and cities.  Between 1976 and 1981 we lost two 

million acres of natural landscape.  Broken down, this loss 

worked out to over 1,000 acres a day or 44 acres an hour, day 

and night. 

 

In some areas of the province, such as Regina Plains, over 99 

per cent of the original landscape is gone.  Half of our original 

prairie wetlands have been drained and filled.  Consequently 

southern Saskatchewan contains one of the most modified 

landscapes in North America. 

 

With the loss of our natural ecosystems, we see the continued 

loss of our native flora and fauna.  Our spring duck population 

has plummeted from 20 million birds in the 1950s to less that 4 

million today.  In 1960 some 500,000 white-tailed deer 

inhabited Saskatchewan.  Today half that number survive.  

About 20 per cent of our native plants are listed as rare and are 

disappearing at an alarming rate. 

 

Once common prairie species, such as burrowing owls, prairie 

long-tailed weasels, loggerhead shrikes are now on Canada's 

endangered species list.  Other well-known species, such as 

pintail ducks, jack-rabbits, and wild flowers like crocuses and 

yellow lady's-slippers, continue to decline.  These statistics 

clearly show that if 

we want to maintain our current wildlife populations, we must 

preserve some of the best remaining habitat, as it is critical to 

maintaining existing wildlife numbers. 

 

The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is unique.  It 

allows ranchers and farmers to continue their grazing and 

haying operations on public lands as they have in the past.  

New fences, water supplies, corrals, buildings, can be 

constructed.  Leases can be transferred to their . . . lessees can 

continue to transfer their lease with the sale of their deeded 

land.  They can continue to control public access on their 

leased land.  The Act merely prevents the government from 

selling the Crown land or allowing clearing, breaking, and 

drainage to occur. 

 

(1145) 

 

Some people say the land will never be broken if it is sold, and 

the members opposite made reference to that.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, since 1980, if we look at the Crown lands sold in 

south-west Saskatchewan, we find that over 33 per cent of that 

land -- unfortunately much of it class 4 and 5 land, 6 land -- is 

already broke.  So so much for the theory that it'll never be 

broken.  Once this land is in private hands, the public, 

governments, have no control over it. 

 

In a recent survey, Mr. Speaker, 87 per cent of the people of 

Saskatchewan said they did not want their public land sold or 

broken up or cleared.  They wanted it to remain the way it is; at 

the same time, allowing existing agriculture uses to continue. 

 

In this time of economic restraint, The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act is very appropriate, because vast sums of money 

are not needed to retain our Crown lands in their natural state.  

Through legislation and co-operation - 

_ with emphasis on co-operation -- we can maintain existing 

agriculture uses, while at the same time protecting the natural 

values of our Crown lands.  Indeed this government is working 

with land owners and other interest groups, such as the Wildlife 

Federation, and meetings will be occurring.  In fact, we're 

going beyond this particular issue.  We are holding a series of 

public meetings to deal with a realm of issues involving public 

lands in the province.  So we are going to be working and 

dealing with some of the concerns mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early 1980s, some 3.4 million acres of 

Crown land in Saskatchewan were identified as critical wildlife 

habitat.  The previous government placed over half of these 

lands, 1.9 million acres, in the Act and there's been very little 

problem.  The people with the land in the Act know that they 

can continue to operate as they have in the past. 

 

Bill 72, which we are dealing with today, will see the inclusion 

of the remaining 1.5 million acres of Crown land in the Act, 

and these acres were identified under the previous 

administration.  We are fulfilling the objective of The Critical 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act which was initiated by the 

former government nine years ago.  And we believe it's high 

time that the loose ends were cleaned up and everybody was 

treated equal. 

 

Like the previous administration, our government has received 

widespread support from throughout 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

Saskatchewan and across Canada in favour of this very unique 

legislation.  In the past 100 years, Mr. Speaker, we have only 

managed to acquire some form of protective status for less than 

5 per cent of our natural heritage in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

With the addition of the remaining 1.5 million acres in The 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, we as a province and 

the people of Saskatchewan are taking a big step forward as we 

strive to achieve the universally accepted goal of protecting a 

minimum of 12 per cent of our natural ecosystems by the year 

2000.  This legislation looks to the future and will ensure that 

our children and grandchildren will have the opportunity to 

enjoy and experience the natural world which we have all too 

often taken for granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support Bill 72, The 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has asked leave to adjourn 

debate.  Leave is not necessary.  Does the member ask for 

leave, or . . . 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- . . . will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member has asked to adjourn debate.  All 

those in favour of the motion please say aye.  All those 

opposed please say nay.  I believe the no's have it. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 81 -- An Act 

respecting the repeal of The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps 

clarification.  On the preceding vote the government members 

were in favour of the motion; the opposition members opposed 

it.  And you declared the no's had it.  I'm just wondering if 

that's the procedure that we'll be following in future votes.  

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay.  I'm sorry.  I didn't comprehend the 

point of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We like it.  We like it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay.  All right. I get the point. 

Bill No. 82 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 82 -- An Act to 

amend The Victims of Crime Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill we have before us is 

something that we will not be taking a lot of time to oppose.  

We do have a few questions.  We have a few concerns.  We 

understand that the Bill does take away the . . . The Bill is 

bringing forward a process because of the fact that the 

department felt that there was no way to ensure that funds that 

were granted for compensation were necessarily used for the 

purposes they were placed forward. 

 

One of the problems we do have and one of the questions we 

will be raising is the fact I believe the Bill does give the 

minister . . . will be able to review and vary such awards that he 

sees or appears to that he would . . . or the minister would 

believe to be appropriate.  And this is one of the questions that 

we will be bringing forward in light of the fact that the Crimes 

Compensation Board, I believe, is being repealed through the 

previous Act.  So, Mr. Speaker, I'm just raising a couple points 

and certainly when we get into committee, which will be 

probably in the next day or so, that's one of the major concerns. 

 

And the other thing that we agree with, the fact that we will 

have crisis-intervention programs to deal with the problems 

that many crimes victims do have.  However we may consider 

the fact, and maybe the minister can fill us in a little more in 

committee, on the monetary value.  It seems to me that that is 

being stricken completely from the Act and there may be a 

place and a point for some monetary compensation for some 

loss by victims. 

 

But certainly those are two or three of the areas that we would 

like to get into and address when we get into committee.  So I 

thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


