


















































Hansard: August 24, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2913 

 August 24, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petition 

has been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), are hereby read 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the 

funding of abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Assembly today guests that are sitting in 

your gallery: my sister and her husband, Lynn and Beattie 

Ledingham from Holdfast, and their sons, Blair and Kyle 

Ledingham.  And I know Kyle, the youngest son, is taking a 

real active interest in politics so I'm sure he'll enjoy watching 

question period today, and the procedure.  I ask people to join 

me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today we 

see another in a long list of protests against the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government underway presently in Melfort.  

And, Mr. Speaker, after only 10 months in power, this 

government -- which had pledged to the people that they would 

listen to their concerns -- has seen half a dozen angry 

demonstrations, and that being after only 10 months in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farm families, rural residents, and yes, even city 

folk are gathering in Melfort to send a message to the Premier, 

to this government.  They are tired of being used as a punching 

bag by the government and by the Premier. 

 

My question is simply this: Mr. Premier, you seem to find all 

the time in the world for trips to Ottawa for the constitution and 

the bright lights of the national stage. I am wondering if you 

have the time, found the time, to stop by Melfort and listen to 

your own electorate, ordinary people who have been trying to 

reach you for the last 10 months, Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite who -- I say with the greatest of respect for him 

personally -- knows better, that my attendance at first ministers' 

conferences called by the Prime Minister of Canada is virtually 

without option, has dictated the attendance on the constitution 

and not any desire to be there on my part, I can assure the hon. 

member.  He should know better than that. 

 

The answer to the question, simply put, is Melfort is not a 

protest against the NDP government in Saskatchewan. 

Melfort is a hearing of all governments, including Mr. 

McKnight, and our Minister of Agriculture, to hear the 

concerns of the farmers to see what we can do with respect to 

the long-standing problems with respect to agriculture. 

 

And I close by saying to the hon. member he would do 

everybody a lot of good, especially the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, if he would do something which is more in his 

nature, and that is to depoliticize this matter and make it a 

genuine concern for family farmers everywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, certainly farm families are very 

concerned, rural residents are very concerned, and yes we 

acknowledge the fact that the Premier has been involved in 

constitutional debate.  But we're also aware of the fact that 

there have been numerous occasions for the Premier to meet 

with farm families, with farm groups, on a number of occasions 

with farm groups who have staged meetings around the 

province.  Mr. Premier, you promised to be open, to be honest, 

and consultative.  You promised to listen, you promised to be 

accessible.  However, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, we find the 

farm families of the province have given up in trying to speak 

to the Agriculture minister. People don't want to talk to him 

any more as he doesn't appear to listen, act, or care. 

 

Mr. Premier, surely you could find a moment, an hour out of 

your schedule, to meet with the protesters, whether they be in 

Melfort or wherever, to hear firsthand their concerns.  Will you 

make that commitment, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I endeavour to meet with 

any group or any organization which seeks an appointment 

with me as my time and schedule permits.  I will tell the hon. 

member that a few weeks ago before the unexpected 

development of the lengthy and protracted constitutional 

negotiations, I personally toured the area of Tisdale and 

Nipawin and visited with farm families -- many of them in their 

farm homes. 

 

I recall a specific meeting over a morning session of about an 

hour and a half or two hours involving 30 or 40 farmers where 

we talked about it.  I toured the fields.  I've been in the Wadena 

area.  I've been into a number of the areas in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I've always met with organizers or 

organizations on a basis, where possible. 

 

But I conclude by saying to the hon. member that in the case of 

the Melfort meeting this is a meeting where they specifically 

invited the Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan and the 

Minister of Agriculture representing the federal government to 

be there.  So they must have confidence in him in order to 

invite him specifically to hear their concerns -- and he will 

listen to their concerns -- and we will take the appropriate 

action as we have been urging the members of this House to 

join with us to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

there are a lot of things on the minds of 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Saskatchewan people and I'm sure that the Minister of 

Agriculture will soon inform you and fill you in on the 

concerns as he hears them put forward this afternoon. 

 

In addition to drought conditions, hail, frost, and snow all over 

the north, and even the indication that tonight is going to be 

probably severe frost across our province, people now have to 

contend with the disastrous GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) legislation which you have so callously forced 

through the legislature this morning. 

 

Mr. Premier, your hands are not clean on this.  You cannot hide 

behind your ministers and your preoccupation with the 

constitutional issue.  Mr. Premier, the people in Melfort want to 

know why you have abandoned them.  They want to tell you 

firsthand of the harm you have so recklessly imposed on them 

at a time when you should be helping them, as you promised 

over and over again.  Will you give them that opportunity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the problems with 

this question period is that the member opposite works from a 

set of assumptions which, with the greatest of respect to him, 

come from Alice-in-Wonderland.  And it's hard to respond 

based on those assumptions. 

 

The member from Moosomin knows full well that we have 

been in communication with the Prime Minister's office, Mr. 

Mazankowski, Mr. McKnight, seeking . . . and in fact there are 

going to be negotiations I think tomorrow and Wednesday with 

officials on the question of the third line of defence in the 

disaster relief program. 

 

I have in front of me a letter that I wrote to the Prime Minister 

on July 17 indicating that back in 1990 the ministers of 

Agriculture of which the former premier was one at that time, 

set out the third line of defence program for "largely 

unpredictable programs" and indicated the examples of the 

1988 drought as a proper third line of defence program. 

 

Now if it was good enough when the leader of the opposition 

was premier and minister of Agriculture, surely to goodness it 

must be good enough for the member from Moosomin today. 

 

That's our position.  And the minister from Saskatchewan, the 

Minister of Agriculture, will listen to farmers' concerns, outline 

to them the proposals which we have advocated.  There are the 

discussions which will be taking place.  And let's work on the 

basis of trying to help the farm families. 

 

It's not my fault nor your fault nor Mr. Mulroney's fault about 

the weather.  What we've got to try to do is to depoliticize this 

thing and come up with the right solution for family farmers. 

 

And I say to the hon. member opposite -- and I'm going to 

single him out more than almost any of his colleagues over 

there -- it's not in your nature to do what you're trying to do in 

these question period questions, so please redirect your 

assumptions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the Premier 

would talk of meeting with individuals, and I think there was a 

recent article talked about a meeting in Humboldt with some 20 

people.  I wonder, was that a staged meeting, Mr. Premier?  

Was it an open meeting where you really had the chance to talk 

to people openly and publicly? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier also talked about the agreement last 

year and the fact that there was a GRIP agreement and there 

was a third line of defence.  They all fell, one by one.  However 

the province of Saskatchewan decided to change the GRIP 

legislation.  Mr. Premier, people need to know how they will 

survive in light of the fact that you have rammed through a 

piece of legislation which, Mr. Premier, if you were going to be 

consultative about, you would have taken to the people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the hon. member's 

assumption is, I say with the greatest of respect, wrong.  

Alberta has old GRIP 1991, Mr. Speaker.  Alberta has been hit 

with a huge snowfall, perhaps some might even argue . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Frost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And frost . . . larger in territory and 

more damaging than thankfully we have been thus far.  They 

have the same problem, Alberta does, under old '91 as we have 

under new '92.  Exactly they do have the same problem.  The 

disaster relief programs, whether it's in Alberta or 

Saskatchewan or Manitoba, will still be covered off on this 

position. 

 

The answer is to get a proper gross revenue income plan which 

is based on a cost of production, point number one.  Point 

number two, get the third line of defence cash payment which 

was promised, paid.  Point number three, get a permanent crop 

disaster relief program into place, exactly for the kinds of 

eventualities that the West is facing this particular time.  Now 

surely we can find common ground on that on a non-political 

basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I'm sure that anyone 

who may be listening would be wondering, what would they 

really have in the answers you have given.  What support are 

you really going to give?  What commitment have you really 

made to Saskatchewan producers?  You talk about Alberta 

producers.  Yes, Mr. Premier, Alberta producers have a better 

guarantee than the new program is going to offer to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Can you tell the province how hijacking the democratic process 

to achieve your Draconian political agenda is helpful to those 

that are affected by your bungling in agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, first 

let's hope that there is no frost, that we all would share that 

sentiment.  I'm sure that that's the case. 

 

But the eventuality . . . let's forget about the eventuality. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

 Let's deal with the reality of what has faced Alberta and 

Saskatchewan thus far.  And I say to the hon. member that 

Alberta farmers with '91 will find the program as deficient.  

The program of GRIP, as originally devised -- and I don't mean 

this in any partisan political sense -- is deficient because it's not 

based on cost of production, among other things.  Everybody 

understands that. 

 

If there was any error -- if there was; I admit to none -- but if 

there was any error in us bringing in the changes to '92, it was 

to the extent that we tried to make a silk purse out of a sow's 

ear.  We are aiming in 1993 to structure a new gross revenue 

income plan with a new advisory committee, which will work 

continually toward the cost-of-production formula which has 

been the basis of the platform upon which we campaigned and 

the direction which we aim. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe even by that statement the 

Premier recognizes the damage that this GRIP legislation will 

do to the individual right of redress in a court of law.  You said 

it publicly, Mr. Premier.  Do you not see the irony in working 

for the enhancement of constitutional rights in Ottawa while 

you work to strip individual rights in your home province? 

 

Mr. Premier, I ask: do you not see an irony in the fact that 

you're working for constitutional rights in a charter while at the 

same time taking away those rights by forcing through this 

piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well no, I'm sorry.  I thank the hon. 

member for asking the question again, but I was engaged in 

another conversation with other members on another matter. 

 

First of all, this constitutional round does not deal with the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  That, for good or for bad, has 

been dealt with now 10 years ago, and it's not on the table.  So 

forget that. 

 

Secondly, the legislation which has been introduced and Royal 

Assent was given this morning on GRIP, in the opinion of the 

legal officers of the Department of Justice -- and I could ask 

the Minister of Justice to elaborate in subsequent questions if 

you want -- constitutionally support what the government is 

doing. 

 

Now if you're asking me, will there be, could there be 

challenges to the constitutionality of the Bill, I don't know.  

Nothing prohibits a challenge to the Bill.  What a court might 

or might not decide, who knows?  Only after a court is asked to 

deal with the question . . . All that I can tell you is that the 

opinions that we have, internal and external lengthy opinions 

by constitutional experts, validate the charter and constitutional 

features of this legislation. 

 

And I may say this in closing, old GRIP never had a legislative 

framework, never.  We are putting a legislative framework.  

From a legal point of view, you could argue in the absence of a 

legislative framework there are 50,000 contracts -- in quotation 

marks; I'm not subscribing to that for the moment -- but 50,000 

interpretations as to 

what rights were, based on information pamphlets.  What we're 

doing is having a logical starting point and logical sets of rules 

for GRIP '92 and subsequent changes, something which ought 

to have been done and never was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the Premier, the Premier has 

indicated that they have constitutional or legal advice that says 

their Bill would stand up in court, and conversely we have the 

same suggestions that this Bill wouldn't stand up in the courts. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have seen to it that Royal Assent has been 

given to a Bill that should have never seen the light of day.  

You have muffled any opposition that the members of this side 

of the House may bring.  Mr. Premier, now you are the only 

thing standing between the thousands of people who will be 

hurt by this most repulsive legislation.  You, sir, have the 

ability to hold the proclamation of this Act until farmers have 

had their day in court, which is their right, until today. 

 

Will you stand in your place and do the honourable thing and 

stop the proclamation of the GRIP Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it 

appropriate for me to speak to the question asked by the hon. 

member.  This question of the constitutionality of the GRIP 

Bill was addressed during Department of Justice Estimates.  

And at that time I indicated that we have an internal opinion 

written from the acting director of the constitutional branch 

within the Department of Justice to the acting deputy minister 

-- that was dated June 8 -- in which he canvassed every 

possible objection to the Bill either on the grounds of whether 

it was within provincial jurisdiction or whether it offended the 

charter. 

 

And the opinion went into some detail both as regards section 

7, section 8, and section 15 of the charter, and even went 

beyond that, my friend will recall, to deal with the possible 

violation of the Human Rights Code in every respect.  In every 

respect and without equivocation, the advice was that the Bill 

was sound; that it did not offend the charter and that it was 

within the jurisdiction of the province. 

 

We then solicited an outside opinion from, I think, the leading 

constitutional lawyer in the province -- Bob Richards of 

MacPherson, Leslie and Tyerman, and he again had no qualms 

at all about the constitutionality of the Bill or the fact that it did 

not offend the charter. 

 

Now I'm conscious of the opinion of the Legislative Counsel 

and Law Clerk and I've considered that opinion very carefully 

and discussed it with my officials.  We are frankly and honestly 

unable, on the basis of what we understand the law to be, to 

take this matter to the Court of Appeal.  You don't take these 

things to the Court of Appeal just to relieve political pressure . . 

. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 



2916 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, I appreciate the answer that's been given by the 

Minister of Justice.  But we're asking you this afternoon, Mr. 

Premier, in light of the fact that this legislation has been 

introduced and would seem to challenge the rights of 

individuals, and in light of the fact that you are the leader of 

this province, you are now solely responsible for the retroactive 

GRIP legislation being enacted, and I would ask you, Mr. 

Premier, if you would indeed take the time, if you would listen 

to the people of the province, if you would listen to the farmers 

of this province, if you would give them their day in court and 

if you would give the opportunity for this legislation to be 

challenged, if you would take the time to withhold your assent 

to the Bill, Mr. Premier, so that the farmers and the farm 

community of Saskatchewan can have their due diligence in 

court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite again will be more aware of what I'm going to say 

than I am, because he is in the farming business.  Farmers have 

made their decisions weeks ago, months ago -- their planting 

decisions, their economic decisions, their farming decisions -- 

based on the announced policy of the government.  For us to 

say at this stage in the game that we are going to prolong the 

uncertainty, that we're going to move away from the legislated 

and legislative base, I don't think is responsible and I don't 

think it's a credible suggestion, with the greatest of respect to 

the member from Moosomin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hunters Trailer & Marine Fire* 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  Mr. Speaker, the 

unfortunate multimillion-dollar fire at Hunters Trailer & 

Marine has dealt a serious blow to the economy of North 

Battleford and Battleford and the surrounding area.  And while 

a facility will be rebuilt, the Vanguard manufacturing facility 

has been placed in receivership jeopardizing hundreds of jobs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, constituents of the Battlefords have told me that 

they have . . . that while they have a hope of new potential 

buyers that will keep the facility in the city, their local MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), the member from 

Battlefords, has yet to lift a finger or try to give them any help 

to ensure that the government opposite facilitates the 

maintaining of the North Battleford facility. 

 

I would like to ask the member responsible for SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), at the 

risk of taking over the member from Battleford's job, would 

you commit to this Assembly and to the residents of North 

Battleford that any subsequent buyer of Hunters manufacturing 

will remain in that community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to answer this 

question because the member did not know this, or if he did 

know this, purposefully overlooked this.  Either way, I think 

this is not acceptable. 

I toured the Hunter's fire scene personally.  And with me was 

the MLA for The Battlefords.  I met with the appropriate 

company officials, and with me was the MLA for The 

Battlefords.  We have sent officials of the government at all 

levels to see what can be done, given this very, very 

unfortunate situation. 

 

So I say to the hon. member, please, please, if we've got a 

problem -- which we do -- stick to some basic facts and don't 

politicize the matter wrongly and inaccurately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, for 

someone like the Premier to get up and talk about politicizing 

subjects is a bit of laughter, I would say. 

 

Mr. Minister, The Battlefords since 1982 have seen expansion, 

diversification, and several other good things in their economy.  

Recently however, the news hasn't been all that good.  In 

addition to Hunters, one of the major car dealerships, Manning 

Mercury, has announced they're going to close.  As well, 

Motorways appears to be closing their shop. 

 

Now this may come as a surprise to you, sir, the member from 

North Battleford, I haven't heard him talking about it.  I saw the 

news clip that you were talking about.  And I'm officially 

informing the Minister of Economic Development that all is 

not well in The Battlefords.  And it hasn't been well since 

you've been in power. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you today . . . surely you can give us the 

assurance that you will instruct the receiver that priority be 

given to the arrangement that would keep this facility in North 

Battleford.  Would you give us that commitment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to take for 

a moment to outline some of the things we're not going to do.  

We are not going to instruct the receiver.  That may have been 

the tendency of the previous government, but that is not 

legitimate.  Today in the Leader-Post there is a big headline -- 

"THE GIGATEXT HANGOVER" -- that refers to one of the 

major economic scandals in your government and the former 

SEDCO minister, Rick Swenson, says: 

 

 . . . "no recollection" of a gag order and (any) disputes other 

aspects of (the) Kolody's version of the events. 

 

A major story of a major economic scandal that still goes on to 

this day to the point where many people are still asking, where 

did all the money go? 

 

I want to say that in North Battleford the biggest issue in the 

last nine years has not been Hunters but you remember the 

High R Doors fiasco of your government.  What we've been 

doing with Hunters for the past two weeks is working very 

diligently.  The president of SEDCO has met with them, the 

Premier of the province has met with them, the MLA for the 

area has met, and we're doing the best that we can. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

Obviously there's always more that can be done.  But I can tell 

you obviously that playing politics, playing politics with a 

major fire that has dealt a devastating blow to a community is 

not the answer to economic development. 

 

So I'd ask members opposite, rather than do that scenario, 

mislead the members of the Assembly about who has met or 

who has visited . . . the truth is many members have met, the 

government has met, and we hope and we really wish that that 

plant will be up and running and the jobs will be re-created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it seems kind of 

funny, when you talk about political rhetoric, all he can talk 

about is GigaText, GigaText.  Well GigaText was maybe a 

mistake but, Mr. Minister, that is not going to help North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I'm telling you is North Battleford is in 

some trouble, and I'm asking you to take notice of that.  There's 

drought, there's frost, there's snow, and now we've got GRIP.  

You've got taxes, you've got off-loading, you've got user fees, 

and the list goes on. 

 

Your economic development is abysmal over there, Mr. 

Minister.  And I'm asking you, while the NDP government 

representation in this area has been non-existent -- that's what 

they're telling me -- they're not happy campers in North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you endeavour to meet the city . . . will you 

meet with the town and city officials, the business and 

community leaders of The Battlefords at your earliest 

convenience.  Will you make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the members opposite that the fire that devastated Hunters is 

unfortunate.  And for them to come here and mislead the public 

by saying that the member from North Battleford hasn't been 

paying attention, is not legitimate.  That simply is not 

legitimate nor honest. 

 

But I want to say clearly that we are doing everything we can 

to help get Hunters back on their feet. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We don't believe that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well you may not believe it.  The 

member from Arm River hollers from his seat that he doesn't 

believe it. 

 

I'll tell you quite honestly that we have been on site a number 

of times with a number of politicians and more importantly, 

with the staff from SEDCO, working very closely with the 

Bondar family to get the project back on its feet.  And they will 

tell you that if you go and talk to them. 

 

So I say to you quite honestly what we need from you folks is 

support, and support for the plant in North 

Battleford, not more sleazy politics that we've seen here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind the 

Government House Leader that the word sleazy has been ruled 

unparliamentary on a number of occasions in this House.  And 

although other Speakers have allowed it, it certainly doesn't 

help to retain the order in the legislature. 

 

Bail Conditions and Early Release Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for your attention in 

order that I could answer a question asked of the government 

on August 20 concerning the case of a Mr. Hubert Acoose.  

And the question was whether the prosecution had opposed bail 

for Mr. Acoose on the charge of armed robbery and possession 

of a weapon, did the lawyers oppose bail or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House that in the case of Hubert 

Acoose, the Crown did appear and did oppose bail.  And the 

senior people in the department have reviewed the way in 

which the case was handled, and they're satisfied that all 

appropriate representations were made to the court opposing 

the granting of bail to that individual. 

 

Similarly in the case of one of the other accused, David Myles 

Acoose, in that case bail was also opposed very vigorously.  

And again the matter is being reviewed by senior people in the 

department, and they're satisfied with the way that Crown 

counsel handled the matter when it came before the judge. 

 

The Speaker: -- Although question period has elapsed I will 

allow one follow-up question on that, and the minister to 

answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It's been done in the 

past. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

wanted to first of all thank the minister for coming back to the 

Assembly with a response to the question.  However I would 

also ask the minister if he would take the time to review the 

process in light of the tragedy that took place last week and 

certainly for the sake of the family and other people involved, 

so that we don't have similar circumstances take place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for the question, Mr. 

Speaker.  These questions about whether or not people who are 

charged with offences should be given bail is a very difficult 

one, very ongoing.  It's founded upon the presumption of 

innocence, and the questions are really whether the accused 

person is likely to appear in court if they're let out on bail.  

That's the fundamental question.  There are other 

considerations. 

 

Bail is, as the member will know, a matter that's provided for in 

the Criminal Code which is a federal matter, and these people 

were out on bail.  But we continue to watch these situations 

very carefully and continue to discuss them with our federal 

counterparts, and we will continue to do that. 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 92 -- A Bill to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that A Bill to 

amend the Education Act (No. 2), be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 91 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and 

Gas Corporation Act, 1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure 

for me to speak today about the amendments of The 

Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act, 1985.  This Bill 

brings to a conclusion discussions that have been carried on 

with Saskoil during the past few months and sets the stage for a 

period of further expansion for Saskoil as well as a positive 

economic benefit for the province. 
 

The oil and gas industry remains one of the most significant 

components of our economy in Saskatchewan.  This 

government continues to examine ways this sector can 

contribute more jobs and economic activity.  With this Bill and 

the memorandum of understanding signed Friday, we believe 

our government is playing an important role in providing not 

only the environment, but also a program of specific initiatives 

necessary for the successful economic development of the 

province. 
 

Saskoil is now the largest oil producer in the province at 

approximately 38,000 barrels per day or about 17 per cent of 

the provincial total.  It is also the largest gas producer with 

approximately 146,000 cubic feet per day of operated 

non-associated production, or this amounts to about 21 per cent 

of the provincial total. 
 

It is one of the most active companies in terms of drilling 

activity in virtually all oil and gas producing areas in 

Saskatchewan.  It is very active in horizontal well-drilling 

programs, having drilled 36 of these wells to date.  This 

relatively recent technology promises to add greatly to 

Saskatchewan oil and gas reserves. 
 

Saskatchewan accounts for 80 per cent of Saskoil's production 

and 60 per cent of its natural gas production.  Saskoil employed 

over 500 people in Saskatchewan, paid $30 million in salaries 

and benefits and approximately $44 million in royalties and 

taxes last year. 
 

Saskoil has been increasing its Saskatchewan and Canadian 

holdings at a time when many other major oil and gas 

companies have been reducing their interests.  It follows, 

therefore, that this government is very interested in seeing a 

successful and growing Saskoil. 

Before I talk about the specifics of the Bill, I wish to mention 

briefly some of the activity that will follow.  Based on the 

memorandum of understanding which is now a companion 

piece of this legislation, Saskoil has agreed to undertake certain 

economic development initiatives during the next three or four 

years as a result of this legislation, which will increase its 

investment base in Saskatchewan. 

 

These projects include the development of 50 horizontal wells 

at an estimated cost of $50 million, creating 175 person-years 

of employment; the examination of the feasibility of 

developing a co-generation facility at Saskoil subsidiary, 

Moose Jaw Asphalt Inc., at an estimated cost of $30 million 

and also creating 160 person-years of construction 

employment; the implementation of an active capital program 

to maintain production and reserves with a continuing focus on 

investment in Saskatchewan; continue to develop in an 

application of horizontal well-drilling technology including the 

export of this technology; the expansion of Saskatchewan 

supply base for goods and services in co-operation with the 

Department of Economic Development to increase 

Saskatchewan content. 

 

We'll also pursue development of a second office tower in 

Regina.  It will promote and encourage within the oil industry 

research into unique aspects of Saskatchewan oil and gas 

reserves. 

 

These initiatives, as well as other forms of co-operation with 

the government, will help to bring long-term spin-offs to the 

province.  In order for these developments to take place, it is 

necessary for Saskoil to have the environment in which to 

continue its growth.  I am pleased to report that our 

government will be able to bring about this activity without any 

cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, nor will it in any way 

affect the government's control over Saskatchewan oil and gas 

resources.  The Bill before us today will provide amendments 

to The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act, 1985 that 

will facilitate further growth by Saskoil by allowing it to gain 

greater access to expand equity markets and thereby 

broadening its investment base.  This investment will allow the 

program of Saskoil to proceed. 

 

The amendments in the Bill provide for the following.  It will 

raise the total number of voting shares that can be held by any 

one person or a group of associated persons to 10 per cent from 

4 per cent of issued outstanding voting shares.  In special 

circumstances involving an acquisition, a merger, or 

amalgamation, this 10 per cent limit can be exceeded with 

authority provided by the board of directors.   But the person 

holding the excess shares cannot vote more that 10 per cent of 

the outstanding voting shares. 

 

Non-residents who were previously unable to hold voting 

shares can now do so, subject to the maximum of 10 per cent 

voting shares for any one person or group of associated 

persons.  And the total non-resident holdings will not exceed 

35 per cent of issued voting shares.  The residence restrictions 

on the board of directors will be revised to require 50 per cent 

of the directors to be 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

residents of Saskatchewan, and otherwise the regulations or 

restrictions will be consistent with The Saskatchewan Business 

Corporations Act. 

 

Saskatchewan participation on the board of directors will be 

strengthened by a change in the mechanism under which the 

government can appoint members to the board of directors in 

lieu of voting its shares.  In addition to its current right to 

appoint directors in proportion to its shareholdings in Saskoil, 

the government will be able to appoint an additional member to 

the board as long as it holds 20 per cent or less of the issued 

shares. 

 

The amendments rescind provision in the present legislation 

which enable the province to guarantee Saskoil's securities and 

indebtedness.  The Saskatchewan government, through Crown 

Investments Corporation and SaskPower, holds approximately 

13 per cent of Saskoil's shares. 

 

With the legislative amendments proposed, the province will 

see the health and vitality of Saskoil maintained and the greater 

success of this dynamic oil and gas corporation.  Our 

government looks forward to working with Saskoil in 

achieving this success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 91, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act, 1985 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have taken a quick look at this Bill and we think it's a good 

Bill.  We think it's a good start from the folks on the other side 

to take a look and try to help the wealth creators do their job of 

creating wealth. 

 

One of the things that has to be done here, we have to have 

people out there.  And I think that Saskoil has proven, in the 

short while they've been in existence, that they are certainly 

capable of producing wealth and I congratulate the minister for 

whatever work he's done on that. 

 

I also congratulate the members opposite, particularly those I 

think of Rosemont and Regina Albert North, Saskatoon 

Broadway, Moose Jaw Palliser -- those are folks that we felt 

were against this kind of privatization. 

 

I was interested to hear you say, sir, that you will allow up to 

35 per cent foreign ownership.  I believe you're going in the 

right direction.  That should bring in outside dollars which we 

need in our province. 

 

Ten per cent individual ownership, that's very good I think.  

Anyone that would like to invest in their own province has a 

chance of investing up to 10 per cent.  We have a lot of things 

about this Bill that I agree with you, sir.  And I'm at this time 

prepared to let it go to committee, and we'll discuss further 

parts of the Bill at that time.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all an observation and a 

question.  And I'm not totally positive or sure on this, but my 

understanding is, Mr. Chairman, that the members that would 

accompany the Premier would be members from the 

department, that EAs (executive assistants) or members 

directly involved in his office wouldn't be part of the discussion 

or allowed in the Assembly.  And I just want a clarification of 

that matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, if I may just speak to 

this, there is no executive assistant here.  These are all the 

traditional positions.  My colleague, the former premier, had a 

chief of staff and a deputy minister to the department, and all 

these other people are all line-function department people. 

 

But in any event, I think I have the right to bring anybody I 

want to help me, but there are no executive assistants. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I thank the member from Moosomin for 

his question and thank the Premier for his comment. 

 

It is my understanding that normal practice in Committee of 

Finance is that the minister will be assisted by line 

departmental staff and not personal staff, that is to say, 

ministerial assistants or executive assistants.  It's I guess a 

question of the Premier as to whether he is satisfied that the 

staff that's with him today fits into the category of line 

department staff, and are staff that are necessary to assist him 

in answering the questions that may be put to the committee. 

 

It's difficult for the Chair to rule whether one official or another 

is an appropriate one to appear before the committee or not.  

But I think we must take the word of the minister as to whether 

or not the staff that he has with him are appropriate staff to be 

here before the committee, recognizing the practice that has 

been followed in the committee in previous years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to rise on . . . I 

understand the member raised a point of order on this.  And 

you're saying that you're taking the Premier's explanation as a 

satisfactory explanation on the point of order? 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair has ruled that . . . or has explained the 

previous practice in the committee, as near as I can ascertain 

this.  And that is that line department staff are invited to 

accompany the minister, to assist the minister in answering 

questions that may be put to him by the committee. 

 

It's normally accepted that personal staff, that is to say 

executive assistants, ministerial assistants, are not invited to 

appear with the ministers.  But it's difficult to determine 

whether, for the Chair, whether staff that the Premier has with 

him, what category they fall into. 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

And in my opinion, it's a question of judgement on the part of 

the Premier as to whether or not the staff he has with him are 

necessary for him, to assist him to answer the questions that 

may be put to him by the committee. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The past practice of this Assembly, and it has 

been ruled on previously, is that the appropriate officials are 

the deputy minister to the Premier, the director of 

intergovernmental affairs, the director of administration, and so 

on. 

 

They are all people directly in the bureaucracy of the Premier.  

They are not political staff.  And I think there have been rulings 

in the past, and I specifically would raise assistants to the 

previous premier who were questioned in this Chamber, who 

held the same type of political job as the individual in question.  

And at that time, they were instructed by the chairman to leave 

the committee because that had been the practice of this 

Assembly for a long time. 

 

And if we are going to have political assistants in here, then the 

opposition has every bit a right to have political people sitting 

beside them in questioning, passing on whatever information is 

deemed necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, may I just speak very 

briefly to the point of order.  Look, I say to the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek, the chief of staff has, amongst other 

responsibilities, line responsibilities, my itinerary in the 

itinerary office, he has media services responsibilities, he has 

the whole correspondence unit responsibilities, he has 

communications procurement. If you're going to ask me any 

questions on communications procurement or not, 

responsibilities, he has the question of House business office 

responsibilities.  These are line functions of which there's just a 

separate division of duties. 

 

Secondly, under political staff, ministerial assistants, as the 

member himself should know better than anybody, they're 

appointed under MA (ministerial assistant) regulations.  The 

chief of staff is not so appointed.  He's appointed, as senior 

personnel are, by order in councils, recognizing the differences. 

 

Surely to goodness we're not going to get hung up on this. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have some further information to the point 

of order I wish to raise with the Assembly.  Or I'll raise a new 

point of order if you'd like. 

 

The Chair: -- I'll listen to one more comment from . . . or 

instead of comments from the member, if he feels that he's got 

something that he hasn't raised yet, and extend the opportunity 

to the . . . 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm specifically, Mr. Chairman, going to ask 

you to refer to the precedent that was set when John 

Weir, chief of staff and principal secretary to the former 

premier, was asked to withdraw from this Assembly because 

that position, even though it was an OC (order in council) 

appointment, was not recognized as being within the official 

proceedings of this Assembly. 

 

And if that was the position of the New Democratic Party a 

short time ago, I would think the Premier today would want to 

uphold that type of ruling. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  I appreciate the comments that 

are being raised by the members.  I would like to consider the 

comments that have been raised and come back with a more 

definitive ruling at a later time. 

 

In the mean time, I note that the Premier in referring to, I 

believe, his chief of staff has indicated this person has line 

responsibilities. He mentioned correspondence unit, 

communications procurement, House business office, and the 

like.  I think we have to accept the word of the Premier that this 

person does have line functions and that it's necessary for him 

to be here to assist the Premier in answering the questions that 

may be put by the committee. 

 

As to the broader question of which officials are appropriate to 

be here, we'll take that under advisement and come back to the 

committee at a later time with a ruling. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, a 

while back a number of global questions were sent to the 

Premier's office and, as we have done in the past and had an 

agreement with other ministers, that they would take the time 

rather than us trying to tie up a significant amount of time in 

the Assembly on standard questions that normally come before 

the House, and we've asked the Premier for the global 

questions. 

 

The Premier has indicated that the questions are here, and we 

would ask the Premier to send across the global questions.  I'm 

asking right now.  I'm just wondering why, or if it wouldn't 

have been possible, for the questions to have been . . . or the 

answers to have been submitted even a day or so sooner so we 

could have had time to peruse them.  But, Mr. Premier, we 

certainly would appreciate taking the time to have them sent 

over so we can follow up on these global questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to forward 

the package of information which the hon. member wants, 

which, I might add, is basically unprecedented -- it never did 

happen during the former years.  In fact not only were 

commitments made to give answers in writing in the former 

years, these were not forwarded.  But I'm very pleased to do 

this, to the hon. member.  And I do say to the hon. member I 

think this is a good step forward because a lot of the 

information is there. 

 

Now, with respect to the delay about getting them forwarded to 

you, this I take full responsibility.  I did not get back to 

Saskatchewan until very late Saturday night and, even at that, 

I've not had a full opportunity to peruse and check the answers 

which my officials have set out.  In the week or 10 days prior 

to that time, as the hon. member  



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

knows, I've been otherwise engaged.  So I pass a copy here.  I 

do have a copy for the Leader of the Liberal Party, but she's not 

here.  I'll forward it to her in due course. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, I just 

want to also point out for your information and for the sake of 

maybe your department, and in view of the comment just made 

about the unprecedented action, just remind the Premier of the 

fact that back when the Estimates first started and the Associate 

Minister of Finance, as we were dealing with these Estimates, 

we had posed a question at that time asking if it would be 

appropriate if the ministers would prefer that the opposition 

take the time to lay out these questions in writing and present 

them to the minister so that he can more closely peruse and get 

the proper answers back. 

 

And at that time the minister commended the opposition for 

taking this route.  And that's the reason for the questions being 

put to the Premier that way, and certainly to other ministers.  

And we have had certainly co-operation from other ministers 

regarding the responses to the answers that have been asked of 

them. 

 

As well, Mr. Premier, we will take some time to quickly go 

through.  And as you've indicated, you haven't had the time to 

probably to go through all the questions yourself.  But we'll 

have to take some time to peruse the questions and make sure 

that we feel that the answers have indeed been given to the 

questions that have been asked. 

 

Mr. Premier, this morning we were . . . or when we started the 

Estimates this morning I had gone into some debate on the 

question of the GRIP legislation that had just passed this 

Assembly, had just been given Royal Assent. 

 

Mr. Premier, as well we just in question period were raising the 

issue with you and your office regarding the fact that as a 

Premier of this province, you do have the authority and you do 

have the power to withhold the proclamation of the Act.  It may 

have Royal Assent. 

 

But in light of the questions that we've been posing, Mr. 

Premier, I'd also like to take a moment just to read into the 

record a letter to the Leader of the Opposition, August 21, from 

the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, Mr. Robert Cosman.  

And it says this: 

 

 Dear Mr. Devine: I have carefully reviewed the provisions of 

Bill 87 with respect to the extinguishment of causes of action 

and the institution or continuation of such actions before the 

courts, and, in my opinion, these provisions -- specifically 

Clauses 8 (enacting new sections 10.1 and 10.2 of The 

Agricultural Safety Net Act) and 18 (enacting new sections 

13.1 and 13.2 of The Crop Insurance Act) -- are contrary to 

the guaranteed legal rights which Canadians are "not to be 

deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of 

fundamental justice" (s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms) unless such rights are limited "by law as can 

be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society" 

(s. 1 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms). 

And Mr. Cosman goes on and indicates: 

 

 Mine is but a single opinion.  Others could be of the opinion 

that access to the courts is not specifically guaranteed by 

section 7 of the Charter (although there is a case law to the 

contrary -- Pearlman v. Manitoba Law Society Judicial 

Committee (1991), (and this is the) 84 D.L.R. (4th) 105; 

(1991) (and in the Supreme Court of) 6 W.W.R. 289 

(Supreme Court of Canada).  Still others would argue that, 

although a legal right has been "limited", it is "demonstrably 

justified" by the Preamble to the Bill ("Whereas" Clauses), 

and therefore is allowed by section 1 of the Charter. 

 

 All of these positions are reasonable.  Which one is the right 

one is subject to interpretation.  I submit that the final 

authority in making such an interpretation is the Supreme 

Court of Canada.  Access to the Supreme Court is costly and 

time-consuming (1-2 years, optimistically -- and then not "as 

of right") when taken on appeal from actions which are not 

yet before the courts, or are currently at the trial (vs. appeal) 

level.  There exists in Saskatchewan a "Constitutional 

Questions Act" . . . which may be utilized by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to speedily take the issue "on reference" 

to the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan, which, in turn, 

establishes direct access to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

 As an element of doubt may exist in the legal community at 

large (although none exists in my mind), and as this is a 

matter begging early resolution -- being a matter of concern 

to a significant number of crop insurance contractors as well 

as the Government of (Canada) . . . -- I should think that this 

issue would be a proper one for such a reference. 

 

 Respectfully submitted, 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Premier, this afternoon in question period you indicated 

that, as you had indicated earlier on back in June when the 

legislation first hit the Assembly, that even though you 

believed fundamentally in the rights of individuals and even 

though you believed that the opposition had a right and had a 

position, a sound position in challenging the GRIP Bill, that 

you took the position today, as you did then, that the legislation 

would not change.  You would continue to force this legislation 

through. 

 

And as I've just indicated and I believe you also indicated, and 

no doubt any legal person we talk to will give us a different 

answer, but there are many legal minds across Canada, 

certainly in the province of Saskatchewan, those who would 

take the government's stand and would suggest that the Bill 

does not affect individual rights -- it's constitutional -- but 

many others who would suggest that it does. 

 

Now I ask you, given your own confession that the law 

stripped farmers of their rights, and given the legal 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

opinion of the only legitimate and recognized lawyer of this 

Legislative Assembly, I ask you if you will agree to withhold 

proclamation of the GRIP Bill until or after a reference has 

been made to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

reading the letter, but I actually have read it myself. And I say 

with the greatest of respect to the Legislative Counsel, this is 

not an opinion upon which one can conclude constitutionality 

or lack of constitutionality of a Bill.  Just the way the letter is 

drafted in that paragraph that you have read the Legislative 

Counsel says: 

 

 Mine is but a single opinion.  (I'm quoting directly.)  Others 

could be of the opinion that access . . . is not specifically 

guaranteed . . . 

 

And then he goes on to describe the contrary argument.  So he 

says, on the one hand and then he says on the other hand.  And 

then he says, of course the only people who can decide in an 

opinion is the Court of Appeal and ultimately the Supreme 

Court. 

 

This is not a legal opinion.  This is an opinion that says the 

matter needs to be or should be decided by the Court of Appeal 

or the Supreme Court.  Well I respect Mr. Cosman's point of 

view, but this is not a way a government operates.  A 

government operates on the basis of legislation that it produces 

-- in its wisdom or lack thereof based on public policy -- gets 

its lawyers to say that it's constitutionally valid, if that's 

possible.  Once it has those assurances, in a legal opinion -- not 

one that says on the one hand but on the other hand -- once that 

opinion is tabled, the Bill is introduced, debated, and enacted. 

 

That's the procedure that we have followed.  We think that's the 

proper procedure, and we think that's the effect of the Cosman 

letter. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Premier, as I've indicated, yes it doesn't 

matter who a person would talk to.  And when we get to the 

legal community it would appear that anyone could give us a 

different answer.  And certainly in this Assembly a number of 

days ago the question was posed about the rights of individuals 

and the right to appear before the court.  And the fact was also 

shown that the Bill was taking away the ability of any 

individual to carry an action against the government, against 

any Crown, or against any minister. 

 

Now if it's in your opinion the right of individuals to be able to 

proceed to court and to challenge government actions in the 

court, why would such a clause be brought into a Bill that 

would take away that right, or at least seem to take away the 

right of individuals to be able to have their day in court without 

the government basically erasing their ability to go to court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again the answer 

that I provide to the hon. members is twofold.  First of all, as I 

see it, it is the responsibility of the government of the day to 

make a policy decision as to what it should enact or not enact 

in a particular field.  In this case we're 

talking about income insurance programs for farmers.  We 

have taken that policy decision in order for the legislative 

framework on the new 1992 GRIP . . . The second 

responsibility of the government is to determine whether or 

not, in the preparation of the appropriate legislation, the 

legislation is done in accordance with constitutional propriety.  

This is no guarantee that 100 per cent of the time the 

government's opinions are accurate.  There are something like, 

I think, 5,000 court cases across Canada on charter of rights 

matters stemming from all kinds of pieces of legislation which 

have been introduced all over the country.  Some succeed and 

some don't succeed. 

 

All that we can do is take the position as we think is proper, 

both from a policy point of view and from a constitutional 

point of view.  And having done so, it is then for the rest of the 

events to unfold as they will in pursuit of the remedies which 

our democratic society provides. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, if indeed 

you are standing for the rights of individuals and if indeed you 

indicate that the process can proceed . . . and you also indicated 

that in light of the mandate and in light of the program the 

government is trying to follow, you felt that imperative that 

you put forward a clause.  And I can only assume it's to get this 

legislation forward and to try and interfere or withhold the right 

of individuals to at least proceed to court on the basis of the 

fact that if any court: 

 

 . . . action or proceeding against the Crown or a Crown agent, 

a court shall not consider any principle of law or in equity 

that would require adequate, reasonable or any notice with 

respect to any amendments or changes to a revenue . . . 

contract to be provided by the corporation to any party to the 

contract. 

 

It would appear to me, Mr. Premier, that there would be no 

reason for that portion of the Act or that portion to be in the 

Act if indeed we feel that the rights of individuals should . . . 

the individuals should have their right to the due day in court, 

to challenge, whether it's the government, whether it's an 

individual, whether it's a corporation.  And I believe, Mr. 

Premier, that is the main question that sits before us today. 

 

I don't believe that back on October 21, 1991, Mr. Premier, that 

when people went to the polls and they voted for your 

government, that they expected, as they cast that ballot, that 

within six to nine months they would have a government that 

would be using their majority . . . and in order to get through 

their legislative agenda would use that majority to ram through 

a controversial Bill such as the GRIP legislation to give 

overwhelming authority and support to any minister -- give 

them powers beyond what people have been normally used to 

seeing. 

 

I don't believe that when people cast that ballot that they really 

believed that this government who talked . . . this government 

and yourself as Premier, where you talked about being open, 

honest, consultative, and as you indicated even earlier on, that 

there's a process continuing regarding GRIP and regarding 

negotiations for an establishment of a firmer GRIP plan for 

1993. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

And that's one of the arguments we've presented for a period of 

time -- in fact for the number of days we've been in here, Mr. 

Premier -- is the fact that Saskatchewan made substantive 

changes when the other provinces made minor changes to firm 

up their programs, also aware of the fact that there was that 

ongoing national debate regarding the GRIP program so that 

there would be a long-term insurance program available to 

producers if they felt led to where they wanted to get involved 

in order to protect their farming operations. 

 

However, Mr. Premier, I just can't understand why you would 

decide . . . if it is appropriate for you to believe in individual 

rights, why you would write a Bill that would seem to and 

appear to interfere with the rights of individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again the 

member obviously has every right to ask any question he 

wishes.  My answer, however, has to be based on the fact that 

the answers given by my colleague, the Minister of 

Agriculture, and the Minister of Justice, have answered that in 

the course of this lengthy debate with respect to GRIP.  I can 

only repeat again that we have a different interpretation as to 

the constitutional impact of this Bill and we also believe that 

there is a need for a legislative framework for it. 

 

Now the member opposite does not accept that argument, will 

not accept that argument.  There's nothing I can do, I suspect, at 

this late stage to convince him otherwise, other than perhaps to 

throw out the additional idea that, given the fact the farmers 

have made their planting decisions already and it's now 

September around the corner, perhaps the worst of all worlds 

would be continued uncertainty. 

 

I think this is a framework which is sensible.  It's based on a 

unanimous recommendation of farmers and advisory 

committee.  It reflects, I think, improvements.  I would say that 

we need to make more improvements.  That's our rationale.  

And I can do no better, nor do I intend to get into an 

interpretation of the law, than to say what I've said.  Our 

officers say it's legal, constitutional.  Our policy decisions are 

predicated on the reasons that we've advanced.  And this may 

be . . . obviously -- not maybe -- this is obviously one area of 

many, I suspect, where we agree to disagree. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Premier, as I indicated earlier and 

certainly we've raised the question in question period, the fact 

remains, Mr. Premier, that of all people in this province, you 

and your cabinet, and you in particular as the Premier who the 

people have put their trust in, still have the ability to withhold 

proclamation of this Bill.  To refuse to withhold proclamation 

yet indicates a further act of defiance by you and your cabinet. 

 

I believe, Mr. Premier, when you were fighting for the rights, 

property rights, to have property rights included in the 

Constitution of Canada in 1982 . . . And this round of 

negotiations has again prevented property rights from being 

enshrined.  I'm wondering if it's not true that the inclusion of 

property rights would have made the case of farmers in this 

situation even stronger than the equality rights that currently 

exist under the charter. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The hon. member must know that in 

the current negotiations, property rights were never on the 

table.  So there was no suggestion by either the Prime Minister 

or by Mr. Clark or by any other provincial government that 

property rights should be on the table.  It did appear on the 

Dobbie-Beaudoin, but it never was a part of the negotiations to 

begin with. 

 

But secondly, may I say that even if it was a part of the 

negotiations, it must be clearly understood that property rights 

extended constitutionally to this measure only, namely, that if 

property, real property, land was expropriated or taken away by 

a government that appropriate compensation measures would 

be made therefore.  That was the essential extent of the 

property rights provision.  It didn't deal with contractual or 

intellectual property or personal property notions. 

 

And that is for very good reason: that all governments of all 

political stripes from time to time, whether it has to do with the 

highways or power line or a tie line or something of that nature, 

may run into a dispute with some individual and has then to 

reconcile the issue of private interest versus public policy.  And 

the idea was to guarantee the common ground by making sure 

that in the matters of real property there would be adequate 

compensation in the case of an expropriation nature. 

 

But that wasn't even on the table in this constitutional round.  

Nobody advocated that.  No provincial government advocates 

that for a whole number of reasons.  It just simply gets the 

courts into areas of social and public policy which, with the 

greatest of respect, the courts really have no business in being 

in. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, on 

June 23, '92 you said: 

 

 "I worry about contracts and all of that (this was in the Star-

Phoenix).  I mean, one has certain rights.  That's where the 

merit of the PC walkout is." 

 

Your Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Premier, was quoted on, I 

believe, it was June 17 a couple of times in the Leader-Post, 

and I'll quote from them: 

 

 Agriculture minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to the '91 GRIP contracts after March 15 

deadline would create legal problems, says members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

 But Wiens told committee members:  "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

And in that same article, it said: 

 

 Essentially, he (Wiens) didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not to be identified.  "He 

thought we could get around that (legal question). . . He said 

he would get around it somehow." 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, as a former attorney general of this 

province and as so charged to be the highest lawyer in the 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

land, if you will, do you agree with that statement of Mr. Wiens 

about when questioned about legal problems with the Bill, he 

said, well we'll get around it somehow?  Do you subscribe to 

that same type of attitude? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, nobody wishes to "get 

around" rights which are enshrined.  I do believe however that 

the member's quotation is not, with the greatest of respect, as 

fully complete and as contextual as it ought to be. 

 

As the Minister of Agriculture has pointed out himself, in the 

negotiations with the federal government on this particular 

change to 1992 GRIP, there were assurances given all around 

by the federal government people that if we had the 

prerequisite number of provinces, other "problems" or hurdles 

would pose no legal impediment.  These were the bases upon 

which the changes were made.  And in that context, one can 

see a different interpretation of the words made by the minister. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I'm sure you can read 

whatever you want into it here.  But the committee that your 

minister is always quoting, which you quoted yourself today, 

one of the members -- didn't want to be identified for obvious 

reasons -- he said he could get around it somehow. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, I'm going to pose another question to you.  

Your Minister of Agriculture, when faced with a legal problem 

to break contracts, says he'll get around it somehow.  So as the 

legal community says, he is demonstrably justified by 10 or 12 

whereas's in the front of the Bill, to get the proper 

constitutional things lined up so he doesn't have a challenge 

under the Charter.  You may be right there, he might be right; 

we may be wrong -- he's demonstrably justified in what he 

does. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Premier, what about all the people out 

there, the farmers that made contracts with bankers, with credit 

unions, with their neighbours, based on the contract that they 

signed last year, the three-year agreement?  What do you say to 

those people, Mr. Premier?  Can they demonstrably justify to 

the banker, to their neighbour, the three-year agreement to rent 

the land, the three-year lease they took on the piece of 

machinery, the 178, the mortgage that they signed because they 

were going to go out and do something based on the fact that 

their GRIP contract . . . And I'm told by the legal community 

that any time that one of those contracts is taken to court 

vis-a-vis 178 or The Exemptions Act of Saskatchewan, they 

aren't . . . it has been ruled as a contract. 

 

So what do you say, Mr. Premier, to all of those people who 

you have now broken their contract?  They have binding 

contracts with others that they can't break.  Are you saying to 

them, demonstrably justify to me and I will help you break 

those contracts that you have signed with your neighbours and 

with your banker and with your credit union?  That I'll help you 

in that? 

 

Are you going to allow them, Mr. Premier, to do as you have 

done to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I say this 

with the greatest respect to the hon. member opposite, that I 

don't accept the contextual statement in the context in which 

the hon. member casts the question.  And I also say with the 

greatest of respect, I furthermore don't accept it on the basis of 

an anonymous source. 

 

I've given, in my previous answer, the larger contextual 

statement in which I believe the comment is made upon which 

the actions are predicated.  So since your question is based on 

an assumption or a set of assumptions from which no 

responsible premier or government can act, it would be not 

helpful for me to speculate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well beyond the point, Mr. Premier, that the 

newspaper article said it, I didn't; it said, the committee 

member who asked not to be identified. 

 

Now, the media don't have to give up committee members' 

names I don't suppose, and if that's not good enough for you, 

let's just go to the straight premise here.  We have people who 

signed contracts last year -- contracts that when they are put in 

a court of law, have been demonstrated to be contracts. 

 

Under many different sections of the Bank Act, under our own 

provincial Exemptions Act, I would say that probably the Farm 

Land Security Board, the Farm Debt Review Board, mediation 

services, all of them have dealt with people who signed GRIP 

contracts, and it has been deemed a contract by a court of law. 

 

Now your minister has taken a great deal of time and effort to 

weasel his way around that.  And I asked you, what do you say 

to the hundreds and probably thousands of farm families who 

have gone out and made other commercial arrangements with 

neighbours, with businesses, with bankers -- some for one year, 

some for two years, some as long as five, that I have met who 

are locked in, who have no way out. 

 

They can't demonstrably justify with a bunch of whereas's in 

their contract with the banker on the mortgage they signed, of 

how they're going to get out of it, because you have cut their 

guarantee by up to $30 an acre.  And today they might be 

droughted out, they might be froze out, they might have a lot of 

reasons for the banker to be breathing down their neck. 

 

Now I'm asking you, Mr. Premier, are you going to give them 

the same break as you are expecting this onerous piece of 

legislation to give to your Minister of Agriculture, the same 

kind of break?  Are you going to do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I do want to be helpful 

to the hon. members in answering questions about spending 

Estimates in my department or the responsibility of my 

department. But I will also say to the hon. member opposite 

that I think it doesn't further his pursuit of facts or knowledge -- 

or for that matter, my attempt to assist him in this regard -- to 

base answers which are rooted in hypothetical situations, 

complex and myriad thereof, and with variations of it.  I will 

try to justify the best I can what we've done.  You may or may 

not accept them.  I'm not going to get into the realm of 

speculation. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

I do tell you we believe in rights, we believe in squaring as best 

as possible the circle where individual rights conflict with 

public policy rights.  Your government had to do the same 

thing, we have to do the same thing.  We do all that we can to 

try to make sure that the public policy is served in a proper and 

in a fair way. But for me to get into the realm of what I would 

say is hypothetical questioning simply would be not proper. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't accept the 

Premier's explanation, and I guess we can argue about that.  

But my experience with the Premier's Estimates in this 

Chamber over the last seven and a half years has been that all 

aspects of government, all aspects of government are open 

topics. 

 

Now I know we have a very limited time here today, very 

limited, but I'm saying to the Premier, his Minister of 

Agriculture has made, Mr. Chairman, a very, very far-ranging 

decision.  It will affect the lives of hundreds, if not thousands, 

of people.  If the Premier wants the names of Saskatchewan 

farm families who have signed other contractual arrangements 

based on 1991's GRIP contract entered into this legislature, I'm 

sure we can accommodate him in all sorts of facets. 

 

I simply ask the Premier, as a matter of policy: because these 

individuals cannot break those contracts as a course of law, will 

he extend the same privilege to them -- the protection of this 

legislature -- as he has extended to his Minister of Agriculture 

by allowing him to enter a Bill into this legislature that in three 

separate categories exempts the Minister of Agriculture from 

having to testify in court pertaining to anything to do with the 

'91 GRIP contract -- that no one can take the minister or the 

government to court in any shape or form to do with the '91 

GRIP contract. 

 

I am simply asking the Premier, as a matter of policy, the other 

people in Saskatchewan that don't have that out, will he extend 

the same privilege to them or at least commit to this legislature 

that he will engage in discussions with banks, with credit 

unions, with anyone who signed contracts with farm families as 

pertaining to the 1991 GRIP contract, now that contract is 

gone.  It is void.  It has been deemed never to have happened, 

according to the legislation -- deemed never to have happened.  

Now that there is a 1992 that has less remuneration in it than in 

the case of, as Mr. Furtan said from the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan), that in the case of drought or something like 

that, it is a disaster, will he extend the same rights to those 

Saskatchewan citizens as he has extended to his Minister of 

Agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I suppose another way 

of answering the question, as I've tried to a moment ago or so, 

is to simply say this.  We will continue to monitor the situation 

in agriculture, whether it's changes from '91 to '92 GRIP or the 

international trades war or any other aspects of this, as I'm sure 

the hon. member will, both in his personal life and in his public 

capacity life.  And we will respond to what we think is the 

most appropriate policy initiative in consequence of the 

monitoring of those situations. 

That of course will have to be announced in due course when 

and if the situation should dictate action.  I can't foresee the 

future.  All I can say to the member is what we're dealing with, 

which is the reality of the Bill.  So we'll monitor.  But to base it 

on a speculative nature, I think is not the right way in which to 

proceed in farm policy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, I assure you we 

can provide names of people who signed contracts.  Now I'm 

simply saying to you it isn't good enough to say, well we might 

deal with it in the future.  You have just passed a Bill in this 

legislature that has voided all of 1991.  It has voided it.  Says 

so in the legislation.  There was no contract. Period. It was 

void. Didn't happen. 

 

Now I'm saying to you, Mr. Premier, there were a lot of people 

out there who did things in 1991 with other institutions and 

people besides government, based on something that you have 

just voided.  I want your assurance today as a matter of policy 

that if people come forward with legitimate concerns, contracts 

that they entered into because of something you've voided, that 

you will give it the highest priority, that you will extend to 

them the same consideration that you have extended to the 

Minister of Agriculture saying that that minister does not have 

to appear in a court of law in Saskatchewan to defend his 

actions in voiding, in voiding 1991's contract.  He does not 

have to appear before a judge and 12 of his peers because of 

the legislation that you've accorded him.  Will you accord other 

Saskatchewan people the same rights? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't want to 

be unduly provocative or argumentative, but I would invite the 

hon. member to carefully consider his suggestion from at least 

another point of view.  As I understand the opposition, their 

position in principle is that the voiding of contracts is wrong.  

And the member from Thunder Creek now is in effect 

advocating that we should be voiding more contracts. 

 

I understand, putting his argument in the best light, that he 

would say that it's as a consequence of the initial Bill which he 

would object.  But I think a question of whether or not in his 

mind one wrong should be compounded by yet other wrongs, I 

think that there is a bit of a contradiction in policy.  I don't 

mean to say this by way of inflammatory remarks, but I think 

that that is an important consideration. 

 

But leaving that aside, the substance of the hon. member's 

question, as I read it, I will interpret it this way.  Will we 

monitor, will we receive submissions from you and from farm 

organizations and farm groups, and to take what steps are 

necessary to assist the farm situation in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  The answer to that is obviously yes. 

 

Governments here, given the crisis that we have in farming, 

have got to be doing that on an ongoing basis.  And the very 

fact that the Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan 

together with Mr. McKnight are in Melfort meeting with the 

farmers, listening, is indicative and confirmation of our desire 

to be of assistance if -- a very 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

big word -- if appropriate forms of assistance can be 

uncovered. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, the Minister of 

Agriculture revealed to us in his Estimates the other day that 

under the 1991 GRIP contract that there were three individuals 

who had sought redress through the courts as pertaining to their 

'91 contract.  When asked if he was going to also void those 

particular legal actions, he was somewhat evasive. 

 

I find it strange, Mr. Premier, that the minister wouldn't be 

more definitive.  I mean under the '91 contract obviously 

farmers had the right to take the government to court, that that 

legal guarantee was in there.  In '92 that guarantee has been 

extinguished. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, it would be appropriate that 

the three individuals, as identified by the Minister of 

Agriculture, who sued under '91, who have sought redress 

through Queen's Bench, should have the right to continue on 

those actions.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you would 

give us some indication today about whether you support that 

or don't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again I repeat I want to 

be helpful to what I think is a tough and important series of 

questions.  But I also want to say that I would want to take full 

legal advice before making any commitments -- for obvious 

reasons. 

 

I would say -- I'll stop on that point -- I would say 

parenthetically that what we had in the '91 situation in effect 

were 50,000 or whatever the numbers were of "arrangements" 

or "contracts" -- I'm putting these words in quotation marks -- 

without admitting them to be the case.  There was no 

legislative underpinnings here, and therefore the consequence 

is a lot of interpretation, individual interpretations, in cases of 

disputes.  This is very difficult, not only for the "contractee" 

but the "contractors" -- again in quotation marks. 

 

The '92 legislation not only reflects the unanimous -- in the 

essence of the Bill in any event -- recommendations to the 

advisory farm group, it puts the legislative framework and also 

puts a logical starting point for the ground rules for judicial 

interpretation or judicial action if individual members should . . 

. or people should decide to take it. 

 

I think that that is a desirable step forward as a matter of public 

policy.  I know that the opposition does not share that view.  I 

also say that the fact that we have progressed so far down the 

line in a crop year -- let's hope that we can get this crop off; 

that of course is the wish of all Saskatchewan people -- we can 

take assessment of the situation, the whole situation, in family 

farm and agricultural matters at the appropriate time. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. McKnight, is in Melfort.  Let 

us play all of this out and see how it develops. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Premier, as we were in this House 

debating the agricultural Estimates, and certainly the last two, 

three days specifically on the GRIP question and a number of 

questions were placed to the Minister of 

Agriculture and there was no doubt that the Minister of 

Agriculture was being more political rather than . . . and vague 

in his comments, rather than being up front. 

 

And the appearance appeared to me, Mr. Premier, and I'm sure 

to my colleagues, that the bottom line of the '92 GRIP program 

was based solely on the Finance minister's observation that the 

fact that he had inflated his deficit for the 1991 year, that he 

was looking for a way to get around and drop the 1992 deficit 

and bring it in line with what you and your party had proposed 

and talked about the fact that you would be trying to address 

the deficit situation.  We all agree that it's something we must 

work at. 

 

But what we're suggesting and what we're asking of you, Mr. 

Premier, is the fact that why should the deficit of this province 

be put on the shoulders of individuals who have been 

struggling for the last period of, number of, years, under 

circumstances beyond their control, prices of a product that 

they have no control over, weather elements that they had no 

control over? 

 

And the 1991 program . . . As one producer indicated, his 

bottom line was he knew when he went and talked to the crop 

insurance agent that on his particular farm for each crop that he 

was growing, whether it was $90 an acre, that was the bottom 

line, if he fell below that it would kick in, there would be a 

pay-out, or it was 110, or it was 140, depending on the crop 

and the price and his individual yield.  Whereas the '92 

program dropped that bottom line. 

 

In fact a producer doesn't really know where the bottom line is 

because . . . The Minister of Agriculture was trying to tell us he 

could tell you today, but I don't know if the Minister of 

Agriculture has that good a crystal ball that he could tell us 

what the price of grain is going to be come July 31, 1993, so 

that indeed he could tell a producer today what his bottom line 

is even though it may be 30 or $40 less than what the 1991 

program produced. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Premier, with the 1991 program, the fact is 

that even with the crop that we're looking at . . . and God forbid 

that we should have a severe frost tonight as a number of 

people have already been affected by frost, but if there is a 

substantial reduction, that 1991 program and the difference is 

going to play a very significant factor in the economic activity 

across this province, not just for farmers trying to stay afloat or 

for farmers having difficulty in their operations, but for 

individuals in rural Saskatchewan.  And what's been 

happening, Mr. Premier, is it just seems to be and appears to be 

an all-out attack against rural Saskatchewan for the way they've 

voted over the last number of years. 

 

And I find as I quote . . . or I believe in the leaders' debate you 

were quoted as saying the premium rates and GRIP rates are 

high.  The premium rates are unacceptable and I've been 

getting all kinds of notices by farmers where the premiums 

indicated higher than the cash advance. 
 

And what we're seeing, Mr. Premier, is the fact that yes, most 

people are now looking at their GRIP '92 and they may have 

been complaining about premiums before, but certainly they're 

complaining about premiums today -- they're much higher and 

the guarantee is much less. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

And as we found over the last three, four, five, well even six . . 

. three months the Minister of Agriculture hasn't been willing to 

even look at the program and address the inconsistencies in the 

program. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Premier, we're asking . . . As the Premier of 

this province, as the sole individual responsible, as the leading 

minister in this province, you've given . . . at least prior to the 

election, you gave an assurance that you would certainly work 

for all Saskatchewan residents; you would try to strengthen our 

Saskatchewan base, our rural communities, and our economy.  

Mr. Premier, what we see and what we have to ask, is where is 

that support today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I wish to 

say that the premise of the question I cannot accept.  The 

premise of the question is that somehow any government 

would attack a particular sector or segment of Saskatchewan 

people.  I mean that's not a correct premise about any political 

party. 

 

And it's not even logical -- I say this with the greatest of respect 

to the hon. member -- because having won as many seats as we 

have in rural Saskatchewan, if anything, our motivation would 

be to make sure that we kept that political base, let alone doing 

what's right for the farmers.  I mean, that's exactly what it's all 

about.  Point number one. 

 

Point number two, as you know, we took the same advisory 

committee which implemented the original '91 GRIP.  And in 

taking that advisory committee, took their recommended 

changes.  And essentially they had a number of concerns, but 

they had two or three. 

 

They wanted the program changed so that decisions would be 

based on market-oriented decisions.  The administration -- you 

remember all the arguments about the bin police and the like, I 

don't want to get into that -- they believed that that was very 

important.  And we also campaigned on the larger perspective, 

namely, the larger perspective being the matter of getting the 

plan into a cost-of-production basis down the road, which we're 

still working for. 

 

You say, what happens if there is a frost?  I say the answer here 

is third line of defence.  The way I read the third line of 

defence program and that 1990 ministers of agricultures' 

document, which the Leader of the Opposition is a signatory, 

this is a classic call for assistance in case of whether it's 

drought or frost or wheat midge or whatever.  It's a crop 

disaster.  It's third line.  That's exactly what the words are.  I've 

written to the Prime Minister to that effect.  And this is where 

we should be stressing our efforts. 

 

May I say one final word with respect to the deficit.  I will not 

get on to the business of deficit creation, but at the end of the 

day the deficit is us -- all of us.  It's small-business people; it's 

working people; it's farming people.  That's the deficit we 

carry.  And we carry an agriculture situation which sees our 

share of farm programs rise since '88, of this kind of nature, 

from zero per cent to 41 per cent total costs, and the federal 

government's fall from 100 per cent 

to 59 per cent. 

 

Now you couple that with all of the other financial difficulties 

that we have.  Of course all government programs are 

considered in that light.  But the motivation here was not on 

any deficit.  The motivation was based on the motivation 

stemming from the campaign and on the advisory committee's 

reports. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Premier, you talked about the fact that 

your committee recommended that there be substantive 

changes, and no doubt.  And we're aware of the fact that the 

committee that was appointed, and a number of the members 

that compose that committee, were appointed prior to October.  

And then the Minister of Agriculture . . . and I guess we must 

commend you for at least allowing some of the members to 

continue to serve, but a few more members were added to the 

committee. 

 

And I would also like to inform you that SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), through their 

representative, sent a letter to the minister because they were 

very aware of the problems that we would be facing today, and 

that was back, back I believe in February.  And they indicated 

to the Minister of Agriculture at that time that the government 

should not proceed with substantive changes to the program 

because it would create a real problem in rural Saskatchewan in 

being able to understand the program. 

 

And in light of the fact that the federal government is going to 

be . . . and the province, I believe all the provinces will be 

sitting down and I trust they're even sitting down now, so that 

when revisions are made to the program come the spring of 

1993, those revisions are actually made and solidified by the 

first of the year so that Crop Insurance then has the appropriate 

time to inform producers and get some producer input prior to 

the period of time when producer . . . I believe it's the end of . . 

. or March 15 or April 30 -- so that producers have the 

information well in advance and can make the appropriate 

decisions. 

 

Also, Mr. Premier, you talked about the fact that we had bin 

police.  And talked about with the new program you won't need 

bin police.  I just want to inform you, sir, that a week ago I had 

an individual call and asked if he could come and measure my 

bins.  Well I don't know if that's bin police or what it is.  And I 

don't mind that, Mr. Premier.  I think there are many people out 

there . . . especially in light of the fact that last year we had a 

fairly decent crop in our area and some producers are going to 

have a carry-over, at least some carry-over, of last year's 

production.  And any time there's a carry-over, it can create a 

problem when you get into the new crop year.  And most 

producers aren't in a situation where they can have the type of 

bin storage that they can put all their last year's storage in one 

bin and not have half a bin of grain sitting there that they don't 

want to dump some new grain on in case it distorts their 

figures.  So I don't have a problem with that, but I think, Mr. 

Premier, rather than just accusing the former government of 

having individuals running around to measure bins, I think that 

is part of insurance program, having individuals . . . 

 

(1545) 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

I think most farmers welcome people who come around to 

measure their bins to verify their production so that there aren't 

any questions by the corporation or by anyone regarding 

whether or not an individual has been open and honest with the 

Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

So I would strongly ascertain, sir, that there are many 

individuals today who just feel that the concerns they raised 

went on deaf ears, that they weren't being heard.  And I 

sincerely believe that even this afternoon the Minister of 

Agriculture, no doubt the federal minister, will have a lot of 

people telling them that they weren't listening very closely.  

And certainly any time elected representatives come out with 

suggestions and decide to change programs or come out with 

programs, we're up for a challenge.  We'll face a challenge at 

all times; there's no doubt about that.  We're not going to be 

able to . . . I don't think you can design the perfect program.  

And I can't.  I haven't got the ability to design the perfect 

program. 

 

But at the stage in which this program was brought forward, I 

sincerely believe that if the government even would have taken 

the one suggestion and given producers the ability to choose 

either a '91 or '92, that we wouldn't be sitting here continually 

debating the GRIP question. 

 

The third thing, Mr. Premier, is this idea of looking to the 

federal government for the third line of defence.  Now we're 

aware of the fact that there was a process in place.  And the 

Government of Canada said if we follow the process with the 

overall, broad-based support program, or GRIP, then a third 

line of defence, if needed, would be available.  But they put it 

in there so that it was there in a case of an emergency. 

 

But I would also suggest we can argue in Saskatchewan that it's 

the federal government's responsibility because as a 

government in Saskatchewan we don't want to put ourselves 

deeper in debt or we don't want to take the responsibility of 

protecting the people that we serve.  And yet at the same time 

whenever the federal government comes up with a payment, 

the federal government has . . . their money tree is just as bare 

as the province of Saskatchewan.  And when they add to their 

deficit, it's an added deficit that falls on the shoulders of people 

in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

So I don't think it fair, Mr. Premier, to always look at the 

federal government and always putting the responsibility at 

their feet.  Because I believe when you look at it, the 1991 

program with its flaws still gave a pretty sound and reasonable 

insurance program that producers could carry; that in a lot of 

cases, would have eliminated even the need for a revenue 

insurance program . . . or for a third line of defence because 

they were guaranteeing a revenue portion as well as the crop 

insurance component. 

 

I wonder if the Premier would respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, my response is 

as follows, that I think some of the suggestions made by the 

hon. member are well taken.  I think the need 

to have timeliness in any agricultural program, or particularly, 

changes to agriculture program is beyond refutation.  You 

cannot refute that.  That's exactly what should take place. 

 

And we're hoping that this fall, early this fall, learning from the 

situation as it evolves and getting the advice of the community 

at large, that there will be timely proposals being advanced.  

And we also hope to work with the federal government in 

having a successful resolution to our differences. 

 

I would simply say, in defence, that the old advisory 

committee, if I may put it that way, was the same one that the 

former premier, the Leader of the Opposition, had.  There were 

just some new . . . very few additions, who, by the way, 

dissented saying that we should've gone more in the direction 

of the '92 GRIP changes.  And they had over 300 written and 

oral submissions from November to February.  All of them, all 

of these submissions were geared toward changes in the way in 

which the unanimous report submitted it. 

 

Finally, on the question of whose responsibility is it to fund, I 

repeat again, we have a major problem in the province of 

Saskatchewan and there is a question of availability of cash for 

us.  I mean we are under criticism from you people if we 

increase taxes.  We're under criticism from you people if we 

cut back on programs.  We're under criticism from the banking 

institutions by virtue of the large debt which we've inherited 

and how to manage it. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the farmers of this country 

produce food for all of Canada and the treasury should come 

from all of Canada.  The federal government has a AAA rating.  

It has sources of tax revenues that I do not have . . . we do not 

have.  We provide inexpensive food -- some call it cheap food 

-- for the people in Montreal and Toronto. 

 

They should be assisting us as we assist them in providing, 

through production, the high-quality farm produce that we do.  

I think the responsibility is primarily one of the federal 

government's. 

 

And may I add in closing, this was the unanimous conclusion, 

including the Prime Minister's conclusion, in March of 1992 

when the Prime Minister and all the premiers met to talk about 

the economy.  That was the unanimous conclusion. 

 

So I don't see how it could be suggested, with the greatest of 

respect, by a politician in Saskatchewan, given our fiscal 

position, that when every other premier and even the Prime 

Minister concurs that the principle should be as I've said, why 

it should be the position of the official opposition that 

somehow we should ignore that and find money in this 

jurisdiction, given the strait-jacket in which we have been 

placed. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, in 

question period today there was a lot of heckling going back 

and forth and what not, and I know you felt maybe a little 

insulted by me when I was hollering at the member from Quill 

Lakes about we only get two 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

hours.  And I do understand that you've been a busy man, and I 

just want to say that to you.  And if you thought that I meant 

that you should have been here, there's no way did I mean that, 

Mr. Premier. 

 

It's just that we were told that maybe we're only going to get 

the rest of the day if we're happen . . . they're going to be 

closing this House down.  And I understand that.  Just so we 

know how to kind of go about our questions here, Mr. Premier, 

are you going to be available after 5 o'clock, or will you be 

here tonight for Estimates from 7 to 11?  Or are we through at 

5 o'clock with you, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I believe the House Leader would be 

in best position to answer that, but the belief that I have is that 

we'd be prepared to stop the clock at 5:30 or 6, keeping in mind 

that most of the premiers, many of them, especially from this 

part of the world, are leaving tomorrow for P.E.I. (Prince 

Edward Island).  I have commitments, as it so turns out, in 

Saskatoon.  But that's another issue. 

 

So I'm hoping to be as expeditious and as non-political in my 

answers as I can be and to give you people as much time as you 

can in getting the questions done. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- It's not possible for you to come back for a 

few hours tonight?  Is that what you're saying?  Even not till 11 

-- even 7 till 10?  Is that possible?  Because that was kind of 

left open, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, to us.  If it's impossible, 

it's impossible.  I understand that. 

 

And we hadn't . . . I see on the agenda where it said your 

Estimates from 2:45 to 6 o'clock.  Well with a lot of our 

members out to Melfort it's going to be kind of tough for us to 

have a . . . we got to have a little supper hour.  And that's all 

right if we knew you were going to be back for a while tonight.  

If not, we'll have to do the best we can.  And if the House is 

still open when you get back, that's all we can do about it.  We 

can't do anything about it. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I understand, and I give 

the Premier full credit that he's doing as good as he can do 

under the heavy agenda that he's got; I understand that.  But I 

also want you to understand that we do believe, on this side of 

the House, that your government has run amok while you've 

been gone.  Maybe that's not really a good word to say.  To me 

it's been a sham.  We haven't been able to get answers.  We've 

had more direct answers without political rhetoric from you, 

than we've had most of your ministers through Estimates so far. 

 

We started out back in Estimates, Mr. Premier . . . I've had . . . 

two of my Estimates were with the member from Churchill 

Downs.  And we weren't getting any place for a couple of days, 

and then finally we were the ones between us, drew up this 

here pre-questions that we could send to the ministers.  And 

actually it has helped a lot. 

 

When I deal with the Minister of Social Services, and three 

weeks in advance I had all the answers; so we could peruse 

through them, Mr. Premier, to see if these were answered right, 

and then we could ask a few questions on the answers. 

Now I see these questions and answers that came from you 

today; and I understand that naturally you as head of Executive 

Council would naturally want to go through and that's why 

there'll be a delay on your questioning again.  And I fully 

understand that.  But I see on the questions that we asked you 

to provide, there's questions 1 and 2; and under the column of 

2, there's (a) to (k) and there was just . . . we didn't get any of 

those answers.  I was wondering why we didn't get answers 

from (a) to (k) under that paper. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll have to get the member to identify 

more precisely what questions he's referring to.  You're talking 

about 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 1(d)?  Are those the questions that the 

hon. member is talking about? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- While I go on to some other questions, Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Premier, I'll just send over this list here.  I'll 

send it over.  It's the only copy I have, but you can look at it 

and I'll ask you some other questions while you're . . . so for a 

time here we can move on to something else; and then you can 

come back with that.  Just to help with time.  They can go 

through that and they'll see for themselves. 

 

Mr. Premier, you can understand why we're a little 

disappointed in the actions of the government.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Premier, you can understand why we're a little 

disappointed.  This has been 9 to 10 months since election 

time, and we feel that the election promises that you made out 

there, that . . . and we know that every premier tries to do what 

they can, the best they can to live up to election promises.  But 

we do feel that, Mr. Premier, you've fallen a way short on the 

promises you made. 

 

Now there's one promise that you made out there that I do 

believe that your ministers are trying to keep, and that's a 

balanced budget.  I think people want a balanced budget.  But 

it's on whose backs is this budget going to be balanced?  

Because you also said and you . . . I have a list of quotes that 

you said right here.  I've got a list of quotes that you said, Mr. 

Premier, at the premiers' debate, and these are direct quotes 

from you. 

 

And you've said that you want a balanced budget.  You said, 

speaking throughout the province, that there would be no 

increased taxes and all the different things you would do.  And 

since the election we've had an increase every place you can 

think of -- in the Department of Health we've had tax increases; 

you said the 7 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) tax would be 

gone, but we got an 8 per cent E&H (education and health) tax. 

 

That's kind of playing games with the people out there, at least 

I feel, Mr. Premier.  I know you're not . . . you're going to come 

back . . . But I want you to explain that in your words, not your 

ministers with all their rhetoric, because you may have a 

logical reason for that.  And I want it on the record, what you 

say, Mr. Premier, why the 7 per cent PST is gone and then we 

have an 8 per cent E&H tax now. We had a 1 per cent increase 

totally in the end.  But the people felt out there that it was 

going to be gone. 

 

Now I don't say that you yourself misrepresented the people, 

but I feel that the party did because it was 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

definitely in my riding that it was going to be gone.  I'd just like 

your response on that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the question's a 

fair enough question.  Harmonization, as the hon. member 

knows, being a member of the former government, meant that 

the GST at 7 per cent and its tax base, represented by my hand 

here, would have to be overlapped with the 7 per cent 

provincial sales tax in its totality, equalling 14 per cent. 

 

There was no way that we could overlap a portion but say 

exclude under the provincial jurisdiction some elements in the 

interests of the province -- books, restaurant meals, children's 

clothing; one could go on.  That's one of the failings of the 

GST.  You have to either be lock-stepped right into the federal 

plan . . . which, by the way, could be expanded, the tax base or 

even the rate.  The federal government could increase the rate 

from 7 to 8 to 9, which has been the history, which would be 

beyond then the capacity of this legislature to do anything 

about. 

 

(1600) 

 

And we looked at that and we said that the new taxation areas, 

the fields of taxation, were going to harm the economy.  And 

so rather than to harmonize it, we said no harmonization.  Keep 

the provincial sales tax the way it is and keep the engines of the 

economy, such as they are, going for as long as they can go.  

And that is what we represented when we said the no 

harmonization of the PST, that was our line. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier.  I don't intend 

to get into a long debate on you on GST (goods and services 

tax) and harmonization.  But all I know is what the people 

know out there.  The GST put a 7 per cent increase.  But we 

also know that it wasn't the government that done the gouging 

to the people on the GST.  GST had a manufacturing tax; there 

always was a hidden tax there of 12 to 13 to 18 per cent. 

 

And I've talked to many, many manufacturers and companies 

and what not and that 12 to 18 per cent did lower. It went right 

down.  It came off, and then there was a 7 per cent GST come 

on.  But what happened just in while that was happening, the 

increases . . . Because we run a shop on our farm where we buy 

wholesale from many companies.  And, Mr. Premier, just so 

we have it straight, who really gouged the people was almost 

every company in North America that was selling to Canada, 

they started increasing their costs.  So it didn't . . . was no 

saving to the individuals in the province of Saskatchewan 

because they were paying the GST.  They had it lowered 12 to 

18 per cent; then it went right back up the same amount. 

 

But the thing is, in Saskatchewan right now as far as the people 

are concerned, they were paying before.  They were paying 7 

per cent GST, 7 per cent PST.  Now tell me, Mr. Premier, what 

exactly are they paying now?  What is the exact tax, between 

GST and E&H that the people are paying now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I mean the hon. member clearly 

knows what those tax rates are.  I'm not trying to 

provoke him or be offensive, but that's common knowledge. 

 

I want to make one point in response to the first part of his 

question which I think is important and it's a matter of, I think, 

direction as well.  The harmonization of the GST and the PST 

had what I call the kickback provision for manufacturing and 

the like which was liked by some manufacturing groups.  The 

problem was and is, in my judgement, that it's a very blunt 

taxation instrument.  Everybody gets this return back for the 

provincial inputs. 

 

We think a better way for rebating the cost of doing business 

provincially through provincial tax, would be through selected 

programs of assistance.  For example, the changes that we 

announced in the budget the Minister of Finance tabled here, 

which is a subject for debate, provides for a form of assistance 

which permitted, in the case of IPSCO just a few days ago, the 

announcement of their expansion, one of their major 

expansions. 

 

This was a targeted approach.  We think that is what is required 

here -- not a shotgun approach but a targeted approach.  And 

once we get the constitution behind us, I'd like to see us as 

Canadians looking at a more sensitive and more fair taxation 

policy which not only is based on ability to pay -- those who 

have the money should pay -- but is also based on things like 

stimulation of the creation of wealth.  I think that is one of the 

failings of the harmonization proposal. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, that piece 

of paper I sent over, are you through with it now?  Because that 

was our . . . some of our notes was on that.  I just give it to you 

to look at and we did want it . . . Whenever you're . . . just 

whenever you're through looking at it and have some answers 

on it.  We just need it back but there's no hurry.  Maybe you 

have some reasons you can respond on that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I have it here.  If I don't . . . it's got 

some extra markings on it -- no secret government plans 

revealed -- but they're just by our officials here. 

 

I'm advised that the answer given in part 2, namely the one that 

you're concerned about, quote, the information requested in (a) 

through (k) cannot be provided as requested due to the privacy 

provisions, is the same answer which we've provided in similar 

questions, I'm advised -- for example, in the Department of 

Social Services Estimates -- based on Justice opinions 

pertaining to legal implications surrounding the various matters 

of dismissals, etc. 

 

We have attached names, none the less, to give you the first 

part of the answer, which has been a consistent approach there.  

So it is a question of the legal advice which we give by the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

I'll ask the page to return the question.  And make sure there's 

no secret government plan here. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, the only 

thing is that we just didn't get the answers from the Executive 

Council because all . . . on those from (a) to (k) we didn't get 

those answers in all the departments we 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

have.  So if all of the departments can answer those, we do 

want those.  I'm asking you if you'll supply all those from (a) to 

(k). 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will undertake 

as an undertaking -- I'll ask the officials to make a note of this 

-- if it can be done, we will do this and provide it to you in 

writing in the next few days or after the House arises. 

 

But I am also advised by the officials, who could be in error, 

that the answer here has been consistent in other departments.  

I don't know if that's the case or not.  I can check into it and 

provide the written answer in due course. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, just on that point to the 

Premier.  There is a question of (f) here where it deals with the 

employment qualifications including education and most recent 

incumbent.  The deputy minister of . . . or the Associate 

Minister of Finance pointed out to us in his Estimates that it 

might be inappropriate because if a person had a criminal 

record or some such thing and that would be indicated in there, 

and it would be inappropriate for this legislature to discuss 

something like that.  And therefore on (f) we agree that your 

legal counsel is probably correct because we wouldn't want to 

infringe.  The associate minister pointed that out to us, we 

agree.  But in all of these other ones, your other ministers have 

provided the information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well I will undertake to the hon. 

member to ask publicly -- as I'm doing here again -- my law 

officers, our officers and our officials, to see why it is that we 

cannot comply with your request.  I'm sorry I do not have a 

better answer for you today because I'm advised that that is the 

answer occasioned by all the departments for the legal reasons 

stated.  But I will ask them to review it and to see if they can 

provide it to you in writing.  And if not, we'll give you a 

communication as to why not. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Premier, we'll accept that. 

 

I want to ask you, I've got a series of a few GRIP questions, 

concerning GRIP, that I asked your minister over and over 

again that I couldn't get answers for.  And they're questions that 

I think that you can answer because they're nothing that's 

talking about the actual GRIP for '91 or '92; it's just about other 

things. 

 

But first I want to ask you why, Mr. Premier, since the election, 

why did you -- as far as I'm concerned -- break an election 

promise.  And you've put increases to SaskPower, SaskTel, 

energy, personal income tax, and extra costs in Department of 

Health -- all things that you said at election time you wouldn't 

do.  I'd like to have on all those increases . . . You know them 

all, Mr. Premier, and to save time, there's no sense asking them 

all individually.  There's a whole bunch of things that's 

happened there.  I'd like to know why you as the Premier of the 

province, why you did do all those things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we have 

discussed this before, and I will again in the interests of time 

and also because I don't think it helps much in an 

exchange for information, but just simply allow me, hon. 

member from Arm River, you and I have been in this House for 

a little bit of time and I have to get one of my little licks back 

in again. 

 

I could go down the election promises of 1982: remove the 

sales tax on gasoline, cut provincial income tax by 10 per cent, 

and so forth and so forth, putting an immediate freeze on utility 

rates.  And a lot of these have not come about.  But as I say, it's 

not productive, so just forget it.  Don't be provoked by it.  I put 

that water under the bridge. 

 

But I do want to say this in the more substantive approach.  

This was our campaign platform.  We called it, "Let's do it . . . 

The Saskatchewan Way", and if I have an extra copy I'd be 

pleased to send it over to the member.  Our promises were as 

follows:  First Things First -- open up the books, 

comprehensive review, etc.  New Directions, New Priorities -- 

jobs, fair taxes, and wealth creation. 

 

Our next promise was a better quality of life. 

 

Our next promise was fighting for agriculture and rural 

communities, third line of defence, negotiate improvements to 

GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization account).  We might 

not have -- in your judgement.  In our judgement, we are 

moving in this regard.  Work with farm programs to redesign 

debt restructuring . . . Actually if you take a look at this 

platform card, much of what we've promised has already been 

accomplished in our first term.  We may disagree 

philosophically and practically as to the consequences of it. 

 

Now that was our card.  And the open-the-books thing was 

very important because we wanted to know upon what facts we 

could or couldn't make our budgetary decisions, whether it 

would be Crown corporations or on our taxes. 

 

And that is our promise.  And I don't think we misled anybody 

in this regard.  That is the platform card.  That is what was 

around in every committee campaign rooms. 

 

Now again I don't want to say this in a provocative way, but we 

know that when we opened up the books, this was the 

budgetary situation.  And now we had to make choices.  And if 

the fundamental choice was to work to balance the budget, you 

know we did a marvellous thing here.  I know it's in this 

context only -- I'm only speaking about balancing the budget, 

member of Arm River -- again I don't say this argumentatively, 

but I think your researchers will confirm this.  Over the last 

previous nine years the average percentage increase in 

expenditures, on average, was 6 per cent.  This year we made it 

minus 3 per cent.  That's a turnaround of 9 per cent. 

 

If we did not have the interest charges on the public debt to 

contend with -- $750 million, third-highest yearly expenditure 

-- we would have had a surplus on our budget this year of $220 

million. 

 

Now we have to take that kind of action because the arithmetic 

of the size of the debt will work against us through the magic 

of compound interest.  We may never get out of this debt 

unless we turn this ship around. 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Well we found that out when we did the first things first -- 

open up the books.  And that's the basis. 

 

So I don't agree with you that we "broke promises".  I say that 

we have maintained our promises. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, yes I would 

appreciate a copy of that.  You must have lots of those.  So if 

that was a public document, we'd like to have one. 

 

Yes, I don't agree with you that you lived up to all those 

promises on there.  In fact I couldn't hear any of them that I 

think that you did.  It doesn't work together with what you said 

in the premiers' debate, Mr. Premier.  I mean here's your quote 

right here:  we'll ease the tax burden.  We'll ease it. 

 

Now that's a straight, broken promise because what's 

happened?  The taxes have increased -- personal income tax 

has gone up, taxes on essential services has gone up.  You've 

just raised every place you could.  I mean it costs more. 

 

The next statement: a concerned war on poverty.  When 

everybody's got an increase, Mr. Premier, everybody in this 

province has got an increase some place, that doesn't ease 

poverty, does it?  You'll just never ever be able to convince the 

people of Saskatchewan, convince me -- and I know you'll get 

up and try, Mr. Premier, but you can't -- when you said here at 

the premiers' debate:  we will ease the burden for ordinary 

families and kick-start our economy.  Well you went the 

opposite.  You made the burden harder.  The debt was 3.2 

billion, you said it here for the Crown corp; now it's 14.2 

billion. 

 

We'll never put politics before people.  And if you think it's not 

putting politics before people when we're playing this here 

game in the GRIP we're playing here . . . because, Mr. Premier, 

that has been the worst game I've ever seen since I've been a 

politician for 15 years.  Your ministers or your Minister of 

Agriculture has made a blunder on this GRIP Bill.  I've had 

some of your members opposite tell me that yes, we've made a 

blunder.  Now either he made a blunder or else he's a sacrificial 

lamb, that maybe the orders came from you or the Minister of 

Finance that we cannot afford this expensive GRIP, 1991 

GRIP.  I think that maybe you've even said it yourself, that it 

was an expensive program.  I know the Minister of Finance 

said it's too expensive; it's too rich.  Well that's cutting back. 

 

That's not saying that the promise you made at election time 

that we're going to improve the GRIP Bill . . . There's not one 

farmer in Saskatchewan that will say we didn't want the GRIP 

Bill improved.  If you improved '92 over '91, they'll want to 

improve '93 over '92.  Everybody wants it improved.  I wanted 

to see the 1991 GRIP Bill, but I don't believe yourself, Mr. 

Premier, that you really understand what the 1991 GRIP was 

designed for. 

 

(1615) 

 

It's because of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade) agreements and the guaranteed price of grain 

through Europe and the United States, that we decided in 

Canada, the Canadians decided . . . there's a lot of people, 

including people in Department of Agriculture, in your 

Department of Agriculture now that are still the same people 

that put the '91 GRIP together and the '92 GRIP together.  

There was a lot of smart people worked on that '91 GRIP.  And 

it was to make a guaranteed income. 
 

Now maybe Saskatchewan can say we can't afford that 

guaranteed income.  But, Mr. Premier, I had a debate here for 

-- I spoke 13 hours totally on this GRIP in this House, one way 

and another, in all different, in first, second readings, 

Committee of the Whole, and on the closure debates -- 13 

hours pertaining to GRIP.  And all we get out of the Minister of 

Agriculture is that the people . . . we promised them 

improvement on GRIP. 
 

Well all that the '92 . . . I wonder if you understand, Mr. 

Premier, that the '92 GRIP is nothing else but a gamble on the 

price of grain.  I wonder if you understand that.  They took the 

old crop insurance back the way it was.  Okay.  And the crop 

insurance is the same as before.  They tried to say, your 

ministers tried to say that oh, it's got 80 per cent coverage now.  

Well it always had, for years had 80 per cent coverage.  It 

started out with the choice of 60 to 70 per cent coverage, and 

then it moved down to 50, up to 80.  You got that choice, so 

that's fine. 
 

But don't go out and fool the people that '92 GRIP is nothing 

but the price of grain . . . based on the price of grain.  If the 

price of grain goes over $4 a bushel, there is not going to be a 

dollar for the Saskatchewan farmer.  It's nothing to do with 

helping anybody whatsoever if they get a poor crop.  You 

designed your program so if there's a good crop, the farmers 

will get a good crop plus the payment on GRIP if the price of 

wheat's below $4.  But if there's no crop, he'll get his GRIP 

payment the same thing.  He'll get the same money whether 

there's zero bushels to the acre or whether he gets 50 bushels to 

the acre. 
 

You don't have to be a farmer, Mr. Premier, to understand that.  

On the GRIP payment if you get zero bushels to the acre or 

whether you get 50, if you get 20 bushels to the acre canola -- 

you can grow in my area, you can grow oats, wheat, barley, 

canola -- you get the same price all the way through.  It's the 

biggest socialist program that I've ever known.  Everybody gets 

the same. 
 

And we talked about moral hazards.  We went through moral 

hazards with your minister, and he couldn't come up with what 

the moral hazards were for the 1991 GRIP.  He was not able to 

answer them.  So the 1991 GRIP was put together to see that 

there was going to be guaranteed, bankable, bankable funds for 

the farmer. 
 

Mr. Premier, if you just understand the seriousness of it, that 

there's thousands of farmers a year ago were dealing at the 

Farm Debt Review Board, Farm Land Security Board, 

Mediation Services, and they had no place to go for funds.  

They were trying to put deals together; they were trying to save 

their farms; they were trying to save their tractor; they were 

trying to get operating money.  And they just couldn't seem to 

put the deal together. 
 

And literally thousands of farmers, through the board --  



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

you can get the information from the Department of Justice 

which Mediation Services is under, and Farm Land Security 

Board -- as soon as the '91 GRIP was put together, there's a 

guarantee for a farmer: I'm going to either get $90 an acre or 

150; some of the farmers in the Regina plains got up as high as 

two and a quarter.  They knew what they had coming so they 

can make a budget. 

 

Now many farmers this summer, Mr. Premier, have gone 

bankrupt because of the '92 GRIP, because they folded because 

there's no guarantee and the lenders dropped them.  We just got 

the figures here and we give them to your Minister of 

Agriculture, with no response, that the first six months in 1992, 

the bankruptcies in Canada, that 50 per cent of them were right 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we're not in government; you're in government and 50 per 

cent of the bankruptcies happened right here in Saskatchewan.  

Now that's not helping farmers.  You promised to help farmers.  

You made that promise in town after town.  You made it in 

Outlook, Saskatchewan -- I promise to balance the budget, hold 

or lower taxes, hold or lower essential services, create jobs, go 

to Ottawa and get money for farmers.  And, Mr. Premier, that 

has not happened.  And I know that it's a tough thing to make it 

happen. 

 

And all we hear from your Minister of Agriculture is this same 

rhetoric: let's get the third line of defence out of Ottawa.  Well 

the third line of defence was absolutely the 1991 GRIP.  We've 

just thrown away perhaps a half a billion to 6, $700 million on 

the 1991 GRIP. 

 

If it freezes tonight in all Saskatchewan -- and I sure hope and 

pray that it doesn't happen, and I know the Premier believes the 

same thing as us; we don't want hardship for farmers more than 

we got now -- it could, under the '91 GRIP, it could have gone 

up to a billion and a half coverages more than what they're 

going to get now.  The 1992 GRIP is not going to pay off for 

farmers. 

 

So it comes back that the reason why your Minister of 

Agriculture has stood in this House and has talked GRIP, 

GRIP, GRIP, and has walked right over the farmers in 

Saskatchewan, is because of these 300 letters you've said 

you've got.  Well my goodness, Mr. Premier, if 300 requests for 

a GRIP change come mostly from the north-east part of the 

province, what about the the other 50,000-some farmers -- 

close to 60,000?  I cannot find it, and I earnestly, honestly tell 

you, Mr. Premier, that I can't find an individual in my riding 

that would say, I'll change my '92 GRIP; that I'll change my '91 

GRIP for '92 GRIP.  I can't survive on it. 

 

So you're getting a wrong reading.  What you've got is a group 

of people on that farm debt review committee that was given a 

mandate from the Department of Finance that your mandate is 

financially controlled.  Because, Mr. Premier, we heard from 

the people that's on that Farm Debt Advisory Committee.  

Some of them have told us directly that they were financially 

controlled and that's why they came up with the '92 GRIP. 

 

Now I don't want to get into a long debate with you on GRIP.  I 

just want to bring this to your attention, and if I 

could get your response on what I've said so far. 

 

I've got two or three direct questions that I asked four or five 

times, pertaining to the retroactivity of the Bill and other parts 

of the Bill that I'd like to see if you would answer, Mr. Premier.  

I'm sure I can get an answer from you, and it would clear up a 

lot of confusion.  But if I could just get your remarks -- perhaps 

I went on a little too long -- but your remarks of what I've said 

so far. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I've tried to 

respond to the other members, the member from Moosomin 

and the member from Thunder Creek, on the question of the 

GRIP and the direction of GRIP.  I think what I'd like to say is 

that the advisory committee for the changes for 1992, the 

advisory committee was composed of people like Barry Senft 

of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; Stuart Kramer; Keith 

Hayward of the Crop Insurance Corporation; Roy Piper, UGG 

(United Grain Growers); Jack Stabler, U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan); Brett Meinert, Saskatchewan soil conservation 

association; Sinclair Harrison, SARM; Brian Perkins, cattle 

feeders; Gordon Cresswell, Canada wheat growers; Leonard 

Kehrig, canola growers; Gil Pedersen, NFU (National Farmers 

Union); Nettie Wiebe, at large; and Lloyd Johns, at large. 

 

And I don't think this is a group which takes directions from 

the Minister of Finance or anybody else.  I don't think that that 

Barry Senft would tolerate that.  In fact he wrote a . . . was part 

of a report advising the federal-provincial government to have 

not the kind of '91 program which ultimately surfaced, but a 

different version.  These are independent people, so I don't 

accept that assumption. 

 

I hear what the hon. member says about the impact of 1992 

GRIP.  We have heard your argument.  Please, however, don't 

misinterpret when I say that I do not accept it in its totality.  I 

believe that the changes to 1992 are not complete or perfect.  

We need to make a program for insurance, revenue insurance, 

which is better, I said in question period, to avoid what I think 

was a decision, namely, of trying to make a silk purse out of a 

sow's ear here. 

 

The plan is fundamentally flawed in its essence.  That's what 

farmers have told me over and over again.  Not based on cost 

of production, not market oriented, although we've made some 

changes in that regard and can be administratively approved.  

Now we have to work toward those changes. 

 

As regards the frost situation, I have a different interpretation 

than the hon. member does about what third line of defence 

means.  In 1990 when the ministers of Agriculture of all of 

Canada got together, they particularly identified third line of 

defence to cover off this kind of wide range of unexpected 

matters.  They clearly contemplated that.  Second line of 

defence is GRIP and NISA, something entirely different -- 

GRIP in any event.  Different contemplation, and you cannot 

meld the two. 

 

So all I can say to the member here is I understand your 

argument.  I hope you understand our argument.  You don't 

accept our argument.  We don't accept the essence of your 

argument, not rejecting all aspects of it.  What we 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

have to do is work in the months and weeks ahead, improving 

the situation so that the whole situation is better for the family 

farms. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, yes, you said it 

right there when you talked about insurance.  And that's exactly 

what farmers are saying out there, that we have lost our 

insurance policy on the '92 GRIP.  It's not insurance.  Insurance 

is to cover you when you lose, when you lose something. 

 

Mr. Premier, please understand this.  When your house burns 

down, you haven't got any insurance on you; you collect 

nothing.  If your house burns down, you got insurance; you 

collect.  It's the same thing with every insurance.  This '92 

GRIP, you collect it whether you burn down or not.  The '92 is 

exactly the same.  Your crop insurance went back to the same 

coverage as it was before.  And that's fine, crop insurance is 

there. 

 

But revenue insurance is a gamble.  When you get up in the 

morning and the seeding time was on April 30, you must 

decide whether you're going to put revenue insurance on or not.  

And you've got to look at the markets and take a guess: is that 

wheat going to be over $4 a bushel or under?  If you think it's 

going to be under, well I'd better put on revenue insurance.  

And the only way you can succeed and do well under the '92 

GRIP is to get a bumper crop and then to have that on top of it. 

 

With the '91 GRIP it was . . . I know it was getting away 

because they were going to do away with the crop insurance 

and combine it all into one.  But that's the difference in the 

concept of what you people believe and what we people 

believe and the other provinces believe, that the '91 GRIP was 

to design a program for a guaranteed cheque to a farmer 

whether he got a crop or not. 

 

And we talked about moral hazards.  Well I was the minister in 

Crop Insurance for quite a few years and I know how they take 

care of moral hazards.  You have to farm in a husband-like 

manner and if you don't, your coverages go down so fast that 

you don't succeed.  Anybody goes out and farms for crop 

insurance, it just doesn't happen. 

 

There was too many people that said this. If you had've, Mr. 

Premier, seen my sons or my neighbours on the streets of Craik 

while the election was on and said, would you like to see us 

change the '91 GRIP, and they would have said yes.  But they 

wanted it changed this way -- because this is what I picked up 

all over the province, and I pick it up since the election -- that 

we like the '91 GRIP, but we didn't like what happened in the 

north-east or in some of the poorer land in my riding where I 

got a 50-bushel crop, had to pay a premium, didn't collect. 

 

Well sometimes you can get such a high crop, big crop, that 

you can't collect if the house don't burn down.  So what they've 

asked for, and what we were pushing for -- and I dealt with 

Mazankowski when he was still the minister of Agriculture, 

and it wasn't going to be obtainable at that time but that's what 

they were striving for -- is the '91 GRIP. 

But whatever your yield is on your farm -- 25 or 30 or 35 

bushels to the acre -- whatever your 10-year average is, that's 

what you're covered for.  So if you're covered and got that yield 

that year . . . I say last year, '91, you had to have got a 

25-bushel crop.  But the price of wheat being $2 and some 

cents a bushel -- it's 2.45 they got paid on so far -- and you're 

going to get paid on four. So what happens if you got a bumper 

crop, you could farm yourself or rain yourself out of . . . and be 

blessed that your crop . . . that you collect nothing. 

 

So what they wanted is, if I'm covered for 25 bushels to the 

acre and I get more than that, the extra is mine at market price.  

That's all the improvements they ever asked for; that's all I ever 

heard for all last summer.  And I was at meetings all over this 

province.  But nobody, but nobody, but nobody out there right 

now will say, I agree with the '92 GRIP, that I just want to have 

a little policy off here by itself where I want to make a decision 

on gambling what the price of wheat's going to be.  Now I'm 

not saying . . . I haven't carried crop insurance, Mr. Premier, for 

years.  I haven't had a quota book in my name for quite a few 

years; I've had a plate in my son's book.  But this year I have a 

quota book; I took the '92 GRIP.  I was laughed about it in this 

House here. 

 

But I pleaded with my neighbours, don't drop the '92 GRIP -- 

don't drop it.  Because as long as wheat stays under $4 a 

bushel, you're going to get something.  So I don't want you to 

get me wrong that I'm a hundred per cent against '92, because I 

am not.  It's better than nothing.  It is definitely.  Because if I 

could pull off a 40-bushel crop, get $30 an acre from the 

revenue, I'm doing all right. 

 

My worry is the word insurance that you use here is when you 

get a poor crop and the price of wheat goes down, you get 

nothing -- almost nothing.  It's a disaster for you. 

 

(1630) 

 

Anyway the questions that . . . I want to just ask you a couple 

of questions, Mr. Premier, that I couldn't get an answer from 

from the Minister of Agriculture.  And it's a very, very 

important question.  I asked him three times, got a 35-minute 

answer once, not talking anywhere near close of it, even 

touched on it.  The member from Estevan asked him almost the 

same question and then he had to leave to go to Moose Jaw, 

and the Minister of Agriculture was still talking by the time the 

Leader of the Opposition would be in Moose Jaw.  And never 

even touched -- never even touched the answer. 

 

And here's the question, very simple.  This is what I said to the 

Minister of Agriculture: did you make a mistake when you 

neglected to inform in writing by March 15 '92 to all farmers 

holding a 1991 GRIP contract that there would be a major 

change to their contract?  Did the minister make a mistake by 

not sending that letter out, or did he?  Did he or didn't he?  

Maybe you could answer that question for us, Mr. Premier, 

directly, and we can move on quickly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I support the 

correspondence that the Minister of Agriculture has put out.  

And that's the answer to the question. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, I didn't hear what you said, yes 

or no.  He never gave us an answer, Mr. Premier.  You didn't 

give me a yes or no answer on that.  And now you . . . I know 

I'm going to have to read that to you again because it has to be 

a yes or no answer.  I mean, Mr. Premier, there's where we run 

into an impasse here.  It's very simple. 

 

If the question's a yes . . . and naturally you support your 

Minister of Agriculture. I'm not saying that.  I just asked this 

direct question. I asked you to listen very carefully. 

 

This is like I said to the Minister of Agriculture, did you make 

a mistake when you neglected to inform in writing by March 

15, '92 to all farmers holding a '91 GRIP contract that there 

would be a major change to their contract?  That's all I asked 

him.  Did he make a mistake or didn't he?  I just wanted him to 

say yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I don't believe the Minister of 

Agriculture from Saskatchewan made the mistake.  I think the 

mistake, if there is a mistake, of which I do not admit, is a 

mistake as the result of negotiations and discussions on a 

federal-provincial basis which led everybody to believe that the 

changes which were recommended by the advisory group, once 

implemented, could be implemented, as I explained to the 

member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay then, that's an answer that we never 

got out of the Minister of Agriculture.  It took hours and hours.  

We were under closure. You were away, but you probably 

knew we were under closure.  And 18 hours -- we had two days 

in committee -- and that's 18 hours with, you timing it, two 

10-hour sittings with an hour off for question period and what 

not and special orders.  We had 18 hours, and I'm sure he 

talked 12 of the 18 hours so we could ask less questions. 

 

Now if that question is yes, that he didn't make a mistake, then 

why did we need this here part of this Bill about . . . and I'm 

going to read you this part of the Bill in case you haven't read it 

yourself.  And you're a lawyer, Mr. Premier, and there's several 

lawyers in the front row.  That if it's yes, then why did we need 

this part of the Bill if he didn't make a mistake last spring?  

And let's say he didn't then, that we agree with you that he 

didn't make any mistake, then why did we need section 5, 

clause 4: 

 

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or the 

regulations, section 49 of every revenue insurance contract 

deemed to have been entered into pursuant to subsection 

5.1(1) being the provision stating that any changes in the 

contract shall be mailed to the insured not later than March 

15 of the year for which the changes are to be in effect and 

that those changes are deemed to be part of the contract on 

and after April 1 of that year, (and that this) is void and of no 

effect and is deemed to have always been void and of no 

effect. 

 

Now if he didn't make a mistake and it wasn't necessary to send 

that letter out, why are we sitting here, Mr. Premier, with that 

part in that Bill?  Why?  Please tell me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Because, as I have said in 

question period and other questioners in this same vein, I repeat 

again, we believe that there has to be clarity and certainty in the 

legislative underpinings of this program.  And for greater 

certainty and clarity, that provision was put in there. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Premier, I have to contradict you.  And 

I had the facts.  Because Crop Insurance has been in existence 

since 1962 and there's been many changes made every year to 

the crop insurance without coming into this legislature. 

 

It's a contract between the Crop Insurance Corporation and the 

farmer.  And the member from Thunder Creek read the contract 

out.  It's signed by a farmer and the Crop Insurance 

Corporation.  And when I was minister, I used to sit at board 

meetings and had them make changes.  And the changes would 

come into effect by a vote of that board.  And they could 

change it any time they wanted.  If it was a major change, then 

maybe you'd have to have a regulation change.  But I could see 

every year there could be changes made in Crop Insurance by 

the board.  So that is not right. 

 

You've never, ever had a farmer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, 

wrote you a letter . . . There won't be one letter of those 300 

requests saying, well we're not sure that our 1991 contract was 

just legal in this legislature or not, because they don't 

understand it at all.  They don't understand about a 1991 Bill; 

they don't understand about a '92 Bill; all's they understand is 

they don't want that part of their life void. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Premier, surely you -- and I consider you an 

honourable man, and I really do . . . Because as I said this 

morning, Mr. Premier, as I spoke in this Assembly, that I was 

taught in my family to respect the law and respect my parents, 

my teachers, and the law.  And I've always respected you since 

you've been Premier.  I respected the member from Estevan 

when he was premier.  I respected the Hon. Mr. Blakeney and 

all prime ministers.  That's in my make-up.  I respect you. 

 

And I ask you: do you believe that it was really right that what 

we've done here . . . You, as Premier of this province, do you 

stand up and say to put this part in here to make it void?  Like 

the explanation I used . . . I used the minister . . . the House 

Leader for example.  You might as well bring a Bill into the 

legislature passing a Bill that he was never born, that he was 

never part of our lives.  It's just that bad. 

 

You're taking a part of this Bill and saying . . . Never mind the 

rest of the Bill.  Maybe it needed to have it and clean up 

something -- fine.  But that part about March 15, because it was 

neglected to notify the farmers and just take it void out of our 

life and then go down two paragraphs and say, you can't take us 

to court.  You, Mr. Premier, could not endorse anything like 

that.  I just don't believe it.  Give me your comments, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I have endorsed 

it.  It's a cabinet decision, and it is now a decision of the 

legislature and Legislative Assembly.  I've repeated, again, the 

ground rules to 1991 were confused at best and not properly 

stated. 



2936 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

The intertwining of Crop Insurance with GRIP and 

consequences were hastily drafted in anticipation of an election 

in the fall, and introduced in this House, I believe it was -- I 

don't have my exact dates -- but late before the sudden 

prorogation in June 1991.  We were left with the circumstances 

after the election which necessitated change to the plan, based 

on the recommendations of the advisory committee and putting 

the proper legislative provisions in there for greater certainty 

and clarity.  And that is the reason why we have done this. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, on 

this last statement that you just made, and it's one that I've 

heard you make a number of times and I'm afraid I want to 

present some evidence to you and ask your comments on it in 

regard to that. 

 

In your statements in the leaders' debate last October 5, '91, 

you are quoted as saying that you would ease the tax burden for 

ordinary families and would kick start our economy.  You're 

also quoted as saying -- and these are your words, sir, from that 

debate -- you were referring to the previous NDP government, I 

think, of Mr. Blakeney.  You said there was no debt.  That's the 

point.  The debt was 3.2 billion on the Crown corporations.  

And it's now 14.2 billion since 1982.  That's not our fault.  

That's the fault of the Liberals and PC policies that put this 

situation in these circumstances. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, on October 5, you're still the leader of the 

opposition. You say the debt is 14.2 billion.  You obviously 

haven't had the Gass Commission.  You haven't had access, 

you claim, to the books.  But I say to you, Mr. Premier, that 

like the Gass Commission said, anyone that was interested had 

full access to all the books.  And you had availed yourself of 

that information well before the election.  Now you were 

making all sorts of promises, particularly that there would be 

an ease of the tax burden and you would kick start the 

economy. 

 

We'll we've seen just the opposite.  We've seen every last tax in 

the province increased, and we certainly haven't seen any 

kick-start anywhere in our economy.  In your own budget 

address of May '92, on page 61, in fact it shows the forecast for 

'92 of the gross debt less sinking funds -- and one would not 

include sinking funds naturally -- coming in at twelve seven 

five nine four one.  So the number that you used during the 

election campaign during the leaders' debate of 14.2 is at least a 

billion and a half dollars more than your own forecast on page 

61. 

 

Now coming in a billion and a half less than your own forecast 

than what you are claiming the number was on October 5, I can 

see why you are perhaps saying that you could ease the tax 

burden.  But the fact of the matter is that all taxes have gone up 

dramatically: personal income tax, sales tax, gasoline tax, all 

the utilities.  They've all gone up. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, how in good conscience could you tell the 

public on October 5, '91, that the deficit was $14.2 billion, at 

the same time promise reduced taxes.  You were going to do 

away with harmonization.  You were going to do all of these 

things, knowing full well that 

that deficit was $14.2 billion.  How could you possibly promise 

all of those things and now turn around and say, well we 

discovered that the deficit is higher than we expected?  You 

obviously had access to something or you wouldn't have said 

on province-wide TV one week before or two weeks before the 

end of the campaign, exactly what the deficit was.  How could 

you make all of these promises, knowing the size of that 

deficit, without being irresponsible? 

 

And I'd just like a few comments on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the issue 

of irresponsibility or responsibility is a very good one.  I 

remind the hon. member opposite that between 1982 and 

1991-92 the debt charges paid on the Consolidated Fund 

totalled $2.7 billion.  I remind the hon. member opposite that 

between 1982 and 1991, your government, sir, overspent its 

own deficit predictions -- your own deficit predictions -- by $2 

billion. 

 

On two occasions, both election years -- as it so turns out, one 

we didn't know about, 1986, until after the election; one we 

found out after we won the election -- your deficit projections 

were wrong by over 200 per cent, 216 per cent off in 1986 and 

221 per cent off in 1991. 

 

And you say that's responsibility, sir?  We knew that was the 

track record in 1986.  You projected a deficit of 300 million 

and you came in with 1.2 billion.  I wrote to the premier, as he 

then was, on September 22 and I said amongst other things, in 

the light of the flurry of pre-election announcements and in 

light of this track record of deficit forecasts which I have just 

recited to you -- get this record, I say this to the back-benchers 

opposite -- 221 per cent off, 221 per cent off the mark. 

 

I wrote on September 22 on behalf of not only my party but the 

people of Saskatchewan, I said, have somebody give us the 

exact figure.  You know what kind of a response I got was?  

Right here, from the minister of Finance as he was then, and he 

said: don't worry, don't worry; it's all on track.  Quote: 

numerous factors at play that must be taken into consideration.  

On balance, however, I see no reason to alter our target of a 

$265 million deficit -- on balance. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I said at the leaders' debate, the best that I could say of the 

computations which had been available to me.  The member 

opposite's going to say we had the blue books.  What happens 

when we opened up the Crown corporation figures and saw, 

according to Ernst & Young, $2.9 billion virtually of hidden 

debt, CMB (Crown Management Board of Saskatchewan) and 

its bankrupt position never revealed at any stage in the game.  

None.  Open the books.  You know what Gass revealed.  And 

you ask us where the responsibility is. 

 

And I want to close by saying to you, sir, what I said to the 

hon. member from Arm River.  Our election promises and our 

election statements were made in that document which we have 

headlined, let's make Saskatchewan work, first things first, 

open up the books.  And we proceed from responsibility. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

And we say, you may not like it, but the corner has been 

turned.  The corner has been turned.  The books will be now 

open.  The predictions will be measured by objective standards.  

We will get this deficit under control. And we're not ever going 

back to the days when you're going to be 200 per cent off in the 

blatant attempt to get re-elected. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Premier, without -- and using your phrase -- without being 

provocative, I'm simply dealing with some numbers here which 

you have stated publicly. 

 

And I can only gather, Mr. Premier, that between that letter in 

September and the leaders' debate on October 5, you must have 

gone and availed yourself of some financial information.  

Because obviously on October 5 you felt quite calm in telling 

the entire electorate of the province that the debt was $14.2 

billion when it had nothing to do with Mr. Hepworth's letter or 

things that came out later that you had availed yourself of 

information that put the debt at $14.2 billion.  And I'm only 

showing you, Mr. Premier, that in your own Consolidated Fund 

statement of debt on page 61 of the budget address it shows it 

at twelve seven five two. 

 

Now there's a big difference there, Mr. Premier.  The actual 

number that you were using during the election campaign, 

making all sorts of promises to people, is considerably more 

than your own Minister of Finance has brought in here.  And I 

don't know how, Mr. Premier, you can square that with all of 

these tax increases; how you can square that to the people who 

you've said you were going to, for instance in agriculture, have 

a better grip of cost of production; that utilities weren't going to 

go up; that certainly harmonization was absolutely the worst 

thing, knowing full well that you were giving up many 

hundreds of millions of dollars of tax revenue.  You said, I 

don't need it.  This province can exist on $4.5 billion.  And I'm 

not . . . these aren't my words, Mr. Premier.  These are your 

words -- 14.2 billion, October 5.  The budget statement is 12.7. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, knowing that the debt was 14.2 billion on 

October 5, how could you seriously promise not to increase 

taxes with Saskatchewan people -- knowing that the deficit was 

that high -- and cancelling a tax measure that was going to give 

you at the minimum a couple of hundred million dollars?  How 

could you knowingly do that with a deficit this high and then 

tell this Chamber today that, oh no, I didn't know that number 

until several months down the road? 

 

I mean these are your words, sir.  These aren't mine.  I wasn't in 

the leaders' debate.  I wasn't trying to solicit the votes of the 

entire province, you were.  You used the number.  And you 

promised no new taxes. 

 

Now how do you square that number which you obviously had 

your people research -- probably the gentleman beside you -- 

research in depth to use on TV that night, when the number in 

this book here put out by your Minister of Finance this spring 

is over a billion and a half dollars less?  Now how could you do 

that? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member's 

questions again are based on wrong assumptions.  He says you 

knowingly knew these figures.  If the Minister of Finance and 

the former premier had ponied up the facts in the letter, I could 

have then perhaps adopted your words without knowing.  We 

had to take the best research we could, but not knowingly. 

 

And I want to tell you, the fact that I can say, not knowingly, is 

verified by not only my words here, but by the press response 

and the public's response to what the Gass Commission 

uncovered -- it was a shocker.  Nobody knew, sir, the 

cover-ups.  Nobody knew the scandals that were around.  

Nobody knew the Gigatexts which were around.  Nobody knew 

that until we opened up the books. 

 

You know what you went through when the Gass Commission 

reported, because if I'd have known it, they would have known 

it, and the public would have known it.  Sometimes I think, sir, 

that maybe you didn't even know it. 

 

You say according to the Gigatext story that you didn't know 

about it.  The truth of the matter is that the sequence of events 

reveals through the independent study the situation fiscally that 

you left us behind. 

 

Now let me make one other point.  On the GST harmonization 

-- I've made this to the member from Arm River -- we think it 

was a wrong tax because of the headings of taxes which were 

going to be covered off and all the arguments that I won't 

repeat again, that a better way to go is selective.  That was what 

we are aiming at in a fair tax situation, a fair tax base. 

 

I note that you are still a very strong supporter of 

harmonization and expanding the tax base.  And I suppose that 

there is merit in consistency.  If that's the position of the 

official opposition, that they want to still have harmonization 

and they want to have that extra tax base put on the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan -- which is what you're arguing 

for -- fair enough, we know where we stand.  This government 

does not happen to believe that and the people gave us a 

mandate to make the changes.  There's the explanation and 

there's the direction that we're going. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears what the 

Premier is telling us today in committee is that the number that 

he used on October 5 was erroneous, that he was using a false 

number, that that number that he claims that he researched to 

the best of his capability was a wrong number, and that he was 

using a lot of political licence that evening to bandy that figure 

about. 

 

And I guess what we can gather from that, if that was political 

licence that he was using, that on one hand he was being fearful 

. . . engendering fear in the electorate, and at the same time 

making all sorts of wild promises that he had no intention of 

keeping, about no new taxes.  You know, read my lips, no new 

taxes, sort of thing. 

 

And if that's the case, then I think the Premier's got an apology 

to make to Saskatchewan people because I still haven't had him 

square with this committee today, Mr. 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Chairman, square with this committee the fact that he said 14.2 

and the forecast by his own Minister of Finance is twelve, 

seven. 

 

Now he obviously had access to some numbers.  If the numbers 

are erroneous that his own research dug up for him before the 

leaders' debate, perhaps he could tell us where he got those 

numbers from.  Because that's the ones we're talking about -- 

what the electorate of Saskatchewan a short time ago voted for.  

Now if the Premier's telling us that he was using false numbers 

to deceive the electorate, I think he should tell the public today 

here that that was the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I made my point in 

response to member's allegations about knowingly.  Believe me 

I don't want these Estimates to degenerate into this, but if the 

member's taking me into this line, I guess so it will be. 

 

I said that the public itself, the watchful press gallery and the 

public itself, did not know, only opened the books, told us what 

to know.  You just take a look at the clippings of responsible 

journalists and analysts who took a lot of examination of the 

documents. 

 

Here's one by Mr. Paul Martin, Star-Phoenix business editor.  

The headline says: Gass documents shameful addiction to 

secrecy.  Secrecy, sir.  Not my words, his. 

 

Take a look at the article by Mr. Les MacPherson.  I don't 

quote him all the time, that's for sure.  But he says:  the Gass 

Commission only confirmed what voters already knew -- the 

Conservative administration was without shame.  From all 

indications, the Conservative opposition is no less morally 

deficient on the question of Gass. 

 

But I say again, in explanation and in defence, what I have said 

to confirm the truth of what I have said, the Star-Phoenix 

editorial headline on: "Tories to blame": the provincial deficit.  

Tories must accept responsibility.  And I'll just read this last 

direct quotation, Mr. Chairman, and this is relevant to your 

question specifically: 

 

 Despite the reports' overwhelming indictment of the Tories' 

fiscal management, Neudorf and Swenson had the audacity to 

claim that, during the election campaign, Premier Roy 

Romanow pretended not to know the Tories were lying about 

the provincial deficit. 

 

 The absurdity of this situation and the complete moral 

bankruptcy of the Tories is not lost on Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  That's obviously why they're in opposition. 

 

Now that's not Roy Romanow, and that isn't a group of 

editorial writers who are the biggest fans of the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan either.  I don't get exactly the 

greatest reviews from the Star-Phoenix. 

 

And here you are nine months after our administration still 

hanging on to the thing that is blatantly obvious to everybody -- 

the audacity to claim, in the words of the editorial, that during 

the election campaign we pretended not to know the situation.  

And you still hang on to that 

when everybody in the province of Saskatchewan, having read 

the Gass report, says what the truth is. 

 

That is my answer.  It can't be that I knew and they didn't 

know.  It can't be that I knew the real number, but the 

journalists all of a sudden said wow, we have found out the 

number.  These are people who also know the same access and 

the same records. 

 

And you, in the words of the editorial, have the audacity to 

claim that somehow we pretended not to know.  I can't prevent 

you from being audacious.  You can be audacious and you can 

be pretentious and you can be ambitious.  And I wish all of 

those good things on you.  I really do.  And God bless you all. 

 

But I simply say to the hon. member, if he's asking me to 

square the circle, I have squared it in the ways that I have 

answered it to you.  And I cite in support of my defence, those 

independent reviewers and analysts who have so similarly 

concluded. 

 

You may not like it.  You may not accept my explanation.  And 

maybe you don't even like what the Star-Phoenix editorial 

board says.  But that is the fact.  That is the fact. 

 

I think I make my case. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Premier, a week when it is . . . It is amazing how quickly the 

Premier looks to the press gallery for a place in which to hide. 

 

Just a short time ago in these Estimates, I was quoting articles 

from the Leader-Post to the Premier, and he said, you know, 

Mr. Chairman, I simply don't accept the word of the press 

gallery.  I simply don't accept that they would have found 

people that would say those types of things.  And I'm going to 

take issue with what they said.  And now the Premier wants to 

stand up in these Estimates and turn around and use the press 

gallery as his ultimate weapon. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I don't know if you ever did read the Gass 

report, but I can assure you I did, from cover to cover.  And 

Mr. Gass makes a very, very definitive point in there.  He says, 

Mr. Premier, he says, there is no hidden deficit.  There never 

was.  The books were always open. 

 

And I'm suspecting, Mr. Premier, by your statements on 

October 5, that you had someone avail themselves of that 

knowledge; otherwise you couldn't have come up with a figure 

of 14.2 billion.  There's no other place you could have got it, 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, because if you look further down on 

page 61, you will see in fact that very figure by your own 

Minister of Finance. 

 

While we're on that, some of the write-downs that your 

Minister of Finance has taken and some of the sleight of hand 

tricks that you have pulled with the Saskatchewan public . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  It being five o'clock, this 

committee will recess until 7 o'clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


