




















































Hansard: July 16, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1509 

 July 16, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the rest of 

the Assembly, a friend of mine in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

and his family.  He was instrumental in me being here, who 

worked very hard for me. That may not meet with unanimous 

popularity across the province, but I would like to introduce 

you to them.  Terry Paley, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

and his wife Susan, and their son Vogeson and the newest 

addition, Bronwyn Paley.  If all would join me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you, and through you to the other members of the legislature, a 

young exchange student from France.  Mr. Toulemonde 

Amaury is from the region of Chapelle d'Armentière in France.  

He's here, as I say, on an exchange program.  He's living at the 

farm of Harry J. and Donette Elder in Fillmore, Saskatchewan. 

 

M. le Président, je veux vous présenter à toi et à tous les 

députés de la législature, un jeune étudiant de la France, M. 

Toulemonde Amaury.  Il est ici sur un programme d'échange et 

il demeure présentement à la ferme de M. Harry J. et Donette 

Elder de Fillmore. 

 

Je voudrais demander à tous les députés, et à toi, M. le 

Président, de l'accueillir chaleureusement.  Merci. 

 

(Translation: I ask all the hon. members, and you, Mr. Speaker, 

to warmly welcome him.  Thank you.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 

introduce Norman MacAuley and Hettie MacAuley from . . . 

they're now living in Kelowna B.C. (British Columbia), Mr. 

Speaker.  It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, because Mr. 

MacAuley was the member for the constituency of Cumberland 

from 1975 to 1982.  And he did a tremendous job, you know, 

for the people in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

wish all members to welcome him to the legislature today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, sir, and to all the 

members of the Legislative Assembly a very distinguished 

delegation and group of visitors to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They are seated, sir, in the Speaker's gallery 

ahead of you. 

 

I will ask the members that I introduce to please stand as I 

introduce them and I hope that my pronunciation does do 

reasonably close justice to their importance and to their beings. 

They are, Mr. Speaker, first of all His Excellency, Mr. Michio 

Mizoguchi, and Mrs. Mizoguchi, the ambassador of Japan to 

Canada, and the spouse of the ambassador. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In addition we have Mr. Yuzuki Kaku, 

the Consul General of Japan in Winnipeg, and his wife, spouse 

as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We have the deputy Consul General 

of Japan in Winnipeg, Mr. Kenichi Kudo. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And as well, Mr. Yoshiko Kamo, the 

first secretary at the Chinese Embassy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker and members of 

the House, this is the ambassador's first visit to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And while in this province he is going to meet 

with the Lieutenant Governor, myself, various ministers of the 

provincial government and the mayor of the city of Regina. 

 

I think all of the people of the province of Saskatchewan know 

the importance of Japan to, not only this province, but to 

Canada and to the world economic situation.  We welcome 

them to this province.  We look forward to our various 

discussions and hope that they turn out to be mutually 

beneficial, both to them and to us.  And we say to the 

ambassador and to his wife, come back again soon. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

official opposition it gives me great pleasure in joining with the 

Premier in welcoming the ambassador and his party to our 

legislature and our province. 

 

We have long-standing relationships with Japan, and Japan 

certainly is a very important partner of many of Saskatchewan's 

people in their everyday endeavours.  And we join in with the 

Premier in welcoming you, sir, and hope that your stay here is 

indeed an enjoyable one. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce three 

people to this House who perhaps are not as illustrious and 

distinguished as the delegation from Japan, but are certainly 

very important to me. 
 

I would like to introduce my brother John Wilkening here from 

Calgary with two of his children, Jason and Cindy.  They are 

former Saskatchewanians who have chosen to spend part of 

their vacation in this province and hopefully to spend a lot of 

money here as well. 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the legislature, a special person in 

my life who's sitting in the west gallery, my daughter Paula, 

who will be attending figure-skating school here in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to additionally to the 

delegation . . . the welcomes that have been extended to the 

delegation with His Excellency the ambassador from Japan.  

Welcome, Mr. Art Wakabayashi and Mrs. Wakabayashi who 

are distinguished civil servants in Saskatchewan and in Canada.  

And I believe the title he now holds is Honorary Consul 

General -- close?  And I welcome him to the House and ask 

others to join me in welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the House to 

address a serious topic, and that is cross-border shopping.  It is 

estimated that in Saskatchewan alone, 3,800 jobs were lost to 

cross-border shopping last year.  Needless to say, these job 

losses have a very detrimental effect on our economy and the 

general welfare of our community. 

 

This is particularly hard on the economies of Coronach, 

Rockglen, and Assiniboia, which are on the border of United 

States in my own particular constituency. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, sir, I am pleased to announce that 

cross-border shopping seems to be on the decline.  Same-day 

trips from Saskatchewan to the U.S. (United States) for the 

month of May decreased 3.2 per cent from the previous year. 

 

Also, it is encouraging to see that Regina retailers are coming 

together to promote a "Paid in Saskatchewan, Stays in 

Saskatchewan" campaign . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- . . . to encourage residents to spend their 

monies at home.  Mr. Speaker, I applaud our retailers for taking 

this initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we are all aware of the frustration 

consumers feel over taxes and high prices, but the solution does 

not lie in crossing the border.  That is a cop-out.  We must 

remember the spirit of community and co-operation and work 

together to build a prosperous Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On 

July 14 the Minister of Education released a report entitled 

Into the Classroom: A Review of Directions in Practice.  

This report details the progress being made in carrying out 

education reforms in Saskatchewan kindergarten to grade 

12 schools. 

 

I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the report found a 

sincere commitment among Saskatchewan educators for the 

need for reform.  There was also consensus that significant 

progress has already been made in the improvement of schools.  

New courses have been developed, learning opportunities have 

become more accessible, and progress is being made in 

meeting special needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to note that the Minister of 

Education has supported the recommendations of Into the 

Classroom and has stated that Saskatchewan Education will 

co-operate with the major stakeholders to develop a plan for 

implementation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are times of rapidly changing social and 

economic conditions.  This fact makes the work of schools 

even more important and challenging.  Into the Classroom 

will go a long way towards meeting this challenge.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to provide an 

update on one of North America's best-known endangered 

species.  For decades, Saskatchewan has played a key role in 

bringing the whooping crane back from the brink of extinction.  

Individuals such as the late Fred Bard, former director of the 

Saskatchewan Museum of Natural History, led a 

continent-wide struggle to salvage these regal birds from 

oblivion. 

 

In 1941, there was only 21 whooping cranes in the world, and 

many people figured they would be doomed like the passenger 

pigeon.  During the past 50 years, the population has painfully 

and gradually increased to over 200 birds.  The most recent 

report from Wood Buffalo National Park is that a record 

number of 40 nests were located this spring.  As of late June a 

remarkable number of 35 chicks were surviving.  Even if half 

these chicks survive to make the fall migration south to the 

Aransas National Wildlife Refuge in Texas, North America's 

tallest bird will have had a banner year. 

 

The survival and recovery of the whooping crane proves that 

conservation efforts can produce positive results.  At the same 

time, we see that such efforts take decades for results to be 

realized.  It is far better for us to manage, use wisely, and 

protect all of our natural resources before they are in danger of 

disappearing.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, there's 

cause for cautious optimism as we look at the crop report for 

the province.  Although we hear of rained-out vacations, 

farmers are pleased to see the life-blood of their crops.  Indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that it has rained in all the right places 

over the past week. 

 

There has been a significant improvement in the shape of our 

crops over the past week, and that's cause for celebration. 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

Although the crops began without much soil moisture, the 

cooler-than-average conditions . . . we have seen the gradual 

greening of our fields, the kind of greening that lifts the spirits 

and brings a strong sense of renewal and the satisfaction of a 

job well done. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool report said over two-thirds of 

the wheat and barley crops are headed out and almost 20 per 

cent of the oat crop is headed.  For durum, it's almost 60 per 

cent.  For flax, 30 per cent of the crop has reached a flowering 

stage and for canola, over two-thirds of the crop has reached a 

flowering stage. 

 

Although we could always use more rain, some areas of the 

province have received 20 to 30 millimetres recently and 

according to the weather report we can expect more.  And with 

more rain comes the possibility of a good crop for 

Saskatchewan farmers this year. 

 

In the face of such optimism, let's get on with the business of 

the House, pass the necessary farm legislation to ensure 

farmers . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm delighted to 

report a turn around putting STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company) tours and charters on the road again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, the former administration had 

deliberately caused STC to be priced out of the market.  Buses 

sat idle and of course STC employees lacked work.  STC had 

idle equipment and the travelling public were directed away 

from STC charters and tours. 

 

The new president, Peter Glendinning, set up a tours and 

charters committee including management, mechanics, 

cleaners, and drivers.  This inclusive committee arrived at a 

tours and charters program, including a charter rate, that 

contributes positively to the overall revenues of STC and prices 

STC into the market again.  The STC board of directors 

approved. 

 

This allows the travelling public to now use the quality 

personnel and equipment of STC at competitive rates.  The 

result:  buses are being utilized; people are being employed; 

STC is generating much-needed revenue; the travelling public 

can now use our provincial bus company.  Charters are heavily 

booked this summer; fall and winter charters are being booked 

now.  People are again welcome to use STC because of the new 

attitude best summed up with "on the road again". 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd ask 

for leave to introduce some guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member would wait until we're finished 

with statements by members, and then if she got 

up . . . Are there any further statements by members? 

 

If not, I recognize the member from Saskatoon Broadway. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- The minister has to add, does the member 

have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I'd like to thank my colleagues for giving me 

leave.  I see that my guests have just arrived in the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to all members of the 

legislature two women that are in Saskatchewan who are 

visiting us from Nicaragua.  These women are representatives 

of the National Union of Farmers and Ranchers of Nicaragua 

and they have been involved in a linkage program between 

farm women and ranchers in Nicaragua and the National farm 

union women here in Saskatchewan.  I would like to introduce 

Martha Valle and Elsa Amador.  These two women are very 

active in farming and ranching in the country of Nicaragua.  

They are here to visit Saskatchewan and see what kind of 

farming we do. 

 

As well they're accompanied by Shannon Storey, a farm 

woman from Perdue, and their interpreter who I'm afraid I don't 

know her name.  But she's from the city of Saskatoon. 

 

We are going to be meeting with this delegation of women 

after question period.  I know that they have much to teach us 

and I welcome you to the legislature, and we'll see you at 2:30. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, also to welcome the 

delegation from Nicaragua. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  I would like to join my colleague in 

welcoming them and to comment very positively on the kind of 

courtesy and hospitality that was extended to me when I 

travelled in Nicaragua in 1989 as part of the Saskatchewan 

international labour program. 

 

People representing unions such as these women here today 

were very courteous to me while I was there, and I hope that all 

Saskatchewan people will be able to show them the same kind 

of courtesy and learning opportunities as I experienced.  

Welcome to Canada and to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

Negotiations on Rules Change 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the Acting House Leader.  Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday in this House the Acting House Leader, who's been 

forced to replace his colleague, the new-found Democrat -- 

who was recently found in New York attending the Democratic 

convention at taxpayers' expense, I might add -- well this 

fellow said that the NDP (New Democratic Party) was willing 

to trade bell-ringing for the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) legislation. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, he was trying to blackmail the 

opposition into giving up on farmers in return for keeping the 

bell-ringing tool, a totally unacceptable attempt to worm their 

way out of this mess that the NDP have created. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this the last word from the government?  Is this 

the last word from the NDP?  Is it going to be that blackmail is 

the only answer that they have left for us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I should like to answer 

the question to say to the members of the House that it is well 

known by every one of us that there have been endless 

meetings, endless propositions and counter-propositions, all to 

no avail. 

 

Since the opposition's point of view is that the issues of a 

bell-ringing motion and their view on GRIP are inextricably 

linked; that being the case they shall always be inextricably 

linked whether now or 60 days from now or whatever the time 

frame is now. 

 

It seems as though we have reached an impasse.  The impasse 

in these circumstances has to be resolved, as it is in a 

democracy, by a majority vote.  And we would want the 

members of this legislature to exercise their individual best 

judgement to exercise the vote at the appropriate time on this 

matter. 

 

People want us to get on with the government business.  They 

want us to advance the government agenda.  They do not want 

us to be subjected to feelings of revenge or any other 

motivations which may be existing out there.  They want us to 

do the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'm glad that the 

Premier has seen fit to get into this debate.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Acting House Leader and now the Premier is making as many 

errors talking about the process as the Agriculture minister is 

making in trying to manipulate 60,000 farmers through the 

court process.  The NDP is simply saying, it's either my way or 

the highway -- and gravel ones at that, Mr. Speaker.  And even 

that policy is now being changed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier:  does the government have 

any formal compromise to make which would help us to get 

this place back to normal?  Mr. Speaker, everyone, including 

yourself I now believe, has seen the 

exchange of correspondence and knows that the government 

has never put any compromise in writing -- never.  Will you do 

that, Mr. Premier?  Will you instruct your Deputy House 

Leader to put it in writing because that is the only way that we 

will . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  I think you've asked 

your question.  Let the Premier respond.  If you have another 

question, ask it later. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

again for the question, and I repeat what I said earlier to him.  

The hon. member will know that in various discussions, even 

as late as Friday last, dealing with the Acting House Leader or 

at least the Deputy Leader, the member from Thunder Creek, 

and yourself, sir, from Rosthern, as I'm advised, we were very 

close to a settlement. 

 

That proposition . . . I hear members yelling opposite: you 

never put it, we don't buy it, we don't accept it.  I mean, again 

this is part of our problem.  They do it in open Chamber.  It is 

impossible to get a firm offer from the opposition members 

opposite.  Verbal positions are buried in written positions; 

written positions are then buried subsequently. 

 

I think the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we must admit that the 

government does not believe that bell-ringing and the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) Bill are inextricably linked, 

and the opposition does believe . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  I want to ask the 

member from Wilkie not to keep on interrupting.  There were 

no interruptions when his colleague asked a question, and I 

expect the same courtesy from you, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you.  I'll just wrap up by saying 

that this is the position.  There's the fundamental impasse.  And 

the fundamental impasse is that the people opposite simply do 

not like what is being, they think, proposed for GRIP.  They 

have a right to do that, but they do not have a right to bring 

democracy to its knees.  People have elected only a few short 

months ago a new government with a new agenda, and we 

intend to pursue it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Directly to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, the government's budget, your budget, 

is tearing apart at the seams.  As the public and your own 

back-benchers can tell you, the government has made all the 

wrong decisions. 

 

Mr. Premier, is it so important to the NDP to take millions of 

dollars out of farmers' pockets that you, sir, are quite willing to 

abuse the legislature, abuse the judicial process, abuse the 

opposition, and abuse farmers in order to blackmail their way 

to their own conclusion?  Why are you so afraid to 

compromise?  Are you afraid that it might actually help 

farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it is exactly this last 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

kind of question which I think illustrates the dilemma that the 

Conservative opposition has placed itself in -- the dilemma of 

total incredibility.  Listen to the last question: are you so afraid 

to help out the farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Now whether we are ideologically apart, as we are in a number 

of issues, that kind of a question must surely lack any 

credibility.  How can any political party of any ideology want 

to purposely hurt the farmers?  But there are differences of 

policy, differences between your version of GRIP and our 

GRIP, I admit.  You may not like it.  But the reality is we 

campaigned on it; we were elected on it.  And we intend to 

introduce the amendments and the legislation based on that. 

 

You people do not like that, and you will use every tactic 

available to you in order to halt the proceedings of this 

legislature to an end.  Don't look to us for compromise.  We 

have offered compromise after compromise.  Let's 

acknowledge the fact that this is an area where we agree to 

disagree. 

 

I would ask you to drop your motivation of revenge for what 

you think we did to you during the SaskEnergy debate, drop 

that motivation, get on with the idea of governance, and get on 

with the business of dealing with the people's business, which 

is exactly what the people everywhere in the province of 

Saskatchewan want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and a new question 

to the Premier.  No, Mr. Premier, our motivation is behind us 

and we will not drop our attempt to help the farmers and the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

You say, am I right in criticizing you for what you are doing to 

the farmers, that we are politically motivated.  Sir, this is what 

you've been doing to farmers over the last couple of months -- 

gasoline increase, 3 cents a litre; power bills have gone up; 

gasoline bills have gone up; telephone has gone up; FeedGAP 

(feed grain adjustment program) has been eliminated; cash 

advance has been eliminated; E&H (education and health) tax 

from 7 to 8 per cent; GST (goods and services tax) is not now 

being refundable to farmers because you didn't harmonize; and 

if we're lucky enough to make a little bit of money, now you've 

got 10 per cent on the personal income tax increase . . . 10 per 

cent personal income tax increase.  And you are saying that 

you are for the farmers?  How do you square that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You see, Mr. Speaker, both by tone 

and substance the dilemna in which the Conservative 

opposition finds itself.  The question of bell-ringing is linked 

now not only to GRIP, but this last question, to a whole list of 

perceived abuses in the minds of the opposition.  And a list 

which I am sure with just a little bit of imagination, the hon. 

members opposite could expand for ever.  Of course it's a false 

list, but none the less it is a list. 

 

Under those circumstances, it is clear to any responsible 

person, even the Liberal Party leader, that it is impossible 

to resolve this matter through negotiation because they link 

bell-ringing to this long list of perceived abuses.  In this 

circumstances, that amounts to an abuse of the democratic 

process under the legislative session. 

 

In these circumstances one can only conclude, sir, that you and 

your leader, the former premier, are motivated by revenge by 

what you think we did to you during the SaskEnergy debate.  

And far from standing up for the farmers of Saskatchewan, you 

are standing up -- I'm sorry to say this -- for some sense of 

petty feeling of revenge. 

 

I tell you, hon. member, you're not going to get away with it 

because we got elected on changes which are being accepted 

by the people of Saskatchewan.  There is a change in 

government.  Please, let's understand that we cannot agree on 

everything -- this happens to be one of the issues -- and the 

people want you to get to work.  Get on with dealing with the 

business of this province and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier's 

betrayal of the electors is almost complete.  The final betrayal 

will play itself out in the next couple of days.  You were 

elected, Mr. Premier, because you said you had a better way, 

that you would do more for less.  I just had a long litany of 

things that you have done for this province, Mr. Premier, and I 

suggest what you are doing is wreaking rural revenge on 

Saskatchewan for your '82 and '86 defeat. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government is not interested in 

democracy.  It does not care about the process.  And the 

Premier has admitted it just publicly.  It cares not for the rights 

of farmers or the rights of individuals to have their day in court.  

And louder than the bells that are ringing in these halls are the 

bells that are ringing in our offices right now saying and 

pleading with us to keep our stand. 

 

Mr. Premier, we must and we will stand by farmers, and we 

will stand by the taxpayers . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I'd like him to put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We will stand by the taxpayers and the 

farmers of this province.  I guarantee you that.  No, Mr. 

Speaker, I do not have any further questions.  We're not getting 

any answers.  I move this House now adjourn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we call in the members, I have a fairly 

lengthy statement that I wish to make today. 

 

Once again, during this session . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, no.  You can't do it like this.  Call in 

the members. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay.  All those in favour of the motion of 

adjournment please say aye.  All those opposed to the motion 

please say no. 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

All right, next order of business. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Bell-Ringing Situation 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we call in the members, I have a 

statement that I wish to make.  It's a fairly lengthy statement, I 

hope members bear with me. 

 

Once again during this session, the proceedings of this 

Assembly are threatened by the protracted ringing of division 

bells.  Once again, I am forced by circumstances to intervene in 

what I believe to be the best interest of this Assembly.  I do not 

take this responsibility lightly, but as I have stated before, my 

primary responsibility as Speaker is to support the 

parliamentary process. 

 

In the time since my ruling of June 29, members have 

associated the issue of bells with the disposition of the GRIP 

Bill.  Events have forced me to deal primarily with the bells, 

but I intend to allow further opportunity for negotiations on the 

GRIP dispute. 

 

On Tuesday, the opposition obliged the bells to ring for almost 

five and a half hours until the House adjourned at 10:30 p.m.  

Yesterday, the bells rang for nearly 3 hours, again until the end 

of the sitting day when the motion to adjourn the House, 

moved by the Leader of the Opposition, lapsed.  And today 

once more the opposition has shown its apparent readiness to 

ring the division bells. 

 

On these occasions it was evident that the opposition objected 

to the possible concurrence of the second report of the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures which contains a 

recommendation to limit the duration of bells for recorded 

divisions.  They were spurred on Tuesday when the 

government's Deputy House Leader gave oral notice of closure 

indicating the intention of the government to conclude the 

debate on the committee report. 

 

For the benefit of the public, I should mention that the use of 

closure is allowed under rule 34 of the Assembly rules. 

 

Debate on this report was expected to be called for final debate 

yesterday.  When the item was to be called under orders of the 

day, it was reasonable to anticipate that the motion for closure 

would have been proposed and that upon adoption the debate 

on the second report would be concluded and decided no later 

than 1 a.m. Thursday morning in accordance with the 

provisions of rule 34. 
 

This did not happen, however, because a motion to adjourn the 

House was moved during question period.  Yesterday the 

opposition leader made it abundantly evident that he and his 

party object strenuously to the policies of the government and 

that they would take whatever measures were available to them 

to make their protest effective. 
 

By forcing the division bells to ring all day on the motion to 

adjourn, the House was prevented from transacting any 

business the whole day.  Now today the same tactic is being 

used.  The goal again is to prevent the House from reaching 

orders of the day and thus deny an opportunity 

for the government to move closure on debate of the second 

report. 

 

In my ruling on June 29 when the bells on the vote on the 

GRIP Bill were suspended, I indicated that it was the 

responsibility of members, through the Rules Committee and 

the House, to change the rules to limit bell-ringing. 

 

Subsequent to that ruling, the normal rule change process was 

followed.  The committee met three times and reported its 

recommendations to the House.  That report has been debated 

at length.  The only steps remaining to complete the process are 

to conclude the debate and hold the vote. 

 

Members on both sides of the Assembly are in agreement that 

it is necessary to limit the length that the division bells may 

ring during a vote.  But at the same time, some members are 

saying that the use of prolonged bell-ringing is justifiable in 

certain instances to prevent the government from introducing, 

and the House from passing, a particular piece of legislation 

that some members view as illegitimate or pernicious.  This 

position implies that the end justifies the means. 

 

As Speaker, my responsibility is limited to the means only, 

which is the parliamentary process.  It is not my role to judge 

whether the end sought by the government is good or bad; 

justifiable or insupportable.  At the same time I wish to point 

out that other parliamentary procedures remain available to 

members to fight the ends sought by government. 

 

It is fundamentally important that the Speaker adheres strictly 

to a procedural point of view and seek to maintain the balance 

between the need of the majority to reach decisions and the 

need of the minority to be heard.  This is a basic characteristic 

of any deliberating body, and as Speaker I am bound in duty to 

maintain this balance to the greatest extent possible as allowed 

by our rules and practices.  This is my highest priority. 

 

As I have told the House in previous rulings, the Chair cannot 

allow the use of obstructive tactics to become an intolerable 

abuse of the process.  Obstruction cannot be allowed to cripple 

the work of the Assembly.  It cannot be allowed to prevent 

members from carrying out their responsibilities.  When 

obstruction is taken to such an excess, the Chair has a duty to 

intervene.  In the best interest of the Assembly, the Chair has a 

duty to act. 

 

I would remind members of the references I cited to statements 

of Speakers of this Assembly and the House of Commons in 

Ottawa in my ruling of June 29, demonstrating the unequivocal 

obligation of the Chair to exercise its responsibilities and to 

ensure that the House is able to conduct its business. 

 

It is perhaps ironic that I am being compelled to intervene to 

call a recorded division on a motion moved to protest the 

adoption of rules that will prevent the abuse of prolonged bells 

from happening again.  But so be it.  Faced with the 

circumstances of this situation, I have no choice but to 

intervene. 

 

Members of the opposition have made it plain in the  



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

Assembly and to the media that they will do their utmost to 

obstruct the decision of the Assembly to adopt the second 

report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures.  

Statements made by the opposition leader yesterday made it 

evident to me that they are prepared to use the bells to force 

their will on the House.  This cannot be allowed to continue. 

 

A minority must not dictate the actions of the Assembly, 

especially after the issue has been debated.  As I've already 

indicated, the Chair will act to ensure that the House is not 

prevented from making decisions.  I am ordering the bells to be 

silenced and the vote to be called within one hour of the 

conclusion of my ruling.  The House will be allowed to decide 

by a vote of its majority what is acceptable and what will be 

done.  It is neither parliamentary nor democratic to permit 

continual obstruction by the use of tactics that mock the 

principles of this institution.  If the House wants to establish 

time limits on bells, the House must decide. 

 

It is the duty of the Chair, even in the face of bitter and earnest 

opposition, to make sure the House is given the opportunity to 

make that decision. 

 

While this decision will permit the House to resume 

functioning, I am painfully aware that my ruling will not 

restore the spirit of co-operation which must exist among 

parties if this House is to work effectively. 

 

The problem of the GRIP Bill still remains.  Recent comments 

made by all party representatives suggest that negotiations had 

nearly succeeded in resolving the dispute.  In the hope that 

negotiations might be resumed, I have decided to maintain the 

suspension on the GRIP Bill on the same basis as in my ruling 

of June 29 for at least two more weeks.  I trust that in the days 

to come, members will be able to find a compromise. 

 

I direct that the vote on the adjournment motion will be taken 

at 3:11 p.m. today.  Call in the members. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:11 p.m. until 3:11 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

-- Nil 

Nays 

Romanow Hamilton 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Wiens Draper 

Simard Serby 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Goulet Scott 

Solomon McPherson 

Atkinson Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

 

 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Renaud 

Calvert Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

-- 44 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, in questions put by 

members, item 42, I hereby supply the answer. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion for Closure 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Before the order of the day is called 

for resuming debate on item no. 10 in adjourned debates, I 

move: 

 

 That the debate on the motion for concurrence in the second 

report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures and 

any amendments or subamendments proposed thereto be not 

further adjourned. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1515) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Britton. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There is serious 

public discontent over our political system and how it 

functions.  A Gallup poll taken some 10 years ago 

demonstrated that 61 per cent of those interviewed were in 

favour of parliamentary reform.  Today the numbers are 

staggering.  In the eyes of the people, politicians are now mere 

manipulators, game players.  They're seen as power brokers 

who, once in power, forget the reasons why they were elected 

and do as they wish until shortly before an election, at which 

point they tell the people what they want to hear and the sham 

starts all over again. 
 

The ongoings of this legislature over the last few weeks simply 

emphasizes the need for true parliamentary reform.  Imagine 

how different the events would have unfolded if potentially 

controversial Bills could be forwarded to an all-party 

committee where problems are addressed in conjunction with 

those members that the public most affected by the proposed 

changes.  Why should representatives of the people be afraid of 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

the people? 

 

Public input in all-party recommendations could have allowed 

us to avoid the impasse that led to the initial bell-ringing.  I am 

convinced that greater emphasis on dialogue and conversation, 

consultation, will lead in the longer term to more efficiency and 

effectiveness.  We need imagination.  We need courage, 

open-mindedness, and commitment if we wish to contribute to 

making the parliamentary system evolve and work more 

effectively. 

 

I am saddened by the entrenchment of the Leader of the New 

Democratic Party, the Leader of the Conservative Party, and 

their respective, unwavering followers in this Assembly.  How 

proud are they that good government and democracy have been 

sacrificed to the endless battles between the government and 

the opposition? 

 

Over the last three years closure has been . . . Pardon me.  Over 

the last years closure has been used three times in this 

province.  There was no need for closure until the potash 

privatization debate on August 4, 1989.  Less than two years 

later it was used again when the education and health tax was 

changed to the PST (provincial sales tax) in 1991. 

 

It is being used once again, Mr. Speaker.  The fact that this 

Assembly was able to go for 84 years without closure, but in 

the last few years it has been invoked three times, is a clear 

signal that the NDP and the Progressive Conservatives have 

been incapable of getting along with one another to the 

detriment of our province. 

 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) were supposed 

to be elected to locate problems, to offer a wide range of 

alternative solutions, to choose one in consultation with the 

people, and then to go to the public with that decision, showing 

that the best decision had been made. 

 

Today MLAs seem content to devote most of their time to 

deciding what should be done and persuading and manipulating 

the public to accept their policy rather than discussing these 

issues in a non-partisan fashion and coming up with some 

constructive solutions through consultation. 

 

Good governing and good management are not founded on 

manipulation and arbitrary action.  When the world beyond this 

building is facing a crisis, Mr. Speaker, it is all the more 

imperative that the legislature demonstrate some leadership and 

take action.  But how can it be when it is crippled by the overly 

partisan bickering between two parties. 

 

Elected representatives sent here to lead and to listen to the 

people are failing to break the chains of partisanship and help 

the people of this province out of their crises. 

 

The government does not want to listen to the people, the 

opposition does want to let the House return to business -- and 

I believe that -- while neither is showing much desire to make 

the legislature a constructive and productive institution that is 

capable of helping people whose taxes simply keep running up. 

The rules and procedures that need to be changed to make this 

House meet the needs of the people are difficult to reform, and 

that is because, Mr. Speaker, there is so much partisan 

suspicion.  We cannot change the rules for the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan because parties are too worried about 

losing some advantage.  Meanwhile, the longer we wait to 

reform this legislature, the farther it falls from grace in the 

public eye. 

 

What have politicians gained if they destroy public respect for 

the legislature and elected representatives in order to further 

their own popularity or their party?  If the people have no more 

faith in their institutions, they will have no more confidence in 

their political parties or their elected representatives. 

 

Just when the people of Saskatchewan are looking for 

guidance, Mr. Speaker, to sort out the economic and 

agricultural crises, the institution empowered to offer some 

leadership is falling short of the task. 

 

If the government truly wants to lead us out of this present 

dilemma it should show some willingness to reform this 

Assembly so that it can actually be productive and avoid 

heavy-handedness that it has demonstrated over the last weeks. 

 

Positive steps that could be taken could include the 

introduction of measures that empower the public and better 

enable opposition and government members to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan within this Assembly.  It is 

unreasonable to say that the opposition should lose the tool of 

bell-ringing when it is one of the few means that they have to 

bring attention to and encourage public participation on an 

issue. 

 

If the government wanted to get rid of bell-ringing, it should 

have offered the people a chance to participate in the governing 

of this province through all-party committees.  They should 

have been willing to give the opposition and their own 

members more chances to speak openly, chair more standing 

committees.  They should have been willing to ease up on the 

iron reins of discipline and offered free votes as an exchange. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, and with great disappointment to myself, 

they really offered nothing, leaving one only to conclude that 

they have little commitment to public consultation and true 

reform.  They have little commitment to solving this crisis and 

giving the legislature a chance to rise above its own crisis and 

start solving the economic travesty facing Saskatchewan. 

 

And what happened to the recommendations made by the NDP 

caucus in its own 1987 paper on democratic reform?  Were 

these ideas quickly forgotten during the metamorphosis in 

which the NDP caucus transformed to become the government 

caucus?  Where is the government's long-promised committee 

on democratic reform that was promised in the throne speech, 

and the throne speech before that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

While the Premier may feel the opposition is, and I quote, 

virtually impossible to negotiate with, negotiating does not 

appear to be one of his priorities or strengths either.  I wish to 

remind the Premier how he reacted when closure 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

was invoked on August 4 of 1989.  The Premier was critical of 

the then Conservative government for, and I quote: 

 

 . . . coming in and using the heavy hand of its majority and 

arbitrarily deciding in its opinion that the opposition's debate 

has been too long, in its opinion that our arguments have 

been irrelevant, in its opinion that we ought not to be talking 

about it. 

 

The Premier, then leader of the opposition, described the act as, 

and I quote: unwarranted, undemocratic, underhanded, 

"unwarranted attack to the rules," and described it as a black 

day for democracy. 

 

Further, Mr. Premier, you described the move as "discredited 

and desperate."  You said the actions of the government were 

that of a bully, and that such actions are a means of 

"guillotining the opposition." 

 

I ask the following members of government to rise and speak to 

this amended motion: the member from Saskatoon Eastview, 

who claims to be committed to democratic reform but has 

never demonstrated it in this Assembly; the member from 

Cumberland, who has an important private member's motion on 

parliamentary reform before this Assembly; the member from 

Regina Victoria, who has been committed to proper process but 

has participated to date in the government's disregard for 

proper process. 

 

The amended motion is reasonable, Mr. Speaker, and provides 

hope for future reforms that the members of this House should 

welcome.  Although the main motion to limit the bell-ringing 

does have many merits, proper process must not be ignored 

under such serious circumstances and it is because of that that 

the people of this House should abstain from that motion. 

 

I plead with government members who genuinely care about 

parliamentary reform to demonstrate that commitment today 

and vote in favour of the amended motion. 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I will ask for leave to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce my 

sisters up on east gallery.  Just immediately to your right is my 

sister, Millie Cumming, who is visiting from Saskatoon, and 

Arlene Goulet, who lives here in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

privilege to add a few comments to this extremely important 

and significant debate in the life of this legislature.  We are 

engaged in a process as legislators, of revising the rules of our 

legislature, and that's an extremely important process and I am 

sure one that no one of us, as elected members, takes lightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed when we are privileged to hold a seat in 

this legislature, part of that privilege and part of that 

responsibility is to serve as stewards, caretakers of this 

institution and its traditions, which have been handed to us over 

generations and which we intend to hand on to others.  We're 

not the first members to sit in this House, that's for sure, and we 

will not be the last members to sit in this House.  And while we 

are here, we do serve as stewards and caretakers of this 

legislature and its traditions. 

 

And therefore the debate we're engaged in is not an 

insignificant debate and one that I'm sure no one of us takes 

lightly, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed we are all in some ways sworn to 

protect what we believe are the principles upon which this 

legislature is founded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the short length of time I wish to take in this 

debate, I'd like to talk about some of those principles, the 

principles that I believe are essential, that we as the elected 

members of this time in history maintain. 

 

Number one, Mr. Speaker, no one of us . . . the fundamental 

principle it seems to me, of this legislature, is that no one of us 

occupies a seat in this House except at the will of the people 

who put us here.  We are here only at the will of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  It's the people of our own constituencies who 

through the democratic process have exercised their right, they 

have chosen their members, and they have chosen their 

government.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we must be at all 

times servants in this Chamber, of the people of Saskatchewan, 

the people who put us here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past few days and weeks the people of my 

constituency and people across this province have been saying: 

I am convinced -- to all MLAs -- it's time for you people to be 

doing the work of the people of Saskatchewan.  It's time that 

this legislature in Regina got back to work. 

 

That's our first responsibility, Mr. Speaker.  As members of this 

House we do not sit here except at the will of the people of our 

province, the will of the people of our constituencies who put 

us here to conduct their affairs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, every four years, in our democratic process 

the people of our province make their choice on who they will 

to govern their province. 

 

The second principle, Mr. Speaker, of this legislature, which I 

believe is essential to preserve and maintain, is that principle 

which understands that this legislature is a forum first of all of 

debate.  It is not first of all Mr. Speaker, a place of decision 

making.  Decision making is done in other agencies and 

avenues of government.  This Chamber first of all is a forum 

for debate.  And that principle must reflect itself in our rules. 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I learned this, I learned this principle of the 

legislature first of all from a former premier of our province, 

the Hon. Allan Blakeney.  Mr. Speaker, I do recall, and any of 

us who I think were here that day will recall, some of those 

comments made by Mr. Blakeney in his last speech in this 

Assembly, in which he outlined to those of us here and to those 

of us who will follow the legislative debates, his view of the 

principles of this House.  And he made that point so eloquently, 

that this House first of all is a forum of debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote for the record today some of 

those words from the Hon. Allan Blakeney in his last speech to 

this House. 

 

He, in that speech asked us, invited us, to compare our system 

of government with systems of government that we observe in 

other parts of the world.  And he said: 

 

 When we look around and consider the human condition 

generally there are many things which depress us, but some 

things in which we can take some pride. 

 

 And one of the things which gives us some cause for 

encouragement, as we look on the world scene, is the fact 

that free men have developed institutions to govern 

themselves.  We've seen great advances in the world in 

technology and economics, but we've also, I think, 

appreciated that technology and economic achievement is not 

enough.  We must also find some way for fairness and 

physical well-being to be available to the largest possible 

number of people, and also ways to permit the human spirit 

to soar. 

 

 And so we have devised these methods of public or 

parliamentary government, and we are involved in that 

process.  And I am sure that those of us who have been 

involved in it think from time to time that it's a pretty untidy 

process, and we wonder whether it's all worthwhile.  If I may 

say something to the newer members, I believe it is 

worthwhile. 

 

 . . . But I say to members of the legislature, we're not 

primarily here to make decisions -- other agencies of 

government make decisions; we pass upon them.  We can, on 

rare occasions, cause the executive arm of government to 

change their decision, but rarely. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here's my point. 

 

 Our job fundamentally is to talk about (those decisions) . . . 

to discuss them, to question (them), to explain them, to reply 

to questions, and all (of) this is so that the voters and the 

public will understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the fundamental principle of this 

House, our fundamental job, is to talk, is to discuss, is to 

debate.  It's for members of government, of Executive 

Council, to be available to answer the questions and the 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is first of all a forum of debate.  And when an 

opposition chooses through various legislative tactics to 

remove that privilege, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a change in 

the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we've seen happen over the last almost a 

month now is the cessation of debate in the people's legislature.  

Mr. Speaker, if a fundamental principle of this House is to 

permit the opportunity for elected members who are here to 

serve their constituents and this province to debate, and that 

right is refused by the minority, then, Mr. Speaker, it is time in 

Saskatchewan for a change in the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a third principle that must guide our legislature is 

that principle which says this legislature must guarantee two 

fundamental rights -- the right of the majority to govern and the 

right of the minority to be heard.  If the right of the majority to 

govern is removed, we enter a situation that is anarchy.  If on 

the other hand the right of the minority to be heard is removed, 

we enter into a situation which can only be described as 

dictatorship. 

 

And so when we are involved in this debate about the rules, 

that principle too must be maintained -- the right of the 

majority to govern, the right of the minority to be heard. 

 

With those three principles in mind, Mr. Speaker, first of all 

that we are here to serve the people of Saskatchewan; number 

two, that this legislature is first and foremost a forum of debate 

where the right to speak is precious and should be provided and 

guaranteed; and number three, the principle which says the 

majority must have the right to govern and the minority must 

have the right to be heard, with those three principles in mind, 

Mr. Speaker, then I invite members present to put into context 

the rule which is now before the House, the proposed rule 

change, to see if it fits those three principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question of ringing bells.  Does the ringing of 

bells indefinitely serve the public interest?  If our role is to 

serve the public, does the ringing of bells -- indefinitely -- 

serve the public interest? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's an argument on both sides; there is 

an argument on both sides of that question.  There's no doubt 

about that.  If the bells have been used to provide the people of 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to voice their opinion in a debate, 

if while the bells are ringing the people of our province have 

been given an opportunity to provide their opinion, then 

arguably bell-ringing serves a useful purpose to the people of 

our province.  Mr. Speaker, if it is simple, plain obstructionism, 

if the bells are being rung simply to obstruct the majority 

government, then, Mr. Speaker, there is no purpose served for 

the people of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've had an experience here this year 

where the bells rang for some -- what was it? -- 18 days; 18 

days, Mr. Speaker, an unprecedented ringing of the bells for 18 

long days.  And I ask you and I ask other members present in 

the House this afternoon: at the 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

conclusion of those 18 days when we returned to this House, 

do you recall petitions being presented by members opposite 

having been collected over the 18 days? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recall the bell-ringing incident in 1989 at the 

close of which over 120,000 signatures of Saskatchewan 

people had been collected on petitions.  The public was 

involved and the public was served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the time this extended bell-ringing period 

we've just gone through, the 18 days, do you, Mr. Speaker, or 

do any members opposite recall a time when a public meeting 

was held in this province, sponsored by the opposition where 

members of the public could contribute their opinion?  Mr. 

Speaker, I didn't hear of one.  There was certainly none in my 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the bell-ringing is used as a vehicle to allow 

people to express their opinion and to contribute to the debate, 

then it can be argued there's a purpose.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

when bells are used as simple obstructionism, any credibility 

that has attached itself to that tactic is lost, Mr. Speaker.  And 

in the current situation, in the current situation it is my view 

that the use of the bells have not served the public of 

Saskatchewan and therefore has violated one of the principles 

of our legislature. 

 

Of the second principle, Mr. Speaker: does the bell-ringing 

serve that principle which says this is a forum of debate?  Well 

the answer is obviously not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote.  We've heard a lot of quotes from 

members opposite in the course of this debate.  I want to quote 

a member opposite who said on May 31, 1989 -- and I am 

referring to a quote from the current member from Rosthern -- 

he said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Silence in a democracy is a death knell, I would suggest to 

you, in such a system.  I would further suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Neudorfs in Germany know that the 

precursor to the sound of jackboots is silence in an Assembly 

such as ours. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the man who has silenced this Assembly 

over the last month.  Mr. Speaker, he went on to say: 

 

 I believe, Mr. Speaker, very firmly that the Legislative 

Assembly is the corner-stone for free speech; it is the 

democratic foundation upon which we are built; it is the 

embodiment of the principle of responsible government.  And 

that is what I stand for, and that's what the members on this 

side stand for.  And it is a hope that that is what the members 

opposite will also see their way to stand for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Rosthern in 1979 made an 

eloquent argument, an eloquent argument for the role of this 

House as a place of debate.  Mr. Speaker, the obstructionist 

tactic of ringing the bells indefinitely has silenced this House 

and silenced debate and therefore violated that principle upon 

which this legislature is founded. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, does this unlimited access to bell-ringing 

protect the right of the majority to govern and the right of the 

minority to be heard?  It may, Mr. Speaker, be argued that 

bell-ringing offers protection to the minority to be heard, but it 

does, Mr. Speaker, without question, have the potential to 

eliminate the majority's right to govern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in October of last year the people of this province 

spoke loudly and clearly.  They wanted a change.  Across this 

province they voiced their opinion -- they wanted a change.  

They wanted new policy and new direction.  They gave to this 

government a mandate, Mr. Speaker.  In many areas of 

government and public policy they instituted change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view the members opposite have, one, 

either not grasped that reality, even until today; or number two, 

they are simply using the tactics that we've seen in the last few 

weeks as revenge -- revenge, Mr. Speaker.  Their motivation 

may well be revenge and spite in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan gave this government a massive 

majority to institute new change and new direction in our 

province.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are undertaking that change at 

the will of Saskatchewan people in this very first sitting, in this 

very first budget of the new government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the weekend, over the past few weeks the 

people that I have talked to in a variety of corners of this 

province, including a number of people at the Big Valley 

Jamboree, including a number of those 550 seniors who were 

gathered earlier in Moose Jaw this week for the seniors' games, 

the message was loud and clear: they want their legislators, 

they want their representatives, they want their government, to 

be at work, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we meet that 

responsibility of service to the people of our province, to 

ensure that freedom of speech in this Chamber and the freedom 

of debate on which it's founded continues, and to ensure that 

the minority will be heard.  Because, Mr. Speaker, I remind 

you in the proposed rule change there is provision to the 

opposition that is more generous than provisions to any other 

opposition in this country, Mr. Speaker, to ensure, to ensure 

that the voice of the minority is heard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of our province, the people of 

Saskatchewan, are saying that the right of the majority to 

govern must be maintained.  We elect people to do the work of 

our province and, Mr. Speaker, because that is the view of the 

people of Saskatchewan, I support this change in the rules and I 

would encourage all members to do the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I take a 

great deal of concern in entering into the debate.  I want first of 

all to say that, as a veteran member of this legislature -- some 

16 years I've spent in this legislature, and prior to that I spent 

some four years in the premier's office, Premier Blakeney's 

office, as a special assistant. 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

And I want to say that I have a great respect for the institution 

and for democracy.  And I do think that what is necessary is 

sanity to prevail.  And I want to deal just a little bit with the 

history as I know the legislature.  I go back to '71 and I recall 

there were members on the opposition side, members like Dave 

Steuart, Senator Steuart; Stuart Cameron, who is a justice on 

the Queen's Bench now, or Court of Appeal. 

 

There were other great debaters in the House, and that carried 

on.  And I learned to respect the House and the debate.  And 

when we went outside of the Chamber, there was no 

continuation of hate or vengeance. 

 

(1545) 

 

But I'll tell you, in 1982 when the former premier and his 55 

additional members came into this legislature, they essentially 

showed absolutely no respect for this institution.  I recall, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was merely eight of us in opposition.  And 

the scenes that took place in this House, any premier should 

have been totally, totally dissatisfied with. 

 

I recall eight of us sat on the other side of the House.  And they 

literally sent over when a premier who had been a premier 

respected in this province, and heckle as loud . . . so loud that 

you couldn't even carry on speaking.  And that is where the 

respect for this institution broke down.  And throughout the 

whole term of the former premier's reign in office, he showed a 

total lack of respect for this institution. 

 

I want to indicate some of the areas where he demonstrated 

this.  I take a look at the filing of reports.  Never, never did he 

bother meeting the deadlines for filing reports with the 

legislature.  The auditor, which is a servant of this Assembly, 

he had his Justice minister at the time and concurred with by 

the former premier, a total personal attack on the integrity of an 

officer of this legislature because the auditor gave them a bad 

report and indicated that he could not account for 50 per cent of 

the spending of the former premier's regime. 

 

This is the background that we're dealing with -- a former 

premier and the record of how they governed and the disrespect 

for any of the traditions of this Assembly.  And that is what 

we're dealing with here, trying to get some work done on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan.  And today what we see 

is the continuation of hate and vengeance by the Leader of the 

Opposition and his members. 

 

So they didn't file any reports. They blasted the auditor 

answering questions in this legislature; absolutely refused to 

answer in a civilized manner as former Premier Blakeney had 

so excellently done. The budget process completely broke 

down. And on and on it goes. 

 

So while we on this side agree that you have to work with the 

opposition and you have to have some constructive dialogue, I 

want to make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan that that's 

almost an impossibility with the background of how they have 

shown total disrespect for this institution. 

I want to turn just briefly to the member of the opposition that 

spoke this afternoon.  And she spoke on this motion, and she 

says, I essentially agree with the substance of the motion, but I 

don't like the process.  Sitting on both sides of the fence.  I 

want to say to the hon. member that the editorial in the 

Saskatoon Star indicated that any reasonable people in five 

minutes could decide the issue on bells. 

 

And as my hon. colleague has indicated, the motion or the rule 

changes in respect to the bells is the most generous of 

anywhere in Canada -- anywhere in Canada.  What is she really 

saying?  Don't get rid of the bell, but I agree with the bells 

limitations as set forward.  Are we to hold the House to hostage 

or are we going to address the issue as the public is demanding.  

That's the clear indications that we get. 

 

And I want to say that it has been a great honour in this House, 

and I think that we owe it to the people of Saskatchewan to act 

in a mature way.  And governments do have an agenda and 

when they put forward their agenda they are going to be judged 

by the people of Saskatchewan.  And that's how democracy 

works. 

 

And all we are asking is to continue on in an orderly manner 

and to put forward the government's agenda and let the people 

of Saskatchewan judge our actions.  That's how it has to work. 

 

And I don't think you can take a sanctimonious position of 

agreeing with the substance of it but not the process.  Because 

as the press indicated, any reasonable people could settle it in 

five minutes.  And that's what we have done.  And we brought 

the most generous possible protection to the opposition and to 

the public, the interests of the public. 

 

And so I therefore support the resolution of the amendment of 

the rules. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have leave for the 

introduction of some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to the members of the House here, I'd like to 

introduce 32 young people who have gathered in your 

chambers . . . or your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Twenty-one of 

them are constituents of mine and they're members of the 

Norquay 4-H Club.  The other 11 are 4-H members visiting 

from Ontario.  And they are down here in Regina today doing 

some touring around, and they've taken some time out of their 

busy schedule to take in the proceedings of the House here. 

 

And I will be joining them on the steps for pictures in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker.  And then after that, we'll be getting 

together for some refreshments.  And I'll ask all the members 

of the House to welcome them. 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you.  Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker.  This is not an occasion which gives me particular 

pleasure in which to rise in this House and to speak, but none 

the less I feel that it is important to say a few words. 

 

I've been in this legislature -- it will be off and on, I guess, 

October of 1967 -- 25 years.  We actually didn't sit in October 

of 1967; it took the shake out period after the election.  But 

shortly thereafter I took my seat in the legislature.  Actually as 

I recall, initially back where my friends and colleagues are in 

the opposition side, and then eventually as the legislature 

developed, where the current Leader of the Liberal Party is 

sitting. 

 

And this is an institution which, Mr. Speaker, I can attest 

through personal experience, has witnessed many turbulent 

debates and has witnessed many turbulent and unexpected 

developments. 

 

I hearken back to the time when the government in its wisdom, 

headed by my colleague and friend, former premier Allan 

Blakeney, decided that the impasse in negotiations between the 

government and the potash industry in Saskatchewan and 

because of the Supreme Court decision on potash, that it would 

be in the public interest to introduce legislation establishing a 

publicly owned corporation called the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan and also introducing legislation with respect to 

purchase and so-called take-over of some potash corporations 

in pursuit of the establishment of PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.). 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was one of the highlights of my legislative 

career.  At that time the official opposition was not the 

Conservatives.  The official opposition was the Liberal Party.  

We had campaigned in 1975 on this issue and were re-elected. 

 

When negotiations with the industry broke down, based on the 

mandate that the voters gave us, we proceeded to introduce the 

appropriate legislation.  Which legislation, having been 

introduced in November at the time of the Speech from the 

Throne, was debated continuously and day in and day out for a 

period, if my memory serves me correctly, well into the new 

year, January, February. 

 

There was, during that very passionate debate, periods of not 

only debate and lengthy speeches, but bell-ringing, 

amendments, subamendments, heated words, hurt feelings.  

There was a large campaign which embroiled this legislature 

outside of this legislature by interested members of the public 

-- the potash corporations, the workers, individual concerned 

citizens, individual organizations, chambers of commerce.  All 

sought to embroil the members to one side or the other of this 

particular debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that debate was probably the most tumultuous and 

most intellectually inspired debate in my years in the 

legislature that I can remember.  And I can tell the members of 

this House that it was a debate which featured all the best 

elements of parliament and politics.  It featured ideological 

differences, economic considerations, social concerns, and 

personality. 

 

The dynamism of the then leader, currently retired senator 

Davey Steuart, people like Cy MacDonald, Tony Merchant, 

now Mr. Justice Ted Malone, Mr. Justice Stuart Cameron -- all 

of these were articulate spokespeople in opposition to what the 

government was doing.  I felt, because I was the one piloting 

the legislation through the House and sat here for three and a 

half months in doing so, that there were times the Bill would 

never make it, that the opposition might walk out and never 

come back.  I thought that the government's will might be 

broken. 

 

I even at moments -- I shouldn't be saying this -- wondered 

whether or not what we were doing was the correct thing, but 

eventually again came back to the conclusion that it was the 

right thing to do.  And I tell you in a moment of candour, there 

were days on end where I was personally aggrieved at what 

was said about myself and about my government, by the 

members opposite -- aggrieved for all of the duration that it 

took for me to be aggrieved sitting in this legislature. 

 

A cardinal rule was that once the debate was finished and you 

left this legislature, it didn't matter what you said or how you 

handled yourself in debate, outside we were all servants of the 

public.  And above all there were days when I feared that this 

institution would not survive that debate.  And here we are, Mr. 

Speaker, 16, 17 years later in this institution which has 

survived and which during that period has seen other debates, 

and some raucous debates including the debates in 1989 with 

the proposed privatization of SaskEnergy when the official 

opposition sat on this side. 

 

And this institution survived that potash debate, and it survived 

the SaskEnergy debate, and it will survive this debate because 

no matter what we may think or feel amongst ourselves the fact 

of the matter is there is no other credible alternative in the form 

of governance that we have in this province.  Everybody knows 

it. 

 

And no matter how hurt the feelings are and no matter even if a 

majority has to rule from time to time in moments of total 

impasse, this House is as strong today as it ever will be 

notwithstanding what the members of the opposition might say.  

That is the strength of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now I want to move from that 

background and that historical perspective and that personal 

perspective -- which I readily admit is clouded perhaps by my 

recollection of events but I believe they're accurate -- to today's 

circumstance. 

 

This report which we're debating deals with a change in 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

the rules pertaining to bell-ringing.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to say a few words about bell-ringing, having been involved in 

bell-ringing both as opposition leader and as the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bell-ringing and where does it lead, not only the legislature but 

the official opposition and governments?  What are the possible 

outcomes of bell-ringing?  Essentially they boil down to two 

options at the end of the day.  At the end of the day whether the 

bells are rung for 17 days or 18 days or 21 days or 21 minutes, 

one of two things happens.  Either the government acquiesces 

on the Bill or the measure that it introduces which prompts the 

bell-ringing, for its own reasons through compromise and 

negotiations or a change in policy or whatever reasons, it either 

acquiesces -- in which case the opposition says we're not going 

to ring the bell any more -- or the government in its wisdom 

decides that it is not going to acquiesce, that the policy or the 

measure which has been introduced which has prompted the 

bell-ringing is a policy which is necessary either for financial 

considerations or is necessary because it improves the lot of the 

community or the sector of people which are being affected by 

the legislation or for whatever reasons.  In which case the other 

alternative is that the opposition acquiesces and the bell-ringing 

stops and there is a vote and the legislature decides and 

determines. 

 

(1600) 

 

That is the essence of democracy -- full, fair opportunity to 

debate fully, as we did during the potash debate or as we had in 

the SaskEnergy debate and as I am no doubt, absolutely 

positive, we will when the GRIP Bill is recalled again -- full 

and fair opportunity to debate, to communicate your views, 

even to hold up proceedings so that you can see if you can rally 

the support of the public at large. 

 

But democracy also has one other important component to it.  

At the end of the day there has to be a decision.  And there can 

only be one of two outcomes.  At the end of the day either the 

government acquiesces and the Bill is withdrawn, the measure 

is withdrawn, or in the alternative at the end of the day the 

opposition acquiesces and the measure progresses.  What is not 

an option is the suggestion that the measure should somehow 

float into Never Never Land and neither be decided by an 

opposition's decisions or by a government's decisions, that the 

measure should not even be introduced or that the measure 

should not even be debated.  At the end of the day that is not 

consistent with the parliamentary, democratic process.  It 

would grind democracy to a total and complete halt.  It would 

bring this legislature into disrepute. 

 

Now in 1989 we were involved in a bell-ringing episode.  In 

1989 in the bell-ringing episode we took the following 

position: that the government of the day did not campaign in 

1986 on the privatization of SaskEnergy.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, the record will confirm the absolute, total truth of that 

statement.  We argued moreover that not only did it not 

campaign and get a mandate on the privatization of 

SaskEnergy, it promised short few weeks or months before 

time that they would never, whatever they privatized, they 

would never 

privatize a public monopoly which was a public utility, like 

SaskEnergy.  I am confident the record will show that. 

 

I am confident that if my memory is correct, that on or about 

May 9, 1988, I think it was, maybe '89, the then deputy leader 

and deputy premier of the government, now Senator Eric 

Berntson, told the legislature in black and white in Hansard 

that whatever they would privatize, they would not privatize 

SaskEnergy. 

 

We know that that was not the situation.  We know that they 

introduced the legislation.  And we took the position that since 

the voters did not approve of this course of action, since it was 

so drastic, so fundamental to the essence of what has been 

Saskatchewan culture, is so embedded in sharp ideological 

differences, privatization versus non-privatization, that we 

wanted to prevent the passage of the Bill and to alert the 

Saskatchewan public to what was being done and we walked 

out for the period of 17 days. 

 

I will not go into the history of what happened during the 17 

days.  My colleague from Moose Jaw South has indicated that 

very ably, with the rallies and the petitions and the public 

support which was garnered in opposition to what the 

government was doing because I think the public believed that 

what they were doing was wrong and also that they did not 

give the government of the day the mandate to do so. 

 

Now what happened?  What happened was, coming back to my 

analysis, one of two decisions.  And the decision that was taken 

by the government of the day for its own reasons was to 

acquiesce and to withdraw the Bill and to indicate to the public 

in effect that the opposition was right and that this Bill of 

privatization would not proceed and, as a consequence, the 

bell-ringing came to an end. 

 

If, however, the government in its wisdom had gone the other 

way and had decided that it was going to persist in the 

privatization of SaskEnergy -- notwithstanding the lack of 

mandate, notwithstanding what it told the legislature, 

notwithstanding what it told the public of Saskatchewan day in 

and day out -- if it decided in its own wisdom to proceed, then 

the situation would have boiled down very quickly, as it did in 

that period, to the official opposition deciding whether it had to 

acquiesce. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, the opposition of the day had taken the 

destructive course of the current opposition of the day, of 

non-acquiescence, thereby stalemating the democratic process, 

then, sir, the institutions and the officers of this hallowed 

Chamber and the rules and all the appropriate changes would 

have been totally and completely justified in having taken 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now what is behind this current 

situation?  Behind this current situation is a clear 

communication to all of the opposition leaders -- the official 

opposition leader, the third-party leader -- that the government, 

for financial reasons, for policy reasons on GRIP, is 

introducing legislation. 
 

We understand that they do not like it.  But we're not 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

going to acquiesce on that, because we have been mandated to 

do that.  We campaigned on that.  We're not misleading the 

public of Saskatchewan in this regard.  We think that these 

changes are going to be accepted, are being accepted.  If we're 

wrong, the remedy in a democracy is at election time, the 

appropriate time.  We've said that clearly. 

 

We've said we will negotiate any kind of reasonable changes as 

long as it's consistent with the fiscal and substantive changes to 

the GRIP that we recommend.  I won't bore you about the 

details of the endless attempts at negotiation.  I say, with the 

greatest of respect to the Liberal leader, she can say for 

whatever political or other reasons that she wants about the 

lack of negotiating skills that we may or may not have -- that's 

entirely up to her -- but I tell you in cold truth . . . And if you 

would acknowledge, in the interest of, as you say, 

non-partisanship and politics, the truth of it, you would know 

the torture that you yourself were involved in -- and I say 

torture -- of trying to find an agreement.  It was not possible. 

 

I've concluded it was not possible because the opposition has 

decided that because it acquiesced for its own reasons, we have 

to acquiesce for their reasons too, and as a consequence have 

brought the proceedings of this House to a standstill -- a 

standstill which is simply not permitted in the political process, 

Mr. Speaker, not permitted. 

 

This is not our fault.  There comes a time when we have to 

understand amongst reasonable men and women who disagree 

and agree that there's a time to disagree, that we agree to 

disagree.  We have surely at the end of all of these days agreed 

to disagree. 

 

And I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as I saw over the last 

nine years the bankruptcy of this province's finances, 

strait-jacketing the new government, myself as Premier, 

strait-jacketing the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

from farmers to small-business people, as I've seen the 

bankruptcy of the economic situation in the province, I for one 

will not support the final bankruptcy, and that is the bankruptcy 

of this institution because an opposition has decided in its own 

wisdom that it is going to wreak revenge on me and the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  That is unacceptable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Permit me to close, Mr. Speaker, in 

the time permitted to me -- the last three minutes, I guess, or 

approximately that as I'm watching the watch, clock -- let me 

close by saying: is democratic reform required?  The answer is 

yes.  This report is democratic reform. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party says she supports it.  The 

Leader of the Conservative Party says he supports an end to 

bell-ringing.  The difference is, the Leader of the Conservative 

Party says he only supports an end to bell-ringing if the 

government acquiesces on the main part of the Bill.  He says, 

decouple them. 

 

But if we decoupled them, would his position change 60 

days from now or six hours from now or six weeks from now?  

Of course they would not, and he would not give up the ringing 

of the bells motion.  So decoupling is not possible.  It's not 

logical.  With the greatest respect to the Leader of the Liberal 

Party, it's not possible. 
 

We either have to deal with this matter later or we deal with it 

now.  So we deal with it now.  And this is democratic reform.  

It's positive, democratic reform.  We are not voting on GRIP.  

We are voting on modernizing this Legislative Chamber with 

all the other chambers of Canada in order to support 

democracy, not to attack democracy, and that's why everybody 

should be on side. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- In eight months that we've been in 

office we've done much.  We've had the Gass report; we've had 

the tabling of documents and reports in a timely fashion; the 

Crown Corporations Committee; questions are being answered 

in a timely fashion; independence of MLAs is being fostered.  

Have we done it all?  The answer is no.  Do we intend to do 

more?  The answer is yes.  This is an important aspect of the 

reform. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan won't be fooled 

behind what has taken place today.  They weren't in the debate 

of potash in 1975.  They weren't in the debate on SaskEnergy 

in 1989.  And let us not despair, they won't in the debate of 

1992.  They know where the principles and the commitments 

of democracy lie and what this report that we're debating is all 

about -- the enhancement of democracy.  This institution is 

stronger than any one of us, including any petulant behaviour 

by any group of MLAs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is how we got here.  I put this case because it 

gives me no pleasure to be in a circumstance where there is not 

consensus.  But as hurtful as it is to be in a position of 

non-consensus, it would be more hurtful and a betrayal of my 

25 years in this Chamber, on all sides of this House, of my 

betrayal of the fundamental principles of democracy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is what this report is all about.  It's an 

enhancement and a growth of democratic reform.  I ask all 

members to join us in the vote in support.  Thank you very 

much. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amendment negatived. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

(1615) 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Ombudsman Amendment Act, 

1992.  Under the amendments, restrictions on the 

Ombudsman's jurisdiction, which do not occur in other 

provinces, will be removed.  This will help to ensure that the 

government remains accountable to the people it serves.  The 

Ombudsman will now be able 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

to review the administrative acts of ministers and deputy 

ministers. 

 

This amendment represents a significant extension of the 

Ombudsman's jurisdiction.  The Ombudsman will also be able 

to review the actions of government officials in relation to 

intergovernmental matters.  Furthermore, he or she will be able 

to review the actions of arbitration boards established by 

provincial legislation. 

 

The Saskatchewan legislation presently requires that the 

Ombudsman be a Canadian citizen.  This requirement will be 

removed.  The requirement that the Ombudsman receive the 

approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council before 

delegating his or her authority will also be removed.  This 

requirement may be said to infringe upon the independence of 

the Ombudsman.  The requirement that persons complaining to 

the Ombudsman be Saskatchewan residents will be removed, 

so will the requirement that complaints be made within one 

year of the event giving rise to the complaints. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that these amendments will enable 

the Ombudsman to work more effectively in responding to the 

concerns of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Ombudsman Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, at this time I would suggest that 

giving us the opportunity to further look at the Bill as it's 

introduced and then speak to it more clearly, I would move for 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- I recognize the member from Rosthern.  Why 

is he on his feet? 

 

NON-CONFIDENCE MOTION 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would like to make 

the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly, in view of the unprecedented action of 

Mr. Speaker and his direct refusal to abide by the rules of this 

Assembly and his subordination of the rights of this House to 

the will of the NDP government, resolve that it no longer has 

any confidence in its presiding officer. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act respecting Arbitration 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Arbitration Act, 1992.  The Bill 

will replace The Arbitration Act which is outdated.  The Bill is 

based upon the Unified Law Conference of Canada's uniform 

legislation in this area. 
 

The guiding principles of the Bill are:  parties should have 

the broad freedom to design the arbitral process to meet their 

needs; people who enter into valid arbitration agreement should 

abide by the agreement; the process should be fair to both 

parties; opportunities for delay should be minimized; the 

arbitrator's award should be readily enforceable, subject to a 

review of a specific list of flaws in form or substance. 

 

The Bill applies to all arbitrations conducted under agreements 

and other statutes unless the act is excluded by law or the 

international arbitration Act applies. 

 

Arbitrations commenced after the Bill comes into force will be 

governed by this Bill.  The previous Act will continue to apply 

to arbitrations commenced prior to proclamation of the new 

Bill. 

 

Under the Bill, arbitrations remain a matter of contract between 

the parties.  The parties to an arbitration agreement can design 

their own arbitration process by expressly excluding or 

modifying provisions of the Bill.  However, all arbitrations 

governed by the Bill are subject to a list of specific compulsory 

provisions in section 4. 

 

Arbitrators must be independent and impartial and must 

disclose to the parties circumstances which may cast doubt on 

his or her independence and impartiality.  Procedures for 

challenging and removing arbitrators are provided. 

 

The Bill requires that arbitrations be conducted in a manner 

that treats parties fairly and equally and affords an opportunity 

to present a case and respond.  In this context the arbitration 

tribunal determines its own procedure.  Arbitrators are required 

to decide the dispute in accordance with the law and the rules 

of equity unless the agreement provides otherwise. 

 

The Bill seeks to minimize the opportunities to delay the 

arbitration either by a party refusing to participate or by 

seeking court intervention.  A party who has an objection 

during an arbitration must raise it promptly or risk losing the 

ability to do so. 

 

The Bill clarifies the role that the courts play in arbitration 

proceedings.  The courts will not intervene in an arbitration 

unless the agreement provides otherwise.  However the courts 

can keep the process moving in the face of resistance, protect 

the position of the parties during the proceedings, and ensure 

that the arbitration is conducted in accordance with the 

agreement.  The court can also prevent inequitable treatment of 

parties and enforce awards made in Saskatchewan and 

elsewhere in Canada. 

 

In summary, this Bill preserves the underlying contractual 

nature of arbitrations, addresses many procedural and 

substantive aspects of an arbitration, and updates the 

legislation.  The Bill is consistent with the efforts of other 

Canadian provinces that have adopted legislation with the 

Unified Law Conference of Canada's model act in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Arbitration Act, 

1992. 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again as I indicated before, in order 

to allow the opposition the required time to see the Bill and to 

peruse the Bill and come with the arguments that we would 

need to follow through on the Bill, I would ask to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Homesteads Amendment Act, 1992.  The 

amendments proposed by this Bill will eliminate the 

requirement for the land title system to enforce compliance 

with The Homesteads Act, 1989.  However the consent of the 

non-owning spouse and a certificate of independent 

acknowledgement will still be required before owning spouse 

can dispose of the homestead. 

 

Additional amendments are also being made to ensure that if a 

non-owning spouse is wrongfully deprived of homestead 

rights, he or she will have recourse against the owning spouse 

and the land title system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendment were carefully crafted to meet 

the goal of reducing the work-load of the land titles system 

while continuing to ensure that the rights of non-owning 

spouses will be protected.  I am confident that we have 

achieved an effective balance of these objectives in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Homesteads Act, 1989. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again the opposition must ask for 

the appropriate time to review the Act and come forward with 

the arguments.  We must be very careful in how we peruse the 

Act.  And therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act, 

repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts resulting from the 

Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and the Court of 

Queen's Bench 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Queen's Bench (Surrogate 

Procedures) Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Surrogate Court has historically had 

jurisdiction over wills and estates of deceased persons.  This 

Act will amalgamate the Surrogate Court with the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  It repeals The Surrogate Court Act and 

transfers a substantive law from that Act to The Queen's Bench 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though The Surrogate Court Act seems to 

set up a separate court, in fact the judges of the Surrogate Court 

are the judges of the Court of Queen's Bench.  The court 

officials for both courts are the same people.  The Chief Justice 

of the Court of Queen's Bench 

has recommended that the courts be amalgamated to streamline 

the operations of the courts. 

 

The Surrogate Court Act allows the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to appoint official administrators at the various judicial 

centres around the province.  The role of an official 

administrator is to administer an estate when there is no one 

else willing or able to administer it.  Historically, trust 

companies have been appointed as official administrators.  

These amendments will establish the Public Trustee as official 

administrator throughout Saskatchewan.  This is a 

budget-related measure which will increase revenue to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Another change being implemented by this Bill is to continue 

the effort begun in recent years to put our legislation into 

clearer language.  The Surrogate Court Act was originally 

passed in 1907.  The wording of many of its provisions have 

not been changed since then.  The result is that some sections 

of the Act have been criticized in recent years as being almost 

incomprehensible.  The sections that are being transferred into 

The Queen's Bench Act have been reworded to solve that 

problem. 

 

Under The Queen's Bench Act, the province pays all Court of 

Queen's Bench and Court of Appeal judges an annual fee of 

$3,000.  This honorarium will be eliminated. 

 

In addition, it is expected that some efficiencies will be 

achieved in court operations as a result of the elimination of the 

need to maintain the formalities of a separate court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Queen's Bench Act, repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make 

Consequential Amendments to Certain Other Acts resulting 

from the Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and the Court 

of Queen's Bench. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I've been listening 

to the minister, I've been listening very closely.  And there 

were a number of things that the minister has talked about, and 

I think there is a lot of potential in the . . . necessary 

amendments to the Act that were needed. 

 

But certainly we must take and will be asking for a little more 

time to peruse the Act and come forward with more questions 

or anything that we see, make suggestions for the minister and 

for the officials.  And therefore at this time I adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to outline the purpose and the major provisions of this 

Bill.  These amendments to The Education Act consist of two 

main parts.  The first deals with a licensing agreement for the 

use of copyright materials and the second deals with 

procedures for the closure of schools in rural areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new federal copyright legislation has 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

imposed much stricter rules on teachers and students in terms 

of their legal right to photocopy public materials protected by 

copyright.  These restrictions have been imposed to respect the 

legitimate right of the producers of copyright material to be 

properly compensated.  However the new rules have had the 

effect of creating difficulty and expense for educational 

authorities. 

 

To help overcome these problems, a system of licensing 

agreements is being developed.  Under this system an 

organization called the Canadian Reprography Collective, or 

Can Copy for short, is representing the interest of publishers of 

copyright materials.  Can Copy will enter into licensing 

agreements whereby teachers and students will be entitled to 

copy materials in return for a licensing fee to be paid to Can 

Copy.  Can Copy will then turn the money over to the 

publishers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would obviously be cumbersome and 

ineffective for each one of our school divisions, colleges, and 

universities to enter into a separate licensing agreement with 

Can Copy.  Therefore in consultation with our partners in 

education, we have worked out an arrangement whereby the 

Minister of Education can enter into one licensing agreement 

on behalf of all school divisions. 

 

The cost of this agreement will be taken from within the 

appropriation for school grants as agreed upon with the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association.  A similar 

agreement for post-secondary institutions may be worked out 

later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legal authority for the Minister of Education 

to enter into a licensing agreement with Can Copy already 

exists.  However, because the agreement will result in third 

parties, school divisions or other educational authorities 

obtaining legal rights, a provision is needed in the legislation to 

require these third parties to comply with the terms of the 

agreement. 

 

Also a mechanism is needed to ensure that the minister cannot 

be held legally and financially liable for violations of the 

licensing agreement by a third party.  The new section 10(3) of 

The Education Act incorporates the necessary provisions. 

 

As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, the second main part of this 

Bill deals with school closures.  As a result of court decisions 

last year, boards of education and the public have been left in 

some doubt as to the process and the time lines which boards 

must observe when they wish to close a rural school or 

discontinue some grades in a rural school.  These amendments 

are intended to eliminate the ambiguities and set out a clear and 

reasonable process to follow. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the process prescribed in the new 

provisions is as follows.  First, a board must hold a meeting of 

the electors of the district in which the school is located to 

advise them that closure is being considered.  The board must 

give proper public notice of this meeting. 

 

Following the meeting there must be a period of at least 

three months for consultation, after which the board can 

announce its final decision.  A further period of at least three 

months must then follow before the closure takes effect during 

which the board must consult about arrangements for the pupils 

affected.  Finally, the period of the year during which a board 

is entitled to close a school will now be limited to the summer 

vacation between the end of school in one school year and the 

start of school in the fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that these amendments will effectively 

balance the needs of boards of education and the interest of 

parents and pupils.  They achieve the following objectives: 

they eliminate the confusion which has resulted from court 

decisions and set out a clear process which will be known in 

advance by boards and the public; they incorporate a 

requirement for broader public consultation by a board before it 

makes its final decision. 

 

Although the courts have indicated that such consultation is 

necessary, the present legislation includes no requirement for 

it.  The minimum period of time between initial notice of intent 

and the effective date of closure will be six months, as at 

present. 

 

(1630) 

 

However, boards will no longer be able to close schools during 

the school year at times which might be disruptive to pupils 

and families.  All of the prescribed procedures and time lines 

will continue to apply only in those cases where a board of 

education does not have local consent for its proposed actions.  

Where such consent exists, boards will continue to have the 

authority to proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must acknowledge that in our consultations with 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the SSTA did 

express a preference for a different approach to this legislation.  

The SSTA suggested that all procedures and time lines be 

eliminated from the Act leaving boards simply with an implicit 

general responsibility to act in a fair and reasonable way. 

 

There is no question that in most cases boards of education do 

attempt to handle school closures in a sensitive way.  

Nevertheless, our government believes that because the closure 

of rural schools is of such importance to rural residents, it is 

appropriate that the legislation set out clear rules to be followed 

consistently across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments dealing with a copyright 

licensing agreement and with rural school closures will help us 

to maintain an effective school system throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move the Bill No. 68, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, be now read a second time.  Thank 

you. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was listening to 

the comments being made by the minister, I can appreciate the 

problems that many teachers and certainly school boards and 

school districts face across our province in the neighbourhood 

of copyright legislation and being able to recopy material.  And 

certainly we all appreciate the fact too that I think that any 

educator 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

enjoys the ability of being able to go and research material and, 

rather than trying to have this material and substantial time 

lines available, being able to write for it and have it available 

when they want to get to the class-room.  It is certainly much 

easier to copyright the material. 

 

And we also want to respect the rights of the copyrighter.  And 

I think from what I hear this Bill is going to address 

copyrighting and allow educators that process.  And we will 

have more to say as we get into further debate on the Act. 

 

Also regarding closure, school closure is something that is 

really affecting a lot of schools across our province.  And I'm 

not sure if this legislation is even going to be satisfactory to . . . 

and I think the minister has indicated a lot of school boards still 

have a lot of problem with it.  A lot of parents will have a lot of 

problems with it. 

 

And no doubt in view of the number of things that are taking 

place right now . . . even regarding the legislation and 

circumstances that people will face regarding added taxation 

and lack of job opportunities, and people even leaving the rural 

area, it's going to create a greater problem and something that a 

lot of small communities are going to be looking at to try and 

stay alive because I believe the presence of a school in a small 

community, the presence of a school, the presence of a 

hospital, the presence of a care home are things that people 

look at as being very beneficial to the livelihood and the ability 

of that small community to survive. 

 

So no doubt as we get into the debate on this, Mr. Speaker, we 

will have a number of things to add as well.  So at this time, I 

move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

It's my pleasure today to rise in the House to describe changes 

to The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act.  As you're aware, Mr. 

Speaker, the changes in this Act are the result of an extensive 

consultation process, one in which a broad range of people 

concerned about the issue of farm debt in Saskatchewan put 

themselves to the task with a great deal of energy in order to 

come forward with a creative solution to a problem that has 

plagued farmers as a result of circumstances in the 

market-place that has made farmers victims of circumstances 

beyond their own control. 

 

The difficulty with the farm debt situation in Saskatchewan is 

that we're dealing with it in the context of an income crisis that 

is a result of international trade that had not been adequately 

addressed by the federal government in its responsibility for 

international trade and its responsibility for agriculture and the 

protection of farmers and their income base in the face of 

events 

beyond their control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers have enjoyed prosperity in 

the past and, mark my words, we will have the opportunity 

again when the market conditions are no longer skewed by 

international price wars.  But the question is, will we have our 

farmers in place here to be part of that more competitive 

market-place?  Not if we do not stand up for our farmers in the 

face of the crisis they are now confronting.  We must move on 

many fronts, Mr. Speaker, and this legislation before the House 

today is part of that overall plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan is the 

foundation upon which most other economic activity in this 

province is based.  Without our farms, without our farmers and 

our agricultural industry, we do not have teachers and nurses 

and lenders and business people in our small and large 

communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the agricultural economy does 

improve, we want everyone to enjoy the benefits of that vibrant 

and healthy agricultural sector once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government is determined to 

do its part, even though the federal government has denied its 

responsibility that it has agreed to with respect to third line of 

defence for Saskatchewan farmers in standing up for us in the 

face of this international crisis. 

 

Our government is not sitting back.  We knew the problem was 

there when we were elected, and we immediately moved to do 

something about it.  One of the first acts of our government 

was to establish the farm discussions with the financial 

community in order to get agreement from them to hold off 

foreclosures and to offer 1991 leases to farmers who had 

previously lost their land, so that the farm debt advisory 

committee had time to do its work.  By January the committee 

had begun its consultations and after many hours of hearing 

briefs and responding to ideas by farmers and others, they 

brought their report forward, and that report was released on 

March 27 of this year. 

 

The recommendations of the report were in the areas of 

security of tenure, the debt review process, the availability of 

credit, homestead security legislation, entry and re-entry into 

farmers, and farmers exiting the industry.  The committee 

viewed its recommendations as a package that addresses the 

needs of the industry.  As I mentioned earlier, these 

recommendations were based on consultations with a very 

broad sector of people in Saskatchewan.  Over 300 briefs and 

presentations were heard by the Farm Debt Advisory 

Committee. 

 

It gives me great pleasure today to introduce the farm security 

amendment Act, 1992, which is the legislation proposed as a 

result of that consultation.  I am pleased to have the 

opportunity to present it to this House on behalf of those who 

did design the program for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is grass roots legislation, and it is legislation 

which will help to preserve our Saskatchewan farming 

industry.  It ensures that farmers may continue to farm land 

which they have turned over to lending 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

institutions to settle debt -- debt, Mr. Speaker, which is the 

result of international market conditions beyond our farmers' 

control, debt that is incurred through no error or 

mismanagement on the farmers part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as Saskatchewan legislators must do all that is 

in our power to control what we can in our own province when 

we are so vulnerable to outside market conditions.  Will we 

stand by and let trade wars between Europe and the United 

States destroy our agricultural industry?  We will not.  Will we 

sit silently as the Government of Canada neglect to move in its 

capacity to intercede on our behalf?  We will not. 

 

To do so would be to abrogate our responsibilities and our 

heritage.  If we make no effort to save our agricultural industry, 

we deny the history of this province; we deny the legacy left to 

us by our pioneers and settlers.  They came here specifically to 

farm on land that they could call their own.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

we will do everything in our power to ensure that our farmers 

have the opportunity to call that land their own again. 

 

This government, on the advice of the Farm Debt Advisory 

Committee, has proposed changes to provincial mortgage laws 

which will strengthen the security of tenure for Saskatchewan 

farmers through a six-year leaseback program.  Leasebacks 

have been offered by the lenders, but in most cases the time 

allowed under the leases is not sufficient to allow the farmers 

the opportunity for financial recovery and repurchase of the 

land. 

 

This program, Mr. Speaker, will extend that time period to 

enhance the opportunities for farmers to recover financially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agricultural lenders now hold approximately 1.4 

million acres of farm land as a result of debt settlements.  

Approximately 1,000 Saskatchewan farmers per year have 

foreclosure actions initiated against them.  There are many 

other farm families who find it necessary to transfer land in 

order to remain viable producers.  And, Mr. Speaker, our 

farmers need time to recover from these circumstances; more 

time so that the benefits of a future possible GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement can be realized; 

more time so that they can benefit from improved prices and 

the world market-place which is more reasonable and more 

fair; more time so that the provinces can push the federal 

government to live up to its commitments to provide the 

necessary third line of defence payments. 

 

If farmers have the time in which to recover, they will recover.  

And today, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

proposing legislation to give them that time.  This legislation 

will help farmers to help themselves.  This is one step in this 

government's efforts to attack the farm crisis facing the 

Saskatchewan agricultural industry.  This is one step of several. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will also address the Farm Debt 

Advisory Committee's recommendation for voluntary 

mediation.  It also provides for farmers to use more of their 

assets as security to obtain loans.  This will make it easier for 

farmers to obtain loans. 

Mr. Speaker, the 1990 and 1991 realized net income in 

Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan farmers was about half of 

long-term averages.  Statements that the crisis is all but over do 

not accurately reflect the situation for Saskatchewan farmers.  

It will take a long time to recover from this crisis after 

experiencing incomes at the levels we have seen in the past two 

years. 

 

While there is improvement in income projections for 1992, it 

is only because third line of defence money the federal 

government committed to last year that was not made available 

to Saskatchewan farmers until this year.  The ongoing 

international grain-subsidy trade war continues to create 

problems for us.  The United States export enhancement 

program, the EEP, may cost our Canadian producers $1.1 

billion in the 1991-92 crop year.  There is no prospect of an 

end to this insanity.  There is no sign of a GATT agreement.  

And, Mr. Speaker, there is no end in sight for the financial 

crisis for farmers. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan must do what it can to 

protect our farmers as they continue to attempt to survive these 

very tough circumstances.  Security of tenure is the 

corner-stone of the report by the Farm Debt Advisory 

Committee.  And it is with security of tenure that we can begin 

to help our farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is tackling the serious problems 

facing our agricultural industry.  It will take time.  But we are 

determined, and we will succeed because, Mr. Speaker, we are 

confident that the grain and oilseed economy will straighten 

out.  We are convinced that our Saskatchewan grains will 

create prosperity for agricultural sector once again.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, when that day arrives, we would like our 

Saskatchewan farmers to be there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this House to support the 

amendments to the Act, and I hereby move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a few 

short comments before I move to adjourn the debate on the 

motion for today. 

 

Certainly many farmers across the province of Saskatchewan 

are facing a lot of difficulty.  And over the last number of days 

we have been hearing from farmers right across . . . especially 

the northern part of the province where the area, a large area of 

the province, is experiencing substantial drought.  And it's . . . I 

find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that at one moment the 

government would be talking about the fact that they're ready 

to support farmers, and then the other moment they would be 

talking about legislation that would certainly take away 

farmers' rights and privileges, and indeed remove a fair bit of 

the funding and the financing that farmers were counting on in 

order to stabilize the farm economy and stabilize their farms.  

And if that program would . . . ability would have still been 

there, in the GRIP '91, possibly the fact of this legislation 

wouldn't be necessary as farmers were able to sit down and put 

a . . . project a cash flow for the lending institutions. 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

And in many cases, I understand, Mr. Speaker, talking to some 

of the people involved in the farm debt review board, they were 

sitting down and finding out that many lending institutions, 

including Farm Credit, were indeed negotiating, negotiating 

very seriously.  And I realize that there are a number of farmers 

out in rural Saskatchewan though that did find themselves in 

very severe financial difficult straits, and regardless of what we 

had before them, they're going to need a little more.  And I 

assume that's what this Act is attempting to do. 

 

We're going to be asking of the minister whether ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) is going 

along and working under the same guidelines.  And I think 

there will be a number of questions we must raise. 

 

There will be a number of concerns that farm groups have out 

there.  Certainly one of the concerns people . . . the number of 

people will have is, how do we address the situations where 

individuals have knowingly gone out, put themselves in a 

difficult situation, and now they're going to get another 

reprieve while their neighbour who has worked so desperately 

to try and make his payments and honour his commitments 

may find himself on the outside looking in. 

 

There are a lot of concerns we have out there, a lot of questions 

that we will be raising.  But certainly I think as we have 

indicated over the past number of days, we are willing to work 

on behalf of rural Saskatchewan because it not only affects the 

farm family and the individuals on the farm, but it affects 

everyone in our rural community. 

 

So therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1645) 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The Farm 

Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1992, (No. 2), and as well 

at the proper time, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment 

Act, 1992, (No. 3). 

 

It's my pleasure today to rise in the House to describe the 

changes to The Farm Financial Stability Act.  These changes 

are a direct result of the extensive consultation that we had just 

discussed with respect to the previous Bill.  These changes are 

part of an overall plan to remove debt from the agricultural 

economy.  And they are only one part of this government's 

initiative to tackle the issue of farm debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan moved 

immediately upon coming into office to tackle this issue, and 

we have made every effort to ensure that people across 

Saskatchewan were consulted.  And they have given us their 

input and their ideas. 

 

The committee made recommendations which have resulted in 

several pieces of legislation that we are 

introducing in this legislative session.  One of the 

recommendations of the committee was to discontinue the 

counselling and assistance program or CAFF (counselling and 

assistance for farmers program) program provided by the 

Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

This legislation before you today addresses changes to the 

CAFF program.  The Farm Debt Advisory Committee felt that 

CAFF was extremely costly and of benefit to only a limited 

number of farmers.  At present, there are approximately 750 

clients with active guarantees enrolled in CAFF, and the total 

loan guarantees is approximately $35 million.  There have been 

some defaults on the loan guarantees: approximately $75 

million by 881 farmers for an average default of $85,000. 

 

The Farm Debt Advisory Committee felt this was an 

unnecessary charge on the public purse.  The Farm Debt 

Advisory Committee recommended that the counselling 

assistance for farmers program be discontinued.  And this 

recommendation was acted upon immediately.  The 

government announced in March that the program would no 

longer accept new applications from new clients effective April 

1, 1992; financial counselling provided by CAFF also 

discontinued as of April 30, 1992. 

 

The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act (No. 2) provides 

for no new clients to be accepted and terminates counselling.  

The Act also provides for the termination of the current CAFF 

administration, effectively July 31, 1992. 

 

Further, new guarantees for operating loans or consolidation 

loans to existing clients will also be terminated at that time. 

However the government has made provision for the existing 

clients.  It would be not fair to farmers involved in the program 

to terminate the program completely and immediately.  As 

such, the program will be phased down gradually so that 

farmers affected by the CAFF program have time to deal with 

the changes within their farm management programs and their 

lending agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

1992, (No. 3) provides for the phase-down of CAFF after July 

31, 1992, by the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Effective August 1, 1992, ACS may continue to provide 

extensions of existing guarantees to existing clients until March 

31, 1995.  This phase-down period will provide farmers with 

time to honour their commitments under existing operating and 

consolidation loan guarantees.  The phase-down period will 

also reduce the obligation of the provincial government to pay 

on guarantees.  And effective August 1, 1992, ACS will be 

responsible for paying out existing guarantees to lenders in the 

event that cases of default do occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Farm Debt Advisory Committee proposed the 

termination of the CAFF program after extensive consultation 

with the agricultural community in Saskatchewan.  This 

recommendation is only one of many that will address the farm 

debt issue.  These changes to the Act are only one small part of 

our larger attack on farm debt. 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard July 16, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this House to support the 

amendments to the Act.  And I move second reading of The 

Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1992, (No. 2), and if 

in order, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1992, 

(No. 3).  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think I have to inform the Minister of 

Agriculture he'll have to move those two separately. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out a 

number of things that I think fly in the face of seriousness 

about the minister to attack farm debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have witnessed today the disgusting approach that the 

minister has taken and forced his colleagues to take over the 

course of the next few days, of introducing the GRIP Bill that 

is going to seriously erode the opportunity of farmers in 

Saskatchewan to compete with their neighbours on the west, 

their neighbours on the east, and totally destroy the opportunity 

to be competitive in the province of Saskatchewan against odds 

that are dominated by the willingness of other provinces to 

participate in the GRIP program. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have undertaken to seriously erode the 

financing of the livestock cash advance.  It's going to seriously 

cost the province of Saskatchewan thousands and thousands of 

jobs over the next two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has taken the feed grain assistance 

program and made us non-competitive in Saskatchewan against 

all odds of the Alberta industry which have drawn our livestock 

through the years. 

 

He has made us non-competitive with Manitoba.  He has made 

us non-competitive with the United States in dealing with the 

industry in agriculture.  And, Mr. Speaker, this minister is 

absolutely, totally disgusting when he talks about the kinds of 

things that he does in his second-reading speech here today. 

 

He said he's going to take and make a new approach to the 

approach of debt in the province of Saskatchewan.  He's right 

out of his mind, Mr. Speaker.  He has absolutely no 

understanding of the consequences that his role as a Minister of 

Agriculture has been in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's 

absolutely disgusting that he should even consider bringing 

these kinds of things forward in light of the fact that he has 

done absolutely nothing to enhance agriculture in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan gave 

him a mandate, and I'll tell you what the mandate was in 

October of 1991.  Mr. Speaker, the mandate of that government 

at that time was to say to the province of Saskatchewan:  I am 

going to give you an enhanced GRIP that will offer you an 

opportunity to compete in the national and international scene, 

that is going to be better than what we have here today.  And 

the Premier had the gall in February of this year to say in the 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald that he would not have to tax one 

single nickel more in the province of Saskatchewan to deliver a 

better GRIP. 

And you know what happened, Mr. Speaker?  The people in 

the province of Saskatchewan are going to lose on the average 

$30 a cultivated acre across this province.  And that has been 

documented time and after time by individuals all across this 

province.  And that is in my mind beyond a shadow of a doubt 

this Minister of Agriculture taking and squeezing the very 

life-blood out of agriculture like no minister has ever done 

before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I stood in this province and debated whether I 

was going to allow myself to farm and ranch in this province in 

1975.  And in 1978, based on the kinds of things that the 

ministers of Agriculture, the then Kaeding and MacMurchy, 

were doing to the province of Saskatchewan, competing with 

tax dollars to buy land that I was not given an opportunity to, 

competing with all kinds of money to deliver that, I said no, 

Mr. Speaker; I'm going to fight that.  I'm going to fight that 

trend till the very last. 

 

And do you know what?  They are nothing.  They are 

absolutely nothing in devastation compared to what this man 

has perpetrated on the province of Saskatchewan in agriculture. 

 

There is absolutely no way that this man should even be 

considered as a Minister of Agriculture.  There are many on the 

other side of the House that have demonstrated in the kinds of 

things that they have done in the province of Saskatchewan that 

they would be better ministers of Agriculture than this one 

right here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, has been evidenced across this province 

by the people who have called in and said that he has 

absolutely no reason to be the minister.  And all he is doing is . 

. . We're waiting for the end of the session to get rid of him 

because the Premier is going to fire him.  When all of this is 

said and done, he's going to be gone. 

 

The people in his constituency are saying this is a one-term 

government.  The strong NDPs in my constituency are telling 

people on coffee row this is a one-term government.  And it's 

perpetrated on the province of Saskatchewan by individuals 

like that who consistently have said no to the hog industry, no 

to the beef industry, no to the grain industry in every way shape 

and form. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this individual has done.  

He has totally ripped apart all of the opportunity.  And here, 

here was an opportunity to develop a counselling program for 

the province of Saskatchewan that would enhance and provide 

counselling to those people who were literally strapped and not 

knowing what to do -- driven there by declining markets, 

declining prices in the markets, and lack of an opportunity to 

sell. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that man has literally chopped agriculture at 

the knees.  He met today with agriculture people in the 

livestock industry.  And, Mr. Speaker, my observations of what 

he probably did . . . and I heard this by the grape-vine that he 

even left early because he couldn't continue to attend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people, the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, expect more from a Minister of 



July 16, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

Agriculture.  They have a high standard that they have had over 

the past 20 years that is not matched by this individual.  Not at 

all.  Mr. Speaker, he is absolutely, totally disgusting in his 

approach to agriculture.  That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this 

individual has done.  I can name individuals who have that 

same . . . 

 

The Speaker: --  Order, order, order.  I think the member 

knows that he's not on the Bill right now, and I would ask him 

to get back to the Bill that is before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The member opposite raised the debt problem 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I'm raising the debt 

problem in the province of Saskatchewan because he knows 

very well that he is undercutting every opportunity for them to 

pay that debt. 

 

And as Mr. Art Crone said to us the other day, and as reported 

in the newspaper, he is going to have to deal with ACS and all 

of the debt problems that he has perpetrated on the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, because he doesn't give them 

the income and protect them in the income side of their 

responsibility.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this individual 

has done consistently in everything he has done. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is why we have kept people who are on 

CAFF.  That is why we have counselling and assistance to 

provide an understanding, and their peers to allow them to 

provide understanding to the difficult situations they are in. 

 

And you, Mr. Speaker, are cutting it down at the knees.  You're 

giving more of the same kind of people less and less to deal 

with.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this Bill is about.  

And that is what that minister is about.  He is chopping 

agriculture and slicing it in half. 

 

And you go into the northern part of the province of 

Saskatchewan and you deal in Cudworth, for example, where 

the municipality is asking, members of the municipality, are 

asking the people of the municipality to withhold the taxes 

because they can't afford to pay it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what's going on.  And you are going 

to take the counselling out of that area, you're going to take the 

assistance out of that area, and you're going to provide for the 

people of the . . . of that area no economic return for the kinds 

of things that they're prepared to do. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely, totally disgusting.  And 

it's been perpetrated in this province by that minister and by 

this Premier who appointed that minister and hasn't got the 

courage to ask him to quit doing what he's doing and 

demonstrating how incompetent he is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely disgusting what he is doing.  And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say on this item 

and I am going to ask to adjourn debate at this point. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 

 


