




















































Hansard: August 10, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2169 

 August 10, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two 

different petitions today I would like to present: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan eliminated the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan without prior consultation with 

people enroled in the program and without any due 

consideration or study of alternatives to elimination. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to re-evaluate this action and refer the status and 

review of this program to a committee that includes plan 

members to examine alternatives such as private sector 

involvement and adjustments to the government's matching 

contribution. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These people are from Rose Valley, Wishart, Elfros, Fosston, 

Bjorkdale, Kelvington, Wadena, and Quill Lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other petition I have to present, Mr. Speaker, reads: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true wellness model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more in both dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the people of Regina, 

Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Martensville, Clavet, Grandora, 

Milestone, Allan, Leask, Dalmeny, Hanley, Unity, St. Denis, 

Sonningdale, Elstow, Biggar, Warman, Vonda, Meacham, 

Harris, Osler, Borden, Kronau, Swift Current, Pense, McLean, 

and Weyburn.  All told there's 11 pages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I present these petitions to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have today 15 

pages of petitions.  I think these are all on the chiropractic 

issues which we have discussed several days and have 

presented many thousands of names already, so I won't bother 

by reading the entire petition to you. 

 

I will mention though that they come from many parts of our 

province.  I see Yorkton is prevalent on the first pages.  We've 

got Preeceville, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, Buchanan. 

 

There's a lot of eastern side of the province names; they go 

right over to Regina.  We have White City as well.  We've got 

Tisdale, back up to the Hudson Bay area of the province, a lot 

of names from that area, Melfort again.  And we've got . . . I 

can't even read that one, but anyway it's obvious that they're 

from . . . (inaudible) . . . and those smaller towns along that part 

of the province.  Porcupine Plain, I see, is in here. 

 

We've got lots more from up in that Tisdale area there of 

Nipawin and so on.  And as we go on through I see more 

names from . . . (inaudible) . . . and Ridgedale and all along 

through the entire province, it appears, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We've got from Weekes and Crooked River -- I'm not even 

sure where that is, but I guess there's a lot of good folks up 

there that are concerned.  We have more from Hudson Bay.  

And Kelvington is on here and we've got Archerwill and 

another bunch from Porcupine Plain and Melfort -- just all 

kinds of people that are concerned about this problem right 

through our province. 

 

We've got Kelvington and Zenon Park and I see again 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

Porcupine Plain and Spalding, just . . . from Burr and 

Humboldt.  Now there's an area we haven't seen many from 

before.  Now they're starting to come in from Drake, from 

Jansen, from Bruno, from Lanigan, Watrous, Watson -- all up 

through that area of Wynyard. 

 

I see at the bottom there's Guernsey, the small town of 

Guernsey; people are concerned up there.  There's Clair and 

Humboldt and Colonsay and . . . a lot from Humboldt, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'll now present all of these petitions on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as a one 

of my colleagues has read most of the petition, I'll just read the 

prayer into the record: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions I am presenting this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 

are signed by people from Saskatoon, North Battleford, Edam, 

Spiritwood, Weyburn, Pangman, Hardy, Dalmeny, Langham, 

Duck Lake, Vanscoy, Regina, Pilot Butte, White City, and 

Balgonie. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions, I think in the number of 18, to present on behalf of 

the . . . 18 pages of petitions on the treatment of chiropractic 

treatment.  And as the other members have read the prayer, Mr. 

Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker, I won't do that. 

 

But I notice that the names come from a wide, wide area.  I 

notice a lot of names written from my own area around Unity 

and Landis and North Battleford and that sort of thing, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think it indicates that the concern is very 

widespread.  And as the petitions keep coming in, we certainly 

are led to believe that it's very, very serious. 

 

I want to present the petitions at this time, Mr. Speaker.  I saw 

you getting a little nervous up there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 20 pages 

of petitions to present.  They are dealing with chiropractic care 

across the province.  These petitioners are from Shellbrook, 

P.A. (Prince Albert), Christopher Lake, Birch Hills, 

Paddockwood, La Ronge, Dafoe, St. Louis, Domremy, 

Weirdale, Viscount, Saskatoon, Martensville, Warman, 

Davidson and Dalmeny.  I have these to present to the 

Assembly here today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I have petitions as well with respect 

to chiropractic care in the province.  Mr. Speaker, there are 21 

pages of petitions here that I wanted to present.  They come 

from P.A., Saskatoon, Estevan, Shellbrook, Maidstone and 

Harris primarily.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'd like to present these now. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to present 

several pages of petitions with respect to the chiropractic care 

in the province of Saskatchewan and just briefly point out that 

these names are from people who are across the central part of 

the province. 

 

And they're from Watson, Saskatchewan.  From Melfort, St. 

Brieux, Gronlid, Lake Lenore, several from Prince Albert, 

Wadena, Kinistino.  I see several from Naicam and Quill 

Lakes.  Bruno, Saskatchewan.  A large number from 

Humboldt, Hudson Bay, Naicam and Melfort, Rose Valley, 

Star City, Tisdale.  And then several from Saskatoon.  

Raymore, Saskatchewan has some.  Crooked River, Englefeld, 

Prairie River, Lac Vert.  And we see several pages here from 

Prince Albert. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have another nine pages from the city of 

Regina on top of that.  I table those today with respect to 

chiropractic care. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions, nearly two dozen here of people from the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I'll just the read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from all over the province.  

North-west -- Glaslyn, Speers, Maymont, Meadow Lake, 

Battlefords, Turtleford, Wilkie, Paynton, Leoville, Speers; lots 

of North Battleford.  Couple of pages of Saskatoon, Macklin, 

Unity, Luseland.  We have lots from Swift Current. There just 

about isn't anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan today, 

Mr. Speaker, that aren't covered in these petitions. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have . . . I've 

got about 15 petitions all relating to chiropractor treatment in 

their petition.  And I won't, seeing that my colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker, have been reading out some of the . . . some read out 

all of it, and I'll just read out the last part, Mr. Speaker, which I 

think is one of the most important: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

Mr. Speaker, when we used to first table these, it used to be 

two.  But I got them from all over the province this time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This page here looks like it's pretty well all Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, except that there's some from Osler, Saskatchewan.  

But that page is pretty well all Saskatoon. 

 

Now this page, Mr. Speaker, is nearly all Weyburn with some 

from the surrounding areas -- Fillmore, Creelman, Halbrite, 

Yellow Grass, Radville.  But it's mostly Weyburn on that page, 

Mr. Speaker.  The next page looks like it's all Weyburn except 

for Francis. 

 

And then there's one here, Mr. Speaker, from Winnipeg, 

Manitoba; Radville, Saskatchewan; Beaubier, Saskatchewan; 

Hardy, Saskatchewan, but it's still mostly Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There's so many of them here that I'm having trouble . . . The 

next one, Mr. Speaker, is also pretty well Weyburn.  The whole 

page, Mr. Speaker, that whole page, Mr. Speaker, except for 

one from Regina. 

 

The next one, Mr. Speaker, it looks like they're all from the 

Estevan area, from the member of Estevan's area -- Bienfait, 

Estevan, Macoun, Lampman, and three or four of them are 

Estevan, and then Carnduff, more from Estevan, and North 

Portal, Saskatchewan.  So those are all the Estevan area. 

 

And then this is also Estevan.  It's Oxbow, Estevan, Manor, 

Carnduff, Midale, Redvers, Weyburn.  Those are mostly the 

Weyburn area too. 

 

And these also are from the Estevan area; these are mostly 

from the town of Estevan, the city of Estevan, pretty well all 

Estevan except . . . for the exception of Alameda and Midale, 

Bromhead.  The rest are all Estevan area. 

 

Now these, Mr. Speaker, these look like these are all 

Saskatoon.  They're all Saskatoon addresses, I do believe, 

because there's about half a dozen, Mr. Speaker, of the city of 

Saskatoon, and the rest look like Saskatoon addresses without 

the town beside them or the city beside them. 

 

And this too, Mr. Speaker, looks like all Saskatoon.  Yes it is, 

except for Warman, Asquith -- but that's Saskatoon area -- 

Saskatoon, Saskatoon, Martensville.  So that's also Saskatoon.  

On this page here also, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatoon.  Looks like 

all Saskatoon on that page, Mr. Speaker, exception of Borden. 

 

This page here is all Moose Jaw.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, that page, 

except for one at Caron, that page is entirely Moose Jaw.  And 

this page here is also Moose Jaw.  It looks like all Moose Jaw, 

Mr. Speaker.  This page, except for one from Craven, this is all 

Moose Jaw.  The next one is also it looks like all Moose Jaw -- 

Moose Jaw.  They're all Moose Jaw on that page, Mr. Speaker.  

And the next page is Moose Jaw, Moose Jaw.  It looks like 

that's all Moose Jaw except for there's two from Central Butte.  

Yes, this is all Moose Jaw except for two from Central Butte. 

And the last page is Morse, Saskatchewan.  And there's some 

from Regina.  No, Churchill . . . I thought they were all . . . 

some from Churchill Downs. But, Mr. Speaker, I think 

everybody from Churchill Downs has now signed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have some 

additions to lay on the Table this afternoon.  I have three sets of 

petitions, Mr. Speaker, and the first one deals, as my colleagues 

have been doing, with the chiropractic situation in the province.  

The prayer has been read a number of times, but I just want to 

read part of the preamble which says basically: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true wellness model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions -- and I have about 40 pages with 

me, which translates to approximately 600 petitioners -- come 

from . . . this particular page mostly from Saskatoon, and the 

second page that I have here also from Saskatoon. 

 

Another page deals with people coming from Metcalfe Road in 

Regina; Pilot Butte; Empress Street, Regina.  Most of these are 

from Regina here.  This whole page, the next page, is from 

Regina. And the next page, some from Indian Head, White 

City, but again mostly out of Regina. 

 

The next page is almost exclusively out of Regina, the next 

page having approximately 18 signatures on it from Saskatoon.  

There's one from my constituency here as well, from Langham, 

Saskatoon again primarily, predominantly Saskatoon, 

Saskatoon, another one from my constituency from Warman, 

Nipawin -- Mr. Speaker -- Rosthern, Delisle, a number from 

Delisle.  This next page quite a few of them from Martensville, 

the rest of them from Saskatoon, Saskatoon -- no, pardon me, 

correction on that, Regina. 

 

Maidstone, North Battleford, Mayfair, Battleford, again.  

Coleville, Battleford, Wilkie, Leopold . . . (inaudible) . . . 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

even one from Regina on that one.  This next page is 

exclusively Regina.  Regina, again -- exclusively Regina.  

Here's one from Pilot Butte, Balgonie, La Ronge, Prince Albert 

on this page. 

 

Martensville, Warman, Hanley, Perdue, Saskatoon -- quite a 

few of Saskatoon there.  This next page again exclusively 

Regina.  Regina, Regina, Montmartre, Regina, Montmartre . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Montmartre. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And I used to be a geography teacher.  

Regina, Regina, Regina, each of those pages has about 30 

names all from Regina, Mr. Speaker.  Lumsden, Regina Beach; 

again, Lumsden, Lumsden; Regina; Craik, from my colleague's 

seat here; Moose Jaw; Lumsden; Bethune; Briercrest; Holdfast; 

Herschel. 

 

Then we have another sheet, Mr. Speaker, from Regina; 

another sheet from Regina; another sheet from Regina; one 

from Avonlea on there. 

 

Then we go to the west part: Kindersley, Dodsland, Eatonia, 

Kerrobert -- many from Kindersley.  This next sheet the same 

thing: Herschel, Rosetown, Kindersley, Rosetown, Southey.  

Quite a few from Regina again; next sheet, mostly from 

Regina, one from Craven; Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the total list of petitions now are numbering 

around the 6,000 mark as far as chiropractic are concerned, and 

they're still arriving on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have further, Mr. Speaker, another petition, and this is the 

first one I think that we're tabling of this type.  It says: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that impaired vision is a highly prevalent disorder, costing 

millions of dollars, and causing distress to thousands of 

Saskatchewan people; 

 

 that early detection of eye disease and related medical 

conditions by optometrists is a highly cost-effective, painless, 

and effective part of our health care system; 

 

 that quality optometric care is vital to the working poor and 

that there is a direct correlation between workplace safety 

and good vision; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

accessibility, comprehensiveness, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to optometric patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed de-insurance 

of optometric care will clearly cost more, both in dollars and 

patient harm. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to de-insure optometry and 

that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against optometric 

patients by refusing them coverage under medicare equal to 

other patients. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I went through all the places where these 

petitioners come from, it would be a litany of every town in the 

province.  I have almost 4,000 petitions in this one package 

here.  And I am pleased now, on behalf of the citizens of the 

province, to present them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crop Insurance Questionnaire 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

minister of Crop Insurance, and we've noticed, Mr. Minister, 

that from time to time you've admitted that you flew over some 

of the dry areas or difficult areas in agriculture to consult with 

the farmers.  And now we find out that you've spent a large 

amount of money doing a survey of farmers in agriculture. 

 

We have learned that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government is in the middle of another massive expenditure on 

surveys and polling, and they have ensured that they get the 

answers they want.  And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because when 

we go through the questionnaire, they've asked loaded 

questions; they've asked non-farmers; they leave out key 

questions; and they dump all over the agents. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have sent out a questionnaire which 

contains questions designed to shed this unpopular light on 

Crop Insurance agents and to paint your '92 GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) program as the key to preventing 

moral hazards.  Mr. Minister, is this your idea of consultation?  

Other than flying over, do you send out surveys and do this 

polling of farmers and non-farmers about GRIP, after you've 

ramrodded it though, used closure, been sued . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Do you have a question, sir?  If 

the members has a question, I'd like for him to put 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

his question immediately.  Order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you, is this how you consult 

with farmers about crop insurance?  You put out a poll like this 

and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  We'll let the . . . I think the member 

has put the question.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the document that I 

think the member opposite is referring to is not a poll but a 

questionnaire which was sent out to all producers.  I think the 

members opposite need to get their line straight.  One day 

they're saying we're not consulting with farmers and we didn't 

send a letter and didn't personally phone every farmer before 

we made the changes to GRIP last year.  And this year as we 

contemplate changes to and improvements to the Crop 

Insurance program, we've sent out a questionnaire to every 

producer asking for their input. 

 

So I think you can't have it both ways.  Either we do it without 

consulting and save the price of stamps, or we send the stamps 

out and hear what the farmers have to say and make changes 

that they ask for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the public has been 

informing us that in this expensive polling that you're doing of 

the farming and non-farming population that non-farmers in 

towns and villages are getting the questionnaire.  So that you 

are . . . you have a biased sample right off the bat -- asking 

them questions with respect to agriculture. 

 

So that if you're dropping it in mailboxes of those that have 

crop insurance and those that don't have crop insurance, you're 

going to have a biased result anyway.  Because you're going to 

go to seniors, people that belong to unions or people who 

belong to co-ops or people who are farming or people in this . . 

. regardless. 

 

So is this your form of consultation?  After you've ramrodded it 

through and after you've brought in closure and after you've 

been sued by the farmers, that you're going to consult and poll 

non-farmers, how do you like us so far?  Is that part of your 

package of consultation in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that we have 

never said that the changes that we've made to the GRIP 

program or to crop insurance are the last ones that we're ever 

going to make. 

 

And certainly we need to consult before we make any more 

changes and we certainly realize that there are weaknesses in 

the GRIP program and in the crop insurance program; and 

they're changes farmers have been asking for, and we want to 

get input from them to get those numbers and those ideas from 

farmers. 

The Leader of the Opposition may be surprised to learn that 

some farmers do live in town as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The surveys are going to everybody in town, 

whether they're farming or not. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, some of the questions in the survey showed 

that you're trying to solicit information to retroactively justify, 

retroactively justify decisions and programs that you've already 

put into place. 

 

You have been, you've been harassing the marketing agents . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would ask the members to 

please not interfere when the member is trying to ask a 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- It's no secret in the towns and the villages as 

well as in the farms that the NDP administration as been 

harassing and badgering the crop insurance agents.  And now 

the survey asks the questions, and it puts it in a context like 

this: 

 

 . . . premiums do not cover the administration costs of the 

Marketing Agent system.  In order to retain the Marketing 

Agent system, how much would you be willing to pay for this 

service? 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that you were either already 

planning to implement a fee and a very large fee for marketing 

agents, or is it that you really just planned to do away with 

marketing agents because the previous administration put them 

in, and you're trying to find out the threshold in terms of what 

price would really discourage people in terms of what price 

would really discourage people from using marketing agents? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, generally when you 

send out a questionnaire to ask people what they think, that's 

the reason you send it out; you want to get some input from it.  

If we'd made up the decision, we wouldn't be sending out the 

questionnaire. 

 

Now again if the members opposite say we shouldn't consult, 

we consulted on the changes to the GRIP program.  We had a 

committee.  We had 300 submissions to it.  They said, well you 

didn't individually consult every individual farmer and 

individually go out and talk to every individual farmer. 

 

Now when we send out a letter to the individual farmers asking 

them what they think of the delivery system of crop insurance, 

the members opposite say well you shouldn't be consulting. 

 

You have to make up your mind one way or the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, they don't consult, and then they 

implement it, and then retroactively they try to justify it.  And 

even, Mr. Speaker, their own candidates don't like this. 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

And in the Leader-Post, Saturday, August 8, here's what Mr. 

Oster says.  He says: 

 

 "Just because I ran as a candidate doesn't mean I'm going to 

be led around by the nose by Romanow and the Cabinet . . ." 

 

 "I don't think six months was long enough for the 

(Romanow) government to research all the facts and come up 

with the changes." 

 

 (And) in addition to paying higher premiums for reduced 

coverage, Oster is miffed by the absence of hail insurance in 

GRIP. 

 

If your own candidates don't like this retroactive justification of 

a program that's unpopular, how can you justify coming up 

with questions that are absolutely biased?  And I refer to 

question 28 which says: which of the following moral hazards 

has the program improved? 

 

 (i) Farmers taking advantage of the programs by utilizing 

poor farming practises; (ii) Farmers selecting crops based on 

program benefits rather than market price; (iii) Farmers 

making decisions based on program features rather than good 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  The Leader of the 

Opposition is taking a very lengthy time in his questions today, 

and he'll have to shorten them.  I'll ask the Leader of the 

Opposition, please put his question directly. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, don't you believe that you have 

put forward a biased questionnaire with respect to moral 

hazards?  And wouldn't it have been much more fair if you'd 

say: how does this compare to last year's coverage of if I have a 

problem with drought, if I have a problem with frost, or if I 

have a serious crop insurance problem, rather than exclusively 

linking it to moral hazards? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, it's quite evident that 

members opposite do not even want to debate the substance of 

the changes to the GRIP program.  Because I think, by and 

large, everybody agrees that the changes that we made were 

changes that needed to be made.  And they continue to fuss 

about retroactivity and so on, instead of talking about the actual 

substances of changes which are very important. 

 

I think, with regard to Mr. Oster, I'd like to point out that he's 

one of 288 people who signed a petition over 60 or 70 days, 

which doesn't sound to me like there's a great ground swell of 

discontent with the changes that we made to GRIP program. 

 

And I like the quote that they made, quoting Mr. Oster saying 

that hail insurance was taken out.  Well, as the members 

opposite well know, hail insurance was taken out last year and 

was not part of the changes this year.  And I think of the 288 

people who are signing the petition, they're probably all 

misinformed by the opposition.  It's 

the only reason they signed the petition in the first place.  So I . 

. . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, now the NDP minister of Crop 

Insurance is picking on his own NDP candidates and saying 

that they are misinformed.  And I quote the paper again: 

 

 . . . Oster said if a farmer's crop is destroyed by hail, it's 

treated as a case of bad farming if his neighbors' fields were 

spared. 

 

And that's what he thinks of your new program.  And he's 

asking if in fact . . . He's asking if in fact that you would be 

more sensitive, because six months isn't time enough to make 

an appropriate assessment. 

 

Would the minister tell the Assembly the costs of doing this 

rural farm and non-farm polling, so the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have some idea what the NDP government is up 

to in retroactively justifying what they've done in Crop 

Insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in regards to the hail, 

again I point out to the Leader of the Opposition that hail was 

taken out of the GRIP program last year.  The spot-loss hail 

was removed last year by that administration.  We did not 

make that change.  That is not one of the changes that we are 

debating in here today. 

 

And I think that speaks well to the argument they have, the 

substance of the changes.  They are arguing against the changes 

that they made to the program and not the ones that we made.  

The changes we made were good changes to the program.  As 

to the cost of this, it's certainly a lot less than the cost that 

we've had in hold-up in the House because of the obstruction of 

the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I ask the hon. member what this NDP polling 

cost, and he hasn't answered that.  Is it true that you've also sent 

these questionnaires to 70,000 homes across Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Minister?  Can you tell us if this sample includes only 

farmers, and what percentage of them would not be farmers, 

and if you break down sort of the sampling of this polling to 

find out if in fact non-farmers are having some impact on the 

judgement and retroactive judgement of an agriculture program 

designed by the NDP which is very, very unpopular 

particularly across the northern central grain belt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to point out 

that this is not a poll; it was a survey.  The questionnaire, it was 

done by professionals and to get us unbiased answers to 

questions that we want so that we know how to make changes 

to the program.  I don't have the exact numbers.  It's not an 

expensive program.  It was done in the cheapest manner 

possible to collect information. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition wants us to be 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

consultative, we have to go and talk to people.  We have to 

travel out to meetings.  We have to mail out letters.  That is 

part of the consultative process.  If they're saying that it's too 

expensive to consult with farmers, then we should make the 

changes here and without consulting.  If that's what you're 

saying, I think that's one thing.  If you're saying that we should 

consult, the least you could do is let us mail out a letter to get 

farmers' input. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to redirect the questions 

with respect to crop insurance and the Bill to the Attorney 

General this time.  Mr. Attorney General, obviously this Bill is 

controversial, the GRIP Bill.  It's before the courts; it has 

invoked closure here; a lot of people upset.  And I'm just going 

to give a couple of lines of the Premier of Saskatchewan as he 

talked about this, and then ask you a question with respect to 

the action that you could take. 

 

This is the NDP Premier, June 23, '92, about GRIP: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, when we had a controversial Bill here 

before, The Representation Act, or The Boundary Act, in 1989, 

the attorney general of the day referred that Act to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, and then it went on quickly to 

the Supreme Court. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, don't you think the honourable thing to 

do and the best thing for the taxpayer and the decent thing to 

do, given this unique Bill and all the people it affects, is to do 

as was done in 1989 with The Representation Act and refer this 

Bill to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite forget 

about the rights of Saskatchewan people that they are really 

concerned about, the right to get their business done in the 

legislature and get it done on time and get . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- They forget about the right of people to 

expect to hear the truth.  There is no closure moved on the 

GRIP Bill, and the members opposite know it.  The members 

opposite have had an offer from our House Leader to take all of 

private members' day tomorrow to debate the GRIP issue.  The 

House Leader has had no response from the members opposite.  

The members opposite talk about wanting to talk about the 

issue, but talk about everything else. 

 

And with respect to the concerns of the farmers the 

members opposite mention, may I quote from the paper, from 

one of the people involved in your court case, says: 

 

 My greatest concern (it wasn't about the deadline, it) was that 

my 10-year individual production record was being kicked 

out of my contract, (and) hail insurance was being kicked out 

. . .  

 

Both not true statements.  The new program respects individual 

production records, both for crop insurance and for revenue 

insurance.  And as the members opposite have already been 

told, hail insurance was taken out by the members opposite. 

 

So their own people who they're talking to are misled, and the 

members opposite continue to give inaccurate statements to the 

press, to the public.  The public has a right to know accurate 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Isn't that just a 

pathetic response to a question to an Attorney General about a 

decent, honourable thing to do for the taxpayer, for tens of 

thousands of farm families, for all kinds of people who are 

worried about contracts.  We've got the Attorney General; we 

have got the Premier of Saskatchewan saying this, outside the 

legislature, about GRIP:  the courts will have to decide that 

question -- end of quote.  That's what he says. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, I go back to you with the same question.  

If in fact the courts will have to decide, and if in fact you don't 

have any right in court now to go at the Government of 

Saskatchewan, there's only one thing that the Premier could 

have been referring to, that is, refer the GRIP issue to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, which can then perhaps go on 

to the Supreme Court. 

 

That's the only way that you can take it to court because you've 

taken out all other rights of farmers to get at the Government of 

Saskatchewan and their Charter of Rights and Freedoms or 

other freedoms has been . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the Leader of the Opposition 

have a question?  I'd like him to put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Attorney General, given the evidence and 

this last statement that the Premier of Saskatchewan said, the 

courts will decide, the courts will decide, won't you, Mr. 

Attorney General, refer this Bill to the Court of Appeal, as we 

saw with The Representation Act of 1989?  Clear it up for the 

taxpayer, clear it up for the Lieutenant Governor, clear it up for 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the minister 

should answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member 

opposite that the courts will decide.  The courts will do what 

the courts are empowered to do.  But the question is:  what will 

the members opposite do?  The members opposite, when they 

had the opportunity to govern . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The Leader of the Opposition just 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

had a minute and a half to ask his question.  I wish he'd let the 

minister answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We don't want to listen to this guy again. 

 

The Speaker: -- The government will decide who's going to 

answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Since when are you the government? 

 

The Speaker: -- It's up to the government to decide. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Going to fall on your lap anyway, Bob. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well that's fair enough. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the question is:  what will 

the members opposite do?  Because when they were in 

government, when they were in a position to do something 

about farm programming, they were more interested in political 

construction than good, sound management.  There's that 

interesting letter in the paper that asks some questions.  It says: 

 

 I heard, in my opinion, a very knowledgeable farmer say on 

TV that the 1991 GRIP was easier to understand, but that the 

1992 plan gave farmers more incentive to farm as they ought 

to. 

 

 I have, in the past at political meetings, heard Devine equate 

the NDP with, Soviet communism.  One identifying factor of 

Soviet communism was that it repressed the agricultural 

sector so there was no incentive to farm. 

 

 Now, tell me why there is such a switch in roles by Devine's 

"free enterprise -- open for business) faction . . .  

 

The question is: what will the members opposite do?  They 

designed a careless program, and now when they're supposed 

to be in the House debating the issue, they're raising any other 

issue and asking questions that farmers aren't interested in 

having answered. 

 

The question farmers want to know is, will you help us get the 

right amount of money for farmers from the federal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question, my question is to the 

Attorney General.  Mr. Attorney General, we have heard what 

the Premier said on two occasions, that he's concerned about 

people's rights in this Bill and PCs are justified, that he thinks 

this should go to court. 

 

And now I'll quote from another Saskatoon paper just recently, 

where an NDP lawyer, Audrey Brent, says she doesn't think the 

GRIP Bill is constitutional.  And she says -- and she specializes 

in farm law -- and particularly where you can't sue the 

government.  And I'm going to quote this.  She says: 

In court actions already proceeding against the government, 

the Bill states that "a court shall not consider any principle of 

law or in equity that would require adequate, reasonable or 

any notice with respect to any amendments or change to the 

contract."  (She says) "I think this is the most disturbing 

aspect." 

 

Because people have lost their right . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the Leader of the Opposition 

please ask his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Attorney General, given the fact that 

lawyers don't believe this Bill is constitutional, farmers are 

suing you, the Premier says it should be settled in court, the 

Premier says people do have rights -- won't you refer this Bill 

to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal so that the public and the 

taxpayers know that you're going to do the decent thing with 

respect to this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, in the debate on Friday, the 

member from Morse said that maybe your government did 

ignore the March 15 deadline about which you're making so 

much.  Maybe they did ignore it year after year after year after 

year after year.  And maybe you did make 105 changes after 

March 15 last year.  And now the member opposite stands in 

the House as though he were incensed by that as somehow . . . 

some kind of a legal travesty that he is proposing.  The fact is, 

farmers were given adequate notice to review the changes to 

the program, to understand it, and to make their decisions about 

the program. 

 

Now there are 288 farmers signed a petition that the member 

opposite took out and allowed to come back in.  Compare the 

travesty to the democratic process here where for 20 days they 

held up the House while they collected 288 names on a 

petition, when in the previous administration they went out and 

they understood that the public had a concern about it -- 

120,000 names were gathered in a 20-day walk-out in the 

legislature.  The members opposite were too busy playing golf 

to pay any attention to the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Attorney General, from your 

experience you must know that any court in Saskatchewan and 

any court in Canada would love to get its hands on this piece of 

legislation -- they would.  And you know that. 

 

Also, Mr. Attorney General, you're aware that this Bill has not 

only local and national but international implications with 

respect to contracts and contract law and the Charter of Rights. 

 

Now given the fact that it has these kinds of implications where 

you said, void on a contract, knowing that you were so weak 

that you had to then in a subsequent section 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

say, but I won't let them sue me, you've hit on two areas that 

people believe it's unconstitutional.  One, you voided 

something retroactively; and number two, to cover yourself you 

said, but you can't take me to court in case I'm wrong. 

 

In such circumstances where every court would like to get at 

this, why don't you do the honourable thing and refer this to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and clean it up once and for all?  

It'll be done very quickly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Let's move on because we don't want to 

listen to you.  You're not the Minister of Justice. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Arm River is not 

going to decide for the government, I don't think, in this House 

who's going to answer the question.  That is for the government 

to decide. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem 

to be more interested in fiddling with political games than they 

are concerned with the well-being of farmers.  When we 

introduce GRIP changes, they play around.  When we 

introduce the farm debt legislation, what do they do?  They 

play with their federal counterparts and they encourage a court 

challenge to our farm legislation to deal with the farm debt 

crisis and to deal with farmers' stability and foreclosure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ought to begin to work 

with us in trying to get through the legislature the important 

pieces of legislation that support farmers; to get on with the 

business of the House and let farmers get back to helping us 

design better programs than the ones that were designed by the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I will 

be making a number of comments this afternoon as pertains to 

Bill 87.  And I think that what we saw in question period today 

was indicative of the problem that this legislature faces and 

indeed all Saskatchewan people that believe in the rights of 

individuals to have their day in court, to sign contracts that are 

legal and binding, and to have the ability to trust those people 

that have been duly elected to govern our province. 

And it's very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the highest lawyer 

in the government today chose to duck this issue because it's 

one I don't think that he should properly duck. 

 

One only has to look at the Bill and see the number of 

"whereas's" in it which I believe in constitutional terms is only 

usually reserved for those issues that deal with the 

constitutionality.  Most Bills don't have several dozen 

"whereas's" at the beginning, and it's indicative that the 

government was trying to cover off a number of circumstances. 

 

It means, Mr. Speaker, that we in this province are faced with, 

as my colleagues have said in this debate and in others 

previously, dealing with a government that is setting itself 

above the law, that says that individuals in our society don't 

have any recourse, any rights.  By a simple act of this 

Legislative Assembly, those rights can be extinguished for 

ever, in fact that we can void, we can void several years of 

happenings just by a stroke of the pen here.  And it's very 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly has sunk to this 

level. 

 

The alternatives, Mr. Speaker, I think were many for the 

government, in the case of the GRIP issue, that could have 

meant a far different outcome to this particular Bill.  Instead of 

having ourselves embroiled in this whole mess that the 

Minister of Agriculture has brought upon this province, if some 

of the people that honestly understood the GRIP program had 

been talked to, I think the government realistically could have 

made some changes to the '91 program that would have been 

accepted by and large by everyone in this province, that would 

have met some of the criteria that the Minister of Finance and 

his officials have obviously put upon the Minister of 

Agriculture, that a number of those things -- the minister of 

Crop Insurance always likes to talk about his moral hazards -- a 

lot of these things probably could have been dealt with in a 

manner that would have been acceptable. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government has a built-in bias 

toward anything that occurred prior to November 1, 1991.  In 

other words, anything at all that occurred prior to that time had 

to be bad.  It had to be wrong.  It had to be unjust.  It had to be 

all sorts of things.  Because these people after so many years, 

I'm afraid, began to believe their own rhetoric, totally. 

 

And it's sort of like the quotes, Mr. Speaker, that we've read 

into the record from 1989 about the rhetoric of the members of 

the New Democratic Party when they were either defending 

democratic rights or rule changes or they were defending their 

rights not to have closure put upon them.  All of these things 

that they were always defending with great vociferousness in 

this Chamber, we found have simply been words.  They haven't 

been anything else.  In other words, members of the New 

Democratic Party became to believe that everything they said 

was true and obviously anything anybody else said wasn't true. 

 

And therefore, we get in a mind-set.  When we come to change 

something like GRIP, we can't listen to anybody that has 

another point of view because they must obviously be wrong.  

And the very marketing agents, Mr. 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

Speaker, that this government is trying to get rid of, the very 

marketing agents that they've sent this polling out, this 

questionnaire out to rural Saskatchewan to try and skew in their 

favour as they get rid of these people, came up with a set of 

recommendations that by and large would have done the 

government good stead to listen to, instead of ignoring. 

 

These are recommendations, Mr. Speaker, that these people 

came up with just simply by listening to the folks that they 

were charged with doing business with.  These are 

recommendations that several thousand farmers had input into.  

These are recommendations that I think crop insurance agents 

had no bias built into other than reporting back to government 

exactly what they were hearing from their clientele. 

 

And this is the very stuff that unfortunately this government 

chose to ignore totally.  And by ignoring and just ramming 

ahead, have now got themselves and this province in a terrible 

place.  It's the kind of advice that the Minister of Agriculture 

could have taken prior to March 15 and built something with, 

instead of saying, well it doesn't matter what anybody else 

thinks, I have a large majority, I don't care if I have legal 

problems, I'll simply ramrod ahead, I'll get around them, I'll get 

over top of them, I'll simply push people out of the road. 

 

And that kind of attitude, Mr. Speaker, has obviously got us 

where we are today, where we're asking the Attorney General 

of this province to take a reference forward to the Court of 

Appeal because of the shemoz that attitude has brought about. 

 

(1500) 

 

My colleague from Morse the other day talked about some of 

these areas, Mr. Speaker.  And as I go through my talk this 

afternoon, I also will talk about them.  Because I think it's 

important that before we get to the final hour in this debate, 

that the Minister of Agriculture have the opportunity for some 

sober second thought, that he can recant before all is said and 

done and come up with something that is far more acceptable, 

rather than dragging this province through the courts for the 

next several years. 

 

One of the suggestions that I've always found appealing, Mr. 

Speaker -- and it's not from a political bias -- it's that over the 

years people in crop insurance and then later on in gross 

revenue insurance said that it was very important at some point 

that we move producers to an individual account, an individual 

basis, that the least amount of distortion in crop rotations and 

incentives is if you have people on an individual basis. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that many times I've often in the past 

felt penalized by the fact that I was sort of lumped into this area 

business, that if you are diversifying, if you're doing things in 

soil conservation, if you're planting tree rows, if you're doing 

any number of agronomic practices that can make your farm 

more productive, you should have some ability to have that 

productivity recognized. 

 

And it was one of the things that, when I attended GRIP 

meetings all over this province in the spring of 1991, that 

people were in favour of.  I think the only people that weren't 

were those that perhaps had been using their neighbour's good 

farming practices in order to prop themselves up.  But by and 

large, farmers out there prefer to be treated as individuals.  

They prefer the fact that their own averages, the things that 

they do to build those averages, mean something. 

 

I mean farming is a very individualistic occupation, Mr. 

Speaker.  There is a lot of pride . . . there's a lot of pride in 

being able to do things a little bit differently and perform to the 

best of your ability and produce a good crop.  And what we 

have now in my case in risk area 8, I believe it is, is that wheat 

and durum make up 80 per cent of the crop grown in that area.  

Therefore when we're figuring out revenue insurance for my 

area, it is very heavily weighted toward those two crops; that 

how the price of those two crops goes on the world 

market-place determines what the ability of the revenue 

insurance in my area to be paid on. 

 

And it has nothing to do with whether I'm a good farmer, bad 

farmer, or anything else.  My agent tells me that my irrigated 

crop which may go 60 or 70 bushels to the acre will have the 

ability to garner the same amount of revenue insurance as my 

dry-land crop which faced an extreme drought situation in June 

and was severely hurt at that time. 

 

Now it seems strange to me, Mr. Speaker, that there would be 

that difference.  Obviously my irrigated crop, in my view, 

shouldn't get what my neighbour across the fence on 

non-irrigated class P soil would be getting in the way of 

revenue insurance.  That seems a little bit bizarre to me that I 

would get those dollars on top of the very, very high 

production, because this year irrigation is treated the same as 

everything else. 

 

And that's the problem.  There is no difficulty, I don't think, 

Mr. Speaker, in recognizing those extra inputs, those extra 

things that I do in irrigation, and recognizing that hard work 

and endeavour.  But you don't do it at the expense of everybody 

else simply because my crop risk area is 80 per cent in wheat 

and durum.  That makes no sense at all, and it doesn't make 

sense to the folks out there.  And I think the Minister of 

Agriculture obviously missed something early on this spring. 

 

Pulse growers would like to have the option to include or 

exclude specialty crops from GRIP.  And I think it's something 

that should have a realistic ability to look at.  The moral hazard 

argument that has been touted by the government time and time 

again centres on one crop, and that's lentils. 

 

Well lentils, Mr. Speaker, are only one crop, but it seems to be 

the one that sticks in the craw of the government the most.  Yet 

the acreage went up in the face of very low coverage.  The 

acreage was up.  The minister could have looked at some of the 

recommendations coming back in from agents in regards to 

pulse crops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the soil classification in Saskatchewan is 

outdated.  Almost everyone associated with farming in the last 

few years and the various programs that have been 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

attached to it know that there has been too much discrepancy in 

the types of soils that are being compared with each other.  

There are too many, too many classifications.  There are too 

many in order to get a realistic, long-term, individual coverage. 

 

And if there is one place that the minister could have started 

making realistic changes that would have had a very significant 

impact, I say to him, on the budget, it would have been in this 

whole area of soil classification.  It's something that -- I believe 

it was Dr. Henry, Les Henry from the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) has been recommending to government for 

years and years and years, that because of all of the different 

classifications, that we have had both unrealistically low and 

unrealistically high yield data attached to certain places in the 

province.  And that has meant the probability of pay-out in 

many cases has been increased. 

 

And I think it would have been prudent of the government, 

given that this has been a big problem for a long time and one 

certainly attached to the whole question of revenue insurance, 

that would have been wise to look at. 

 

But once again, they seem to have had this bull-headed 

approach to this problem in saying that, well because the agents 

came up with it, the fact that Dr. Henry talked about it doesn't 

matter.  I'm simply going . . . I'm going to go ahead in the face 

of everything else and I'll push my way through. 

 

Good experience discounts should be earned on the same basis 

as with crop insurance if no payment is qualified or if payment 

is less than the premium charged.  That's an integral part, Mr. 

Speaker, of giving value for what is needed out there.  That 

good experience I think is something that every farmer will opt 

for.  It's only the people, Mr. Speaker, that knowingly want to 

abuse a program that won't appreciate anything like this, you 

know? 

 

And it's sad to say that, as my colleague just reminded me, they 

put people on the board of directors of Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance that knowingly would abuse . . . knowingly abuse the 

system rather than trying to do the best that they can so that 

they can get a good experience discount down the road. 

 

Producers would favour premium deductions at point of sale.  

Last year, Mr. Speaker, I was at the Agridome shortly after the 

election and it was one of the points that producers were saying 

to the new government.  Sit down with the federal government, 

sit down with the Canadian Wheat Board, sit down with the 

livestock auctions association, sit down with the various 

people, the people that run the various processing plants in the 

province and work out a system so that we can have deduction 

at source, rather than have these large bills come payable 

months and even years down the road; that the government had 

an opportunity to move ahead and try and figure out a system, 

and naturally, it would take time to evolve where producers 

could make payments at source. 

 

Did the government do that?  Did they make any attempt 

to do that?  No.  It was simply take your orders from the 

Minister of Finance.  March ahead.  Come up with a Bill that is 

retroactive and ram it down people's throats.  That's a far, I 

suppose, easier approach, Mr. Speaker, than trying to work 

something out with people to allow deductions at source. 

 

Interest-free status for any outstanding premiums if GRIP 

payments are still owed.  I think, Mr. Speaker, the grains area 

today is one that isn't going to have an easy haul.  And I can 

remember members of this legislature, New Democrats 

particularly, standing on their feet and bemoaning the fact that 

the Canadian Wheat Board was going to move off interest-free 

cash advances. 

 

And I really wonder, when the government obviously knew 

that farmers were in the position they were in and were making 

recommendations like this, that they would not have wanted to 

address it.  I mean after all, this is the party that in last year's 

election talked about having a full cost of production built in in 

the future about, you know . . . And I remember well last 

spring, Mr. Speaker, going around to GRIP meetings and there 

was an outfit that was closely associated with the party of the 

Minister of Agriculture attending those meetings and raising 

quite a ruckus at some, and they had their sheet that they were 

handing out to the folks there that showed what the full cost of 

productions entailed. 

 

And of course this is what the New Democratic Party was 

campaigning on last fall.  And what we have today is a far cry 

from full cost of production. 

 

Producers would feel more competent if support prices were 

projected after harvesting.  Many producers are concerned that 

they cannot make proper management decisions and rotation 

plans in the spring of the year. 

 

Well I don't know if I totally agree with that statement, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I brought that up just to show the Minister of 

Agriculture that I'm not going to agree with everything that is 

in this report.  I think that farmers are moving in an age when 

they have to do their homework.  And it would be unrealistic to 

post those prices afterwards. 

 

I think that there are enough opportunities for farmers to make 

those kind of agronomic decisions in the spring.  And this is 

one that I would really want to see some numbers on.  I would 

want to see how many people were consulted.  I would want to 

see how many of the policy holders actually felt this way 

because it's something that I don't agree with. 

 

But that's the kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, I think that it would 

have behoved the minister to do, that as you go through the 

points that were made by the crop insurance agents and 

recommendations -- after obviously talking to thousands of 

people -- it would have been nice to build that data base and 

really do an honest consultation with people.  The Minister of 

Agriculture knows full well that the GRIP program as it is 

nationally in Canada will be going into a period of review 

again.  It was always understood amongst everyone -- 

producers, the people selling the program, politicians, grain 

companies -- that by the time that third year rolled around, the 

contract that people signed, the commitment that the producers 

of this 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

province signed up for, that in the third year there would be a 

review.  There would be a review. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- After the first year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And the minister says, after the first year.  

Well that's a little bit of a minister's wishful thinking.  The 

minister is looking for justifications, Mr. Speaker, all the way 

through this debate. 

 

And I have no doubt in my mind that the Minister of 

Agriculture in this province cannot stand on his feet today and 

tell this Assembly or any farmer in this Assembly exactly what 

the guidelines for GRIP '93 will be.  And I would challenge the 

minister at any time to get up and do that, to tell me what 

farmers in Alberta, in Manitoba, in Ontario, all across the land, 

in conjunction with the federal government, what kind of 

program we are going to have in 1993. 

 

And he can't do that, Mr. Speaker, because I would suggest to 

you and to this Assembly that that's all going in the hopper this 

fall, that the changes that the minister has made in this 

province, in this Bill, may not be around in '93 because you 

will see a lot of negotiation go on, as was originally intended 

with the GRIP program Canada-wide.  And there is no way that 

that minister would dare go out on a limb in this Assembly and 

tell the folks exactly what the program's going to look like 

eight or nine months from now.  If he can, I'll certainly 

appreciate listening to him, Mr. Speaker, and people will hold 

him at his word. 

 

(1515) 

 

But I don't think he's got the courage to do that because I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that review is going to talk 

about a number of things.  It's going to talk about 

over-production.  It's going to talk about the ability to deduct 

premiums at source.  It's going to talk about adding crops to the 

mix. It's going to talk about the whole area, as the minister 

likes to say all the time, about moral hazards.  And rightly so.  

If farmers in Alberta and farmers in Manitoba under 1992 are 

going to receive a top-up from the federal treasury -- and they 

very well might, as might farmers in Saskatchewan -- they not 

only get the benefit of their own program, they will get exactly 

the same amount of money as Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

So not only will they get higher coverage levels on spring 

wheat and durum and every other crop that is in the program, 

they would also get any special payments.  And I think rightly 

so, Mr. Speaker.  The federal government finds that a bit 

strange.  I think any farmer in this province, any reasonably 

minded person, would find that strange, the way you would 

have the province with the most arable acres in Canada, the 

province that grows most of the grain or a good percentage of 

the grains, export grains in this country, would be so 

diametrically different than the other two provinces, that 

producers here will be affected negatively, that we won't be 

able to garner the same amount of dollars.  And I don't think 

the federal government, rightly so, is going to let a program 

like that exist. 

 

Now it would have been different if you'd had the situation 

where everybody was the same across Canada 

and the provincial government here had chosen to top it up.  In 

other words, if Saskatchewan producers were getting more than 

Alberta or Manitoba, then that's the responsibility of the 

provincial government, that's the responsibility of the 

provincial taxpayer, and those judgement calls would be made. 

 

But that's not the issue.  The issue is that the Minister of 

Agriculture, the Minister of Finance, have changed the 

program so drastically that you have basic inequities. 

 

And it makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, what members of the 

New Democratic Party would do if he we had that situation 

existing in health care or education, where you have very large 

federal transfer payments coming into this province, where you 

have cost sharing involved.  Adult education.  You can think of 

all sorts of areas where there are very significant amounts of 

federal dollars coming into provincial programs.  Programs that 

northern Saskatchewan has enjoyed over the years -- large 

amounts of federal dollars. 

 

I can remember the program that when the roads were built 

from north of La Ronge so that some of the mining areas could 

be opened up. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Roads to resources. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My friend from Athabasca says, roads to 

resources.  Very heavy federal involvement at the time in order 

to open up some opportunities for Northerners.  And of course 

the province then committed some money, some equipment.  I 

believe they had some native hiring stuff in place that allowed 

those roads to get built. 

 

Well what would happen if we had the same attitude with roads 

to resources that we do with GRIP?  There'd be all sorts of 

gnashing of teeth and standing in this legislature on a stump.  

And I can just imagine the speeches that would be given by 

members of the New Democratic Party, much like the speeches 

I suppose they gave in 1989 on closure and rule changes and all 

those other things that they were the great defenders of.  But 

that would be the reality.  And yet we have this government 

saying, no, we can have this basic inequity because it occurs in 

rural Saskatchewan.  It occurs with farming people, and 

therefore it's all right. 

 

Well I find that a strange logic, a very strange logic, Mr. 

Speaker, that you would apply and justify that double standard, 

and that not only do you apply that double standard, you are so 

afraid of those people that you somehow have to structure 

legislation so they can't get at you in court.  In other words, I 

don't want to . . . I can't have the same rights as the provinces 

on either side of me and I don't have the right like they do to 

take my provincial government to court. 

 

You know, every farmer that's signed up with GRIP in Alberta 

can take the Alberta government to court, and every farmer in 

Manitoba that is signed up with GRIP can take the Manitoba 

government to court.  And every farmer in NDP Ontario can 

take his provincial government to court as far as the gross 

revenue insurance program goes.  But in NDP Saskatchewan, 

that's not the case. 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

Now that in itself, Mr. Speaker, is a fairly large inequity, fairly 

large inequity, and I would think it's right and proper that that 

inequity be addressed.  And I guess the only place that you can 

rightfully do that would be in the Supreme Court of our land, 

which doesn't allow provincial governments to tread on the 

rights of individuals.  And if farmers in Manitoba and farmers 

in Alberta and farmers in Ontario can take the government to 

court over gross revenue insurance, then I suspect that the 

federal court, the Supreme Court of our land, would be very 

interested in hearing why farmers in Saskatchewan can't take 

their provincial government to court. 

 

I suspect they would be very interested in a Bill that in three 

different sections talks about voiding contracts, talks about 

rewriting history, talks about the minister's ability to change 

things in the middle of a crop year. 

 

I mean I find it utterly bizarre, Mr. Speaker, that a cabinet 

minister of any stripe, regardless of his party, would even want 

in legislation the power to say to a farmer in August that I'm 

going to de-insure your canola crop.  I don't want it in gross 

revenue insurance any more, therefore by Bill 87 I'm going to 

de-insure it.  I mean I don't know why a cabinet minister would 

even want that power. 

 

Or that you signed up for gross revenue insurance on your pea 

crop and the world price is at such and such, and this is the 

range that you're anticipating, and all of a sudden they come 

along and say no, no, Finance minister ran out of money last 

week and we've decided that the pea crop gets the chop this 

year.  And that's what we've got in Bill 87, Mr. Speaker.  The 

minister has the ability to do that. 

 

Now it was never, never intended, I don't believe, in designing 

this program over a number of years, no matter what the 

Minister of Agriculture says, over a number of years, that it 

was ever intended to have those types of powers built into it. 

 

What was intended was to come up with a program, a national 

program that worked on long-term averages on commodity 

price, tied to long-term production averages on the farmers' 

side.  That's the only way that stability is possibly achieved, is 

a long-term look at what is going on, with the ability of that 

program to adjust itself to those long-term realities.  Anything 

else simply doesn't wash in the world of GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 

 

I mean I sympathize with the farmer out there who always 

says, if they would just give me an extra two or three dollars a 

bushel at the elevator for the first so many bushels; I don't need 

all of this paperwork and all of this malarkey.  Well you 

sympathize with them, Mr. Speaker, but quite simply that 

doesn't fly in international trade relations these days. 

 

And whatever program is designed, whether it be straight crop 

insurance or revenue insurance or a combination of both, has to 

have the ability to stand up in the world today.  I mean there we 

are, Canada, a member of the Cairns Group of nations beating 

on the Europeans, beating on the Americans, telling them to 

clean up their act, come to some sort of GATT settlement that 

will allow 

our producers the ability to compete fairly and yet we would 

change things that would put Canada at the back end of the list.  

That's why we had to come up, Mr. Speaker, in this country, 

with a program such as GRIP. 

 

Now imperfect as it was, it meant that there had to be changes.  

The agents have recommended changes.  Many people around 

the province have recommended changes.  And I think the 

government could have done many things to change this Bill 

without getting into some of the Draconian stuff that we have 

seen. 

 

I would just like to go through a few quotes, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think are pertinent to this debate because they involve people 

that obviously are in decision-making roles in the government 

today.  And I think that members should be aware of what 

people have said on this particular issue. 

 

This quote is from the Star-Phoenix I believe, of July 18, 1992.  

And I quote: 

 

 . . . the argument of Premier . . . Romanow that the situations 

are not analogous is as vacant as the NDP's legislative 

(majority . . . no, morality, sorry) morality.  He says that 

because the NDP campaigned to change the Gross Revenue 

Insurance Plan . . . it has the democratic right to push through 

(this) bill. 

 

 But did the NDP campaign on the promise of making 

changes after the GRIP deadline and using the power of 

government to, as the Tories say, "tamper with (the) 

evidence" in a case now before the courts? 

 

 However the most offensive aspect to the government's 

behavior has been the way it's ramming through arbitrary 

changes to the legislature's rules.  Ignoring the parliamentary 

tradition of all-party consensus on such changes, the NDP has 

applied 30-minute time limits to bell-ringing.  And to do it, 

the NDP brought down the heavy fist of closure to silence 

debate after only four days.  This can only be described as a 

tyranny of the majority. 

 

And that's from the Star-Phoenix of July 18, 1992. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I quote the Premier of the province, 

and this will be from the Star-Phoenix of June 23, 1992. 

 

 I worry about contracts and all that. I mean, one has certain 

rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that one has to also read this one 

because I think this is important.  When you listen to the 

Premier -- and we heard a number of quotes in question period 

today as to what the Premier's view is of how this thing should 

be handled vis-a-vis the courts -- then you stack that up against 

what the Agriculture Minister says; and this will be from the 

Star-Phoenix, April 29, '92: 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens has threatened to bring in 

retroactive legislation changing the (GRIP) contracts, but he 

refused to comment on that Tuesday. 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens was (reportedly) . . . asked 

whether changes to 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 15 

deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

And that's quoted from the Leader-Post of June 17, 1992.  And 

once again from June 17, '92: 

 

 "Essentially, he (Wiens) didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not (to) be identified.  "He 

thought we could get around that (legal question) . . . He said 

we would get around it somehow." 

 

So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, we've obviously got the Premier 

of the province who has felt that there are some legal concerns 

here that need addressing and we have a Minister of 

Agriculture that simply says that he's going to get around 

things.  And I think those are two diametrically opposed 

positions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

They're as diametrically opposed as the Americans and the 

Europeans are on some of their GATT stuff, you know, where 

they both accuse the other of the highest degree of cheating.  

And it's pretty hypocritical, I think, of both the Americans and 

the Europeans on the agriculture question to be sort of 

throwing aspersions at one another. 

 

Well it's also very hypocritical in this Chamber for the minister 

. . . the Hon. Premier to be saying one thing about people's 

legal rights and what not, and then to have the Minister of 

Agriculture simply saying, well it doesn't matter what those 

legal problems are, we'll just . . . we'll get around them 

somehow. 

 

And it looks like getting around them, getting around them . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the Minister of Agriculture 

says, where am I making it up.  I'm quoting from the Star-

Phoenix on June 17, '92.  That was one of your committee 

members who was scared to be identified because he was 

obviously afraid that the government would use its heavy hand 

to do something to him. 

 

But anyway the differences obviously have meant, between 

what the Minister of Agriculture says and what the Premier 

says on this, means that obviously the Minister of Agriculture 

won out.  And the folks were instructed in legislative drafting 

to come up with this Bill 87 that has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 . 

. . we got 10 whereas's in this particular piece of legislation 

because, as the people in the legal community tell me, they 

help the Minister of Agriculture when he gets into the 

constitutional wrangling that is sure to occur on this Bill; that if 

you have the more whereas's, you are . . . the more 

fear that you have of constitutional infringement and challenge 

and trying to justify what you're doing. 

 

And obviously I'd say to members of this legislature, when 

you've reviewed the other 86 Bills that we've had brought 

forward to this House, how many whereas's have you seen in 

them?  Because I don't think anybody was particularly worried 

about the constitutional ability of these Bills to stand up.  But 

obviously now No. 87 has some ramifications that the 

government isn't quite prepared to take on unless they think 

they've got themselves covered in many different ways.  So we 

have 10 whereas's at the beginning of this Bill in order to cover 

off the problems that the Minister of Agriculture created when 

he ignored people.  Earlier this year he said that it wasn't proper 

to do some of these things. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, section 7 of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms is an interesting one.  It's one that maybe members of 

this Assembly should take time once in a while to review and 

read its impact on what we do as legislators in this province. 

 

Section 7 talks about a person's rights, and it covers a whole, 

wide spectrum of things.  It covers, I believe . . . and I've 

sought some legal opinion in the last couple of days, Mr. 

Speaker -- that would say that the contracts and how those 

contracts affect your everyday life, how your financial standing 

as per those contracts, the ability of you to maintain yourself in 

society -- all of those things can be affected by section 7. 

 

And I think it was very important.  It would be very important, 

Mr. Speaker, that we have the ability as a province and as a 

legislator and as ordinary taxpayers to have some confidence 

that that section is being upheld.  And that's why today you saw 

the Leader of the Opposition questioning the Minister of 

Justice as to the possibility of that happening.  Because I 

believe that if a person's economic wherewithal is dramatically 

changed because of a broken contract, a contract that the 

government has broken, then you should have the right as an 

individual to challenge that government. 

 

And certainly what we see in Saskatchewan today with a large 

section of drought, for instance, across the northern part of our 

province where we'll have many producers faced with just 

diametrically changed economic circumstances because of 

what the government has done, that their rights as per a signed 

contract have obviously been infringed upon. 

 

It means that in some areas you'll have a line, Mr. Speaker, and 

on one side of the line where there's been normal rainfall that 

you will have people under the 1992 program getting paid so 

much per acre on an area basis.  And a few short miles away, 

where you have terrible drought, where you've had many 

thousands of acres already worked down, you will find those 

individuals without any crop at all but only getting the same 

amount as the fellow with maybe a 40 or 50 bushel crop.  And 

they will only have recourse under their crop insurance to 80 

per cent instead of the 100 per cent that they thought they had 

in the contract.  And that's on the production side. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that that is very serious 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

because that line, as I understand it, talking to people up there, 

extends clean across the province.  It's in a band that goes from 

the Alberta border to the Manitoba border.  And the 

circumstance will exist right within crop risk areas of several 

thousand acres being worked down in, say, one area; and right 

next to it, a normal crop or above normal crop, and yet they're 

both going to get the same amount of money.  Now I would 

think the person in need is the one that's had to work down his 

entire crop. 

 

One RM (rural municipality) councillor phoned in to our 

caucus office from an area somewhere -- I believe it was 

around Star City -- and said that in one division, one division, 

that's six miles by six miles, that there'd been 5,000 acres of 

crop worked down.  Now that's pretty darned significant, Mr. 

Speaker, in an area six miles by six miles.  That's a lot of crop.  

And that means that those individuals there, if they're all in the 

same risk area as people close by, are going to be discriminated 

against -- discriminated in a major way that they never 

anticipated when they signed their contracts in the spring of 

1991. 

 

I don't think anybody in their wildest imagination could have 

believed that a political party, that a politician would come 

along and change the rules so diametrically that there you are, 

working down your crop, and you don't have a clue what your 

coverage is going to be.  And you have a neighbour a few miles 

away, going to do very well while you're almost . . . well, some 

of those people, I suspect, Mr. Speaker, will be faced with 

analysing whether they're going to stay in farming or not 

because of what this minister has done to them.  And I don't 

think anybody, in reviewing the rule changes to the GRIP 

program, ever wanted that to happen, that because of the 

vagaries of nature that people would be placed in that situation. 

 

I mean can you imagine somebody with a 50-bushel crop, 10 

miles from somebody -- and it can happen -- somebody that's 

had their crop entirely worked down.  And the guy with a 

50-bushel crop, if there's a good quota situation, is going to sell 

all his grain.  He's going to get his revenue insurance on top of 

it.  And this poor schmuck over here has no grain whatsoever. 

 

You know, I mean that simply isn't the kind of program I 

would have envisioned coming out of New Democrats, you 

know.  I mean we've always . . . they've been the great 

equalizer in our society, or at least that's what they've always 

claimed, where they sort of take from the rich, you know, and 

pass it on down to the poor, and that they try and level 

everybody out. 

 

But now we have a minister that's doing his best to make as 

many inequities as possible.  I mean it's simply ludicrous that 

you would have that situation occurring.  And we asked the 

ministers in this House different times about how serious the 

situation is.  You know, we say to the minister responsible for 

Crop Insurance, well how many thousand acres have been 

worked down, so that we can put this problem in its proper 

perspective.  And he says, well I don't know; I flew over it 

once; took a look. 

 

Well the situation is serious enough I think, Mr. Speaker, that it 

would bear a little closer examination.  That if we have this 

very serious inequity arising where you can 

have people in that circumstance, I would think a full-blown 

sort of tour around would be the proper way to handle it.  I 

would think the minister for Crop Insurance would want to 

head out there for about a week.  He might as well go, because 

half the government members are never around the place 

anyway, so he might as well go out, he might as well go out 

and take a walk around for about a week.  And he could 

publicize it, so farmers knew he was going to be around and 

then would take the opportunity to go visit with him about 

these inequities in the program. 

 

Now sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that kind of thing takes courage 

to go do that.  And I haven't seen a great lot of courage from 

either the Minister of Agriculture or the minister responsible 

for Crop Insurance, when it comes to talking to folks. 

 

But I would think if we have this serious situation, that they 

would want to, they would want to go out and do it.  I mean, if 

they lack the personal courage to go do that, maybe the 

committee -- the Standing Committee on Agriculture, which 

the opposition proposed as one of the ways around this mess 

that we're in here -- maybe the standing committee, which is an 

all-party committee, could go out to some of these areas where 

these very serious inequities have arisen because of the changes 

to GRIP, and could confer with people; could actually hold 

some public meetings; could go out and walk around some 

farmers' fields.  I mean they could look at things so that at least 

when the changes that are going to occur in 1993 are brought 

forward, that there would be some on-the-ground experience. 

 

There's certainly members in our caucus -- a member from 

Arm River, former minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  

I'm sure that if the standing committee went out and looked at 

these things, that he'd be an ideal representative from the 

official opposition. 

 

And I'm sure that the government somewhere could find six or 

seven members with the courage and the foresight to go out 

and actually look at the problems before doing the absolutely 

unthinkable act, and that's ramming this particular piece of 

legislation through this House, in the face of those problems. 

 

I mean I can think of so many alternatives, Mr. Speaker, that 

people would find acceptable.  That people would say:  yes, 

that's a consultive government; that's a government that's 

listening to people; that's not someone that's simply is using its 

massive majority to walk over top of me in solving this 

particular problem. 

 

And I thought that amendment that we had proposed earlier on 

in debate was one that was . . . was one that the government 

would jump at.  I mean it certainly would have probably 

precluded now the next step, Mr. Speaker, which is the 

opposition asking the Minister of Justice to seek a reference 

from the Court of Appeal. 

 

I don't know what references to the Court of Appeal, and 

ultimately challenges to the Supreme Court cost, Mr. Speaker, 

but that's where we've moved to.  I mean we can have every 

other committee of this Legislative Assembly sort of out taking 

the measure of problems in 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

Saskatchewan, but when you suggest -- and that's nearly two 

months ago -- that the Standing Committee on Agriculture go 

out with this big problem we've got and sort of take a look at 

things and talk to people and bring back some 

recommendations to the government, instead of doing that two 

months ago and negating possibly the challenge that will now 

have to probably go through the court system, once again this 

government displayed its arrogance and said no, we're not 

going to do that. 

 

We don't want to have a Standing Committee on Agriculture go 

out and talk to farmers about the problem because they might 

come up with something that's different than what we propose.  

They might come up with some reasonable solutions. 

 

They might come up with . . . And quite frankly I suppose the 

Minister of Finance lived in fear of the Standing Committee on 

Agriculture, but he might have surprised himself.  Standing 

Committee on Agriculture might have come back with some 

reasonable solutions to some of the economic problems that 

beset the government also. 

 

(1545) 

 

But even with the guarantee of a very large majority on that 

standing committee, this government said no, we'll find a way 

around it.   We'll just put our heads down and we'll bull ahead.  

Whether that means unilaterally changing the rules to the 

House or using closure day after day, it doesn't matter.  We'll 

simply bull ahead. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it brings me back to a quote that I've used 

often in this House, and it's one that I'm becoming quite fond 

of.  And I'd like to read it to members of the New Democratic 

Party in this debate because I think it's one that they should 

seriously listen to.  And that's once again quoting the Premier, 

the member from Riversdale.  And this is from May 11,1989: 

 

 What new-found Democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

What new-found democracy is this?  What kind of a charade 

is this?  What kind of an unprecedented action is it for these 

people to bring forward a motion for rules change without 

any consultation . . . without any consultation from us; out of 

pique. 

 

And that seems to sum up the entire agenda for this 

government, Mr. Speaker.  It sums up the entire GRIP debate.  

Because as I have just outlined, we have had so many 

opportunities -- so many opportunities to change the way the 

process has unfolded, but none of them taken. 

 

And the words that the Premier spoke in 1989 when he was 

challenging the government of the day, so aptly apply to his 

own government now.  Because it has to be out of pique. There 

can't be any other reason why you wouldn't listen to the agents 

who came forward with several dozen recommendations, the 

people that actually talk on a daily and weekly basis to the 

folks out there -- why you would ignore recommendations from 

your own committee to not go ahead; why you wouldn't want 

the Standing Committee on Agriculture some two months ago 

to go out and actually listen to people. 

It's got to be out of pique -- there can't be anything else, Mr. 

Speaker, because these new-found Democrats, the people who 

were the large, the big champions of democracy in this 

province of people's rights, are trodding all over people, and it's 

got to be out of only one thing -- pique.  Arrogance, perhaps.  

The fact that a large . . . the feeling that a large legislative 

majority gives you the ability to sort of walk all over people's 

rights. 

 

I wonder at times, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier doesn't lay 

awake at night, sort of wondering what some of these people 

are up to, because obviously we have a minister that is 

committed to unilateral change at all cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of other quotes that I think are 

fairly applicable here, and they deal with the walk-out that the 

members of the opposition undertook earlier this year.  And I 

want to remind the members of the government because they 

often raise their walk-out . . . and I heard the Minister of 

Agriculture earlier today sort of in his mind justifying his 

actions once more to this House.  And I want to remind the 

members of the government . . . this would be from June 12, 

1992: 

 

 The facts be known, the Tories are right on.  The NDP 

government is dead wrong . . . 

 

 And right now the Tories' reasons for blocking the 

government's legislative agenda and effectively holding the 

province hostage is far more justifiable than the reasons for 

the NDP's 1989 walkout ever hoped of being. 

 

 . . . the Tories have now walked out of the Assembly over a 

matter of law -- one the NDP (and the NDP) is now 

attempting to rewrite so as to appear as if they have done 

nothing wrong. 

 

 In changing the 1991 GRIP contract with farmers, the NDP 

government -- according to a court ruling this week -- acted 

illegally by failing to notify producers of the changes to the 

program by March 15 deadline. 

 

 The simple solution -- the government has obviously 

determined according to court affidavits -- is to introduce 

legislation that will effectively say farmers were properly 

informed of changes to GRIP before March 15. 

 

 It's ridiculous revisionism from an NDP government that's 

already put a gun to farmers' heads and said:  "You either 

accept our version of GRIP or you will receive no GRIP." 

 

 This is why the PC's bell-ringing is completely justifiable. 

 

Leader-Post, June 13, '92. 

 

I don't think a whole lot has changed, Mr. Speaker, in the 

intervening two months.  We finally have the Bill before us, 

and it is even worse than anyone probably could have 

imagined.  I mean, not only once do we override people's 

abilities to challenge this government, we see it three 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

different times in that Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I want to know, in the intervening two 

months from when that article was written to now, is that why 

the government, in that intervening two months, has been so 

absolutely stubborn on this issue when there were so many 

alternatives that were possible, so many political solutions that 

were possible, so many opportunities for the Premier to look 

reasonable, so many opportunities for this government to come 

out a winner with farm families in that intervening two months. 

 

What is it that has made this government so intransigent, so 

unmoving, so unthinking, so uncaring, that in that intervening 

two-month period they would move this legislation ahead at all 

costs?  And it has to make . . . makes one wonder if it isn't just 

the salvation of the political hide of the Minister of Agriculture 

till we can get through this session and then we can watch the 

Premier shuffle the deck so that this person is hived off into 

something else where he isn't quite as dangerous, because there 

isn't any other logical conclusion. 

 

I mean, farmers and media and people in the legal community 

were all saying way back in June that we had a major, major 

problem on our hands; that because we were tinkering with the 

law of the land, that something should be done about it.  I 

mean, even the Premier is on record back then of saying that: 

 

 "I mean, one has certain rights. That's where the merit of the 

PC walkout is." 

 

This is way back in the middle of June.  This is two months 

ago, okay?  Two months ago.  But we've got all sorts of 

evidence to show that there is a big problem there, and yet the 

opportunities that were there for the government to step in and 

appear very, very reasonable on this issue have all gone past -- 

all gone past.  And we've seen this Legislative Assembly so 

fundamentally changed that it will never be the same again as 

far as how members' rights are protected in here.  And yet all 

that has gone by so that the Premier can shuffle his cabinet 

some time in October or November and send the minister from 

Rosetown-Elrose off to a safer place. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if that isn't a little bit short-sighted.  

I mean, there's no guarantee that that safer place won't be just 

as dangerous for the government as what we've seen in 

agriculture.  And unfortunately if all the government have the 

same attitude as the member from Rosetown-Elrose, then the 

replacement probably won't be any better.  It's obvious that the 

member from Canora has been influenced a long way down 

this road. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I find the member's arguments on 

speculation very interesting, but I think I would like him to 

speculate on the principles of the Bill that is before us. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  I must 

remind myself that I'm not to get in second reading into too 

many details of the Bill or I will have also an adverse reaction 

from Mr. Speaker.  It's a fine balancing act where one must talk 

in generalities all the time about this particular piece of 

legislation, and observations about members of this Assembly 

and the government. 

And I guess that's why members on this side, Mr. Speaker, 

have decided to read into the record so many quotes from the 

members in the New Democratic Party, because it gives us the 

opportunity to deal with things in a more specific manner, and 

yet at the same time ascribe to the rules of the Assembly where 

we're not supposed to get too general. 

 

One other issue that we haven't covered, Mr. Speaker, that's 

very important in this whole debate, and it goes back to the 

alternative portion of my argument and it's one that hasn't been 

talked about, and that was the reaction of the partner, the third 

partner in all of this, between the provincial government and 

the farmers, the federal government. 

 

As you know, way back in June the Minister of Agriculture for 

Canada was saying that time that he was quite willing to abide 

by some deadlines that had been in the 1991 program, that he 

was still willing to live up to his responsibilities, that the 

federal taxpayer was quite prepared to live up to certain 

responsibilities vis-a-vis the GRIP program. 

 

And as we saw time go on, we saw the minister get quite 

proactive and make offers to the provincial government as to 

certain levels of funding, about topping up the insurance, the 

crop insurance portion, to make sure that coverage comes from 

80 per cent back to 100 like it was in '91.  In other words, 

offering the minister in Saskatchewan and the government, the 

NDP government, sort of some outs that wouldn't be very 

expensive -- some ability for them to sort of move back onto 

the contract that was signed in '91 so that people wouldn't feel 

that they had been . . . had their contracts broken. 

 

And the minister, McKnight, was quoted as saying in the Star-

Phoenix on July 22: 

 

 The difference between the old and new plans is the basis for 

the federal offer. 

 

 Saskatchewan farmers lost anywhere from 30 to $40 per acre 

in coverage because of the provincial changes. 

 

So what the federal government was saying, that they had an 

offer that would help bring that shortfall back and negate some 

of these legal problems that the provincial government had got 

themselves into. 

 

And some of the farm groups, Mr. Speaker, were quoted as 

saying that they thought it was a reasonable offer.  At least it 

was a good point to start negotiating, that it would behove the 

provincial government to sort of move off this intransigent 

place that they had been and start talking. 

 

Because I mean there was $40 million put on the table and 

there was the option for farmers not to have to make any 

premium payments in regards to changes until further down the 

road, until the crop insurance . . . or rather the pooling accounts 

were closed off and all those things that mean that payments 

are stretched out over a period of time. 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

(1600) 

 

But what have we seen of that?  I mean here was an offer by 

the federal level of government to the provincial to sort of get 

them off of the post that they had got themselves skewered on 

and get back to a more reasonable approach.  And we had 

assurances, if I remember correctly, Mr. Speaker, at the time, 

as the government was still talking about bringing Bill 87 into 

this House and sort of in their mad rush to do it, that they were 

going to seriously talk to the federal government about this 

problem.  And that hasn't occurred.  I mean, I haven't heard an 

update.  Here we are in second reading of Bill 87, here we are 

discussing court challenges to this particular piece of 

legislation, here we are embroiled in what may be a 

constitutional morass, and I have heard nothing from the 

Minister of Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan in 

regards to the federal government for a couple of weeks now. 

 

Is it simply that they wish to ram this piece of legislation 

through first, rather than assure farmers that there is some 

reasonable negotiation going on, that that $40 million that the 

feds have put on the table is going to just sort of disappear 

because the provincial government is stonewalling? 

 

I mean, I don't know what the threshold of the provincial 

government is these days, Mr. Speaker, but I suspect that with 

lowering interest rates and with various things happening that 

there may be more room for the Minister of Finance to move.  I 

don't know. 

 

But the federal minister has made an offer.  If 40 million isn't 

the right number, maybe 35 is, and maybe the provincial 

government's right number is 15.  I don't know. 

 

But the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister refuses to 

talk about it, to consult with people to ensure that those 

negotiations are going on.  I mean, I haven't heard one farm 

leader in this province comment in the last couple of weeks 

about the minister sort of conferring with them about various 

options and positions. 

 

We have the president of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and we 

have other farm leaders on record in the last weeks saying, you 

know, I wish that these politicians would get off the political 

stuff and get down to some honest negotiation.  But we don't 

have any negotiation going on.  We don't have our Minister of 

Agriculture out front keeping people informed, giving some 

people assurance that he's being diligent. 

 

Instead, all we see is this single-minded attack in this 

legislature on jamming Bill 87 through.  We don't see anything 

that would show us that there's any other intent from this 

government than to simply ram this Bill through this legislature 

in whatever way is necessary and before people have the 

opportunity to challenge it in court or anything else.  It's simply 

sort of a one-mission statement here, and that's to get GRIP 

through.  And then we can talk about other things, but we've 

got to get GRIP through at all costs.  And I find that a little 

strange, Mr. Speaker, in the face of an argument by the federal 

government to sort of get us off the horns of the dilemma here. 

I've got a quote here, Mr. Speaker, that I think is important for 

this debate because it shows the state of the client.  As you 

know, one of the things about the 1991 GRIP program that 

farmers really appreciated after a long, long time was the fact 

that it was predictable and it was bankable.  And what we had 

happen this spring was that neither one of them were the case.  

And it's like I challenged the Minister of Agriculture earlier on 

today to stand on his feet and tell me what GRIP '93 is going to 

look like.  And I know that he can't do it. 

 

One of the things that they enjoyed was the predictability about 

it because unfortunately so many people are having to use 

operating loans these days.  This is a quote from the Star-

Phoenix from April 18, '92.  And it goes: a significant number 

of lenders are refusing to accept the revised GRIP as collateral 

for farm operating loans this year, says Swift Current lawyer 

Neil Gibbings.  They are most certainly not accepting it, says 

Gibbings, whose law firm deals with a large number of farm 

clients.  The general coverage is down substantially and it's 

unpredictable. 

 

You see, what everyone is tending to forget, Mr. Speaker, all 

through this whole debate is that the whole reason that you 

should be doing anything is so that these people out there are 

going to stay there, so that the farming public is going to be 

able to stay viable, and so that our communities are going to 

stay viable.  That should be the whole premise, the whole thrust 

of this Legislative Assembly -- not the sort of the personal 

rising and falling of political careers in here or all the jockeying 

that goes on, but actually the 60,000 farm families that you 

want to stay out there. 

 

Now unless, Mr. Speaker, there's some agenda to get rid of a 

significant number of those people . . . but I've always heard 

New Democrats stand in this legislature and always cry for 

more to make sure that farmers stay on the land, that they're 

viable. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They've been crying for nine years. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes.  As the member from Arm River says, in 

the nine and a half years that they've spent in opposition, that's 

all they ever talked about on agriculture was that there wasn't 

enough to keep these people viable other than the government 

owning all the land, which people don't consider an option. 

 

So given that whatever farm program came along had to have 

some predictability and some bankability attached to it in order 

to meet that criteria, what we have now is just the opposite.  

We have people from all over the province saying that this 

summer has been a bad one, that lending has dried up.  Even in 

the face of interest rates dropping to, I think they said a 23-year 

low last week, Mr. Speaker, you would think that lending 

institutions would be more than happy when interest rates are 

that low, to lend money out. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member from Turtleford is 

aware that during second reading we are not allowed to have 

coffee in this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So here we are, Mr. Speaker, with a very 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

large number of people this summer not being able to access 

operating capital.  We know that there are a large number of 

people that are in difficulty with lending institutions, with ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), lands 

branch, all these sorts of things, because the cash flows are so 

terrible.  And because of that fact we should sort of be, I think, 

changing our focus a little bit from what we've been doing in 

this legislature. 

 

I mean we have a problem that was described last fall as being 

a disaster.  I mean it was described last fall as being just 

absolutely awful.  A crisis was the term, I think, that was used 

most often.  I was at the Agridome when 7 to 8,000 people 

were there and I heard all of the various political leaders speak, 

and they were just talking about a crisis in agriculture. 

 

Well I'd like to know what's changed, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

know what's changed.  Inputs are up; taxes are up.  GRIP is 

neither predictable nor bankable any more.  Wheat is basically 

the same price it was then.  All other farm commodities, to my 

knowledge, are either the same or lower.  So I say to the 

members of this House, what's changed?  If it was a crisis when 

we were looking for votes, is it not a crisis now?  If it was a 

disaster then when we were looking for votes, is it not a 

disaster now? 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we can't go around using 

those words when we're only looking for votes because people 

are going to become cynical. 

 

And I think it's one of the reasons that this government is in 

such deep political trouble so soon into their mandate -- is 

because people do find it cynical.  That if we have a crisis on 

our hands in October of '91 and all of a sudden the crisis is 

evaporated in August of '92 -- that's simply unacceptable 

because it's every bit as bad, if not worse. 

 

Now if the agenda is to get rid of a significant amount of farm 

people, then obviously the minister has got the proper piece of 

legislation to do it.  And I suppose if he wants them to go 

quietly without a whimper, he couldn't have designed it any 

better.  Because by not being able to challenge the government 

in court it means that as they leave the farm they will be for 

ever silenced; that they, in righteous indignation, won't stand 

up to this minister and this government. 

 

But if they are leaving in significant numbers because of the 

changes, then what else is on the agenda?  Who will be the 

minister of this government that stands up and brings through 

the new Bill to redistribute the seats?  That can't be far behind 

significant depopulation in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I suspect that might be part of the agenda, given the minister's 

bull-headed approach to this particular Bill, because this Bill 

will do the dirty work about removing those people from rural 

Saskatchewan.  And if that's the case, then I think the other will 

follow shortly behind. 

 

I've often wondered, if I stay in this legislature long enough, if 

we won't refer to the member from west of Regina and the 

member from east of Regina.  Because that's about where this 

government's legislation is leading us.  And this GRIP Bill will 

go a long way to 

facilitating that. 

 

I mean, you tell me what clause in this Bill would give anyone 

in rural Saskatchewan reason to hope for the future?  What 

clause in this Bill says that there isn't a crisis on in rural 

Saskatchewan any more?  What clause in this Bill says to 

people 1993 is going to be a better year? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I've read that Bill closely and I can't find 

any of those clauses.  I can't find a single clause, either in 

explanatory notes or in the main Bill, that would have me as a 

farmer stand up and say, the crisis is over.  I'm going to be able 

to get operating money next year.  I'm going to be sure that I 

can meet my loan payments in the coming year, that I'm going 

to be able to buy the diesel fuel and the fertilizer to grow 

another crop, that I'm going to be able to go in and get 

financing from the bank or the pool to buy some feeder cattle 

this fall. 

 

There isn't a darn thing in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that would 

give me that kind of optimism.  I mean I wish there was a 

clause in here that . . . And I'd break the rules of this Assembly 

to read that clause into the record even though I'm in the wrong 

reading period to do that.  It would give me that kind of 

optimism.  It would be worth breaking the rules, Mr. Speaker, 

to find a clause in this Bill that would say we are addressing the 

crisis in rural Saskatchewan by implementing Bill 87. 

 

But I can't find a darn thing that would give Mr. Gibbings, the 

lawyer in Swift Current, some reason to talk to his clients and 

say, the heat's coming off, boys; there's a better day coming.  I 

can't find a thing in Bill 87.  I'm wondering what all of his 

clients are going to say when they see this thing. 

 

(1615) 

 

Got another quote here; this one's from July 29.  That's not that 

long ago, Mr. Speaker.  And this is someone I would think that 

the government would want to listen to in this area.  And I 

quote, July 29, Leader-Post: 

 

 The 1991 version of GRIP would have given solid, 

bottom-line protection to farmers and that's what attracted 

them last year. 

 

 But the Saskatchewan 1992 version ended that backing . . . 

 

 "It rewards you when you have a crop, but it doesn't protect 

you when you don't have a crop . . ." 

 

That's Bernard Kirwan, the president of SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities). 

 

Well I hear snickers from the government benches.  I suppose, 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose that one could take that as a sign of 

arrogance.  I don't know if I'll ascribe that to all members of the 

government because . . .  Obviously the member from 

Churchill Downs, in his case, it probably is arrogance, but 

some of the other ones probably do have some ability to respect 

a man like Mr. Kirwan. 

 

He is only elected by several thousands of his peers up 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

through the SARM system.  But he is someone, I think, that 

would have some effect on this government.  I mean the 

arguments that I've been making about this Bill and any clause 

in it that would give a person hope that the future would be 

better, I think, is summed up in Mr. Kirwan's remarks just on 

July 29, that there's nothing there in the way of backing. 

 

I mean what this House desperately needs, Mr. Speaker, is not 

a Bill that goes through machination after machination to strip 

people's legal rights away.  It's a Bill that would come forward 

to this legislature and give people hope, hope for 1993 . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And I'll say to the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, you're going to hear it a lot more times 

before we're done on this.  You're darned right. 

 

It seems to be the one tool, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes works 

with New Democrats.  If you repeat it often enough, if you 

repeat it often enough, it seems to sort of get in between the left 

ear and the right ear, that large impenetrable space that seems 

to exist in a New Democrat between the left ear and the right 

ear, that if you say it over and over and over again, you might 

get through there. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, we have to read into the record 

the comments of people like the president of SARM so that 

they'll start to listen, so that that dead space that obviously 

occurred in their souls when they brought forward this type of 

legislation -- that dead space that's in the soul of these New 

Democratic members of this House -- will get something in it 

that'll get some compassion in it, that'll get some morality back 

in it, that'll get some ability to give farmers hope, rural people 

hope that the next time they bring forward a Bill that deals with 

agriculture in this Assembly, that it'll be something with good 

news in it instead of all bad news. 

 

And I'm afraid we're going to have to repeat so many of these 

things that I'm sure they'll get tired of listening to them.  But it's 

the only tool that's available to the opposition . . . is to read 

them their own words back -- read back to them their thoughts 

and deeds of yesteryear when they were supposedly 

championing the rights of people in rural Saskatchewan, read 

back to them all the things that they said were absolutely 

necessary for rural Saskatchewan to survive. 

 

That's the only way we're going to bring about change with 

these people.  That's the only way we're going to get them off 

of this single-minded path that they've headed on where they 

think nothing of changing the rules of this House unilateralyy.  

Or they think nothing of bringing in closure day after day.  

That's the only way that we're going to get them off of that 

tack. 

 

Because as we stand in this House and we talk about it and we 

remind them, you hope that the folks that are out there 

watching will think, yes, these people have sort of changed: 

they say one thing in opposition; then they do another in 

government.  These aren't the people that I voted for in October 

1991.  These are people that are besotted with power, with 

political power, that simply want to exercise it -- exercise it in 

whatever way happens to sort of soothe their egos that day. 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that's not the role of government.  

That's not the role of elected members of this Assembly -- to 

simply want to exercise political power indiscriminately just 

for the sake of it, that there has to be something behind it, some 

substance. 

 

And that's why we take so much exception with this Bill.  It's 

all negative stuff.  There's no substance.  How can one say that 

denying people's rights in court is substance?  That's all there is 

here.  There's nothing else, no good news.  It's pick on 

somebody. 

 

It's almost like there is sort of a revenge factor attached to some 

of this stuff.  And I wouldn't want to think that there was any of 

that there, Mr. Speaker, but one only has to look at the actions 

of certain members of the government, and you almost get that 

feeling that there's some revenge motive tied to some of this 

stuff that's coming forward. 

 

Because when you look at the alternatives to be politically 

liked -- and I laid out a number of them today, alternatives that 

the government could have taken in this whole GRIP thing -- 

then you would have realized that those alternatives were 

politically, probably, a lot more saleable.  I mean, I can see 

situations where the Minister of Agriculture could have 

probably been a hero to a fairly large part of the farming 

population with certain moves, that he could have still 

maintained his budgetary diligence and at the same time looked 

reasonable. 

 

But that hasn't been the case.  It has been single-minded.  It has 

been . . . I can only think, Mr. Speaker, it has been some type 

of political vengeance almost that drives the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose in pushing and pushing and pushing this 

particular piece of legislation through this House.  I mean, just 

think about the steps that we've gone through.  These steps will 

be documented for years to come.  When they write the 

political history of this place, they will talk about certain 

individuals and the steps and the excruciating pain that this 

Assembly's been subjected to in order to get this particular 

piece of legislation rammed through this House.  And one has 

to start ascribing motives and values, Mr. Speaker, that you 

normally don't like to ascribe to members of this legislature 

when seeing this done. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that I've today laid out a number of 

alternatives, presented a number of arguments that would have 

allowed the government to choose a different course.  And I 

suspect that as the opposition brings forward various 

amendments to this Bill, both in the second reading stage and 

again in Committee of the Whole, that the Minister of 

Agriculture will be presented with some alternatives that he's 

going to be hard pressed not to accept.  There are a lot of 

people out there, Mr. Speaker, who have taken a great deal of 

interest in this debate, who I think feel there still is a sort of a 

ninth inning, that there is the opportunity for sober second 

thought, that there is an opportunity for the Minister of 

Agriculture to regroup -- if you will -- and present a package to 

Saskatchewan people that isn't so onerous and fraught with 

danger. 

 

And I look forward to the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of 

speaking to some of those amendments because they'll 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

have substance.  They will present alternatives that are are very 

clear.  And they will present, I think, some sections of this Bill 

that when people -- the farming public in particular -- pick up 

and read this Bill and they see those amended sections, they'll 

say, finally I have a Bill that gives me some hope, some hope 

that maybe someone is looking at the financial crisis.  The 

crisis that was so talked about in 1991 can be addressed by 

amending this piece of legislation.  And that, along with those 

amendments, will return some hope for the future. 

 

And I look forward to speaking to those and assuring 

Saskatchewan people that there can be some hope if this NDP 

government will get off this bull-headed track of jamming this 

legislation and taking people's rights away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

approximately 15 years that I have spoke in this House, I 

always say when I stand up, Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to 

speak in this House.  But in this last session, there's been many, 

many times I've got to my feet where I can't say it's a pleasure. 

 

We're here today, on August 10, talking about this Bill that will 

be the downfall -- I hope not -- of Saskatchewan people.  I 

hope it's not at their expense.  I hope something can happen.  

But it'll be the downfall of the NDP Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is no way, Mr. Speaker, that any government will ever 

survive what they're doing here in this session -- from May till 

August and maybe September, October.  We could be here a 

long time, Mr. Speaker.  Also there's a chance that I may be the 

last speaker on second reading on this Bill. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, what this arrogant government is likely to 

do is somebody liable to get up any minute and say, we go 

closure.  It wouldn't surprise me for a minute, Mr. Speaker.  

We're here talking about a GRIP Bill that it couldn't possibly 

happen any place else in the Commonwealth countries of this 

world.  It couldn't happen that an arrogant government would 

bring such a Bill forth as we've got here for us today.  It 

couldn't happen. 

 

There is no government that would allow their front benches, 

the Minister of Agriculture and I suppose we've got to add the 

minister of Crop Insurance . . . that they'd make such a blunder 

that a government, instead of getting rid of them, are going to 

get rid of the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There will be thousands of farmers will lose their farms over 

this Bill.  There isn't . . . The member from Elphinstone said it 

isn't true.  How does he know when he got swamped out of 

Shaunavon?  They just said, enough with you, mister, and had 

to come in here and buy his way into Elphinstone, had to go 

out and buy a membership to get elected.  So how, Mr. 

Speaker, does he know anything about farming any more?  He's 

not even a farmer any more. 

 

Because he thinks he's safe, Mr. Speaker, sitting here in 

Elphinstone.  And he's away from farmers.  All he has to do -- 

and I challenge that member sincerely -- is to go back to his 

home town of Shaunavon and go to the first coffee row and 

into a few stores, call into the first 10 farmers that he comes to 

and say to them, my friends that I've grown up with, will you 

tell me what you think of what we're doing in the legislature?  

Mr. Speaker, that would be a sad day for the member from 

Elphinstone. 

 

We get condemned because we're filibustering this House for 

60 days -- 60 days.  Goodness, we're pretty near done.  There's 

just the GRIP Bill that's caused this problem.  And when you 

talk about filerbust, who's been doing it?  Who is responsible?  

The word filibuster, when it's not . . . something isn't 

happening.  Something's holding it up.  And who's holding it 

up is all the yahoos and ministers over here that won't answer 

questions. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to caution the 

member that I believe that those kinds of words certainly don't 

help to keeping order in this House.  And I just caution him to 

stay away from those words.  There are much better words in 

the English language that he can use. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is better words and 

so I'll just say those arrogant members across the front row, 

because that's what they are.  And that word's been used for 

ever and ever.  They're the ones that will not answer questions, 

Mr. Speaker.  The reason why we're here in such a filibuster, 

because what do we see in question period today?  What did 

we see when the member from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to ask the member from 

Regina Elphinstone to either take his seat or maybe move back 

in the back so that he doesn't interfere with the debate that is 

going on over here.  Churchill Downs is what I meant. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today what we 

witness in this House today when the member from Estevan 

sincerely, sincerely asked questions to our Attorney General, 

very sincerely pertaining to the GRIP Bill, and what we could 

do for a compromise, how to deal with it. 

 

You couldn't possibly get a more sincere question when he 

outlined his questioning.  And I won't get into it because we all 

heard it.  But he outlined to the Minister of Justice, the now 

Attorney General, to stand to his feet and give his opinions on 

whether this Bill should be stopped momentarily in this House, 

be sent to the Saskatchewan Supreme Court, and then perhaps 

on to the Supreme Court of Canada.  It's happened before and 

that's what should happen again.  I do believe that.  And I do 

believe that's where it's going to get some day. 

 

But when, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice circled in 

his seat, smiled, looked nervous, and then the Minister of 

Agriculture gets up and never, ever has even come close to 

answering what the member asked.  That's why we got 

filibuster because they're the ones that's doing it, Mr. Speaker.  

If every time that we'd asked questions 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

about GRIP, about anything to do with agriculture, or anything 

in this government, if the ministers would stand to their feet 

and even come a little bit close, remotely close to the subject, 

we wouldn't be in this impasse we're here today. 

 

I have never seen it.  I have seen governments from both sides.  

Mr. Speaker, I have seen the government of the day in '78 to 

'82, and I thought they were bad for not answering questions.  I 

sometimes condemned some of our ministers when we were in 

government that they could have answered questions better, but 

I've never seen anything like this.  There just isn't any questions 

being answered. 

 

So if the House Leader wonders why we're in this impasse, and 

only at approximately the 60-day mark, maybe he should have 

been asking this question at the 120 day mark.  Because the 

year that we had, Mr. Speaker -- talk about a hold 

_up over GRIP -- when we got in, it was over potash and the 

energy Bill.  We sat 120 days -- 120 days. 

 

Open your mouth in here, say too much, and they talk about 

holidays, want to go home. 

 

Well we get extended hours.  We get everything.  Extended 

hours is not going to help.  Did you ever see in your life, my 

friends, Mr. Speaker, I say to anybody, is extended hours going 

to do anything to speed things up if you don't work, if you don't 

bring on the Minister of Agriculture's Estimates, the Minister 

of Health's Estimates? 

 

It's like me, Mr. Speaker, and I'll use this for example.  I can't 

get my crop off for wet weather.  Then all of a sudden I get 

some sunny weather and the wheat's ready to harvest.  But if I 

don't go out and do it, the extra days didn't help any.  I've got to 

have good weather and I've got to be willing to work. 

 

So we get extended hours, from 20 hours a week to 50 hours a 

week.  And until you people over here, Mr. Speaker, start 

answering questions about GRIP and don't talk about closure, 

you start answering questions, then you are the ones that are 

going to waste the 30 hours a week. 

 

Because we here, the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we can stay here 

as long as they won't answer questions.  As long as the 

members opposite don't want to answer questions, we can . . . 

Because we talked about it the other day -- free enterprisers 

have got a lot of ambition.  Because we know, Mr. Speaker, 

that free enterprisers have been carrying the socialists of this 

province since 1944.  We've been making a living for them and 

carrying them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to just say a few words about what our 

problem really is.  We are into a real impasse and a fight -- let's 

not talk about it in the legislature -- over what 1992 GRIP 

really is.  Well 1992 GRIP is nothing but a farmer to sit in his 

office or house or shop with his family or whatever, or with his 

crop insurance agent, and discuss what the price of wheat may 

be over the next year. 

 

It's like going to Nevada, to Vegas, and you're going to . . . 

if I throw a buck on there, will I get a buck back or two bucks 

back or lose it?  So that's really what 1992 GRIP is all about.  

There is no other protection, because the crop insurance is 

separate, the revenue insurance just exactly covers what the 

price of wheat is. 

 

And talk about moral hazards.  You brought in the biggest 

moral hazard that every farmer in this country's ever known.  

Now I'm going to explain to you, Mr. Speaker, and if these 

people over here that are grinning from their seats don't 

understand this, then my goodness, Mr. Speaker, God help the 

farmers in Saskatchewan.  Because what it is, that there is 

farmers in Saskatchewan that got zero bushels to the acre right 

now. 

 

Now do you understand that?  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, do they 

understand that, that there is some farmers that will plug their 

crop out or it had been hailed 100 per cent, they have got zero 

bushels per acre.  There is some farmers that will get 50 

bushels to the acre of wheat and 40 bushels . . . plus canola.  

There is some people going to get big crops and some with 

zero. 

 

Now what I'm trying to explain to them on this revenue 

program, what it really means, so the listeners and the people in 

the Assembly will understand.  Whatever you're going to be 

covered for for revenue insurance, we'll just use the example 

that they used for a farmer.  The example . . . they went from 

hall to hall, meeting to meeting, and they used the same 

example.  A farmer that's covered under the old plan for 115 

bucks an acre, on the new plan, if the price of wheat is at $3 a 

bushel or whatever, he's going to have approximately $30 an 

acre -- 30 bucks an acre. 

 

And that's the example we'll use.  And nobody can contradict 

me in that figure because it came from them.  But whatever it 

is, whether it's 20, 25, 30, whatever you're covered for on 

revenue, that person getting the zero bushels to the acre or the 

50 bushels to the acre gets the same coverage.  That's what he 

gets.  Now if anybody can tell me that isn't moral hazard, I 

don't know what is. 
 

Because I'm going to tell you also, Mr. Speaker, that there's the 

farmer out there, that he's sitting with hardly any rain this 

spring; he has no money in his pocket; he has a hard time 

getting credit for fuel; and he's just doing the best he can.  And 

he sees his crop sitting there looking like maybe a 10-bushel 

crop, and it's not raining, Mr. Speaker.  It's not raining out.  

And, boy, should I spray that crop, or shouldn't I spray it?  

Because I'll get maybe more money if I don't spray it.  Maybe I 

better just hope that it doesn't rain and it'll disappear to zero.  I 

can save the fuel for spring; I can save the fuel for swathing; I 

can save the fuel for combining; and I can save the fuel from 

hauling any grain to the elevator.  Because this government 

Saskatchewan just elected are going to pay me the same thing.  

That's what you call real socialism -- pay the same regardless 

of what inputs you got.  Pay the same.  Average. That's what 

socialism is all about. 
 

But in the 1991 GRIP, it wasn't that way.  If you didn't produce 

anything, you didn't collect so much.  You didn't have the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture, he just -- I want to put it on the record -- he said, 

this is last year's speech.  Well I'll tell 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

you, Mr. Speaker, how wrong he is.  Because I'll tell you, I 

wasn't speaking last year on 1992 GRIP.  Because I never 

thought the day would come that any government in Canada 

would introduce such a mess that this member over here has, 

Mr. Speaker.  It is the worst disaster for farmers I've ever 

heard. 

 

And the farmers will tell you out there that the only one that it 

works for . . . and farmers are thinking for themselves.  There is 

places and pockets in Saskatchewan, and especially that 

north-east and some down into the south-east, where farmers 

had low assessed land.  And the Minister of Agriculture knows 

I'm right, because there was low assessed land and they got a 

lot of rain and got a bumper crop and they out-produced 

themselves.  They out-produced themselves from the 1991 

GRIP so they had to pay a premium.  And so what?  They were 

upset about it.  Ah, we didn't collect anything from GRIP. 

 

But I never heard of anybody collecting from anything . . . 

putting insurance on anything.  Did anybody ever insure their 

house and collect if the house didn't burn down?  Did you?  Did 

they, Mr. Speaker, ever collect if the house didn't burn down? 

 

So there's farmers now out there now said yes, we want 

changes to our GRIP program.  We want changes.  No matter 

where I went in election time last fall, Mr. Speaker, I could get 

someone some day, well I wasn't too pleased with that '91 

GRIP.  I wasn't so pleased.  This bothered me and that bothered 

me and I thought I was going to get more.  Everybody always 

wants more when you're going broke.  They want all they can 

get.  But farmers are reasonable people, and they didn't 

understand it, but I tell you what they did, Mr. Speaker.  They 

were telling people, they were telling the NDP, oh yes, I want 

GRIP overhauled.  I want it improved.  They told me that. 

 

But I'll tell you, when the people started to appreciate the GRIP 

program, when they really started to appreciate it, is at this 

point -- when the cheques started coming out last fall.  They 

were selling wheat from a bumper crop.  They got cheques last 

fall.  They got one at Christmas time.  They've had two cheques 

now.  They've had two cheques from GRIP.  Now don't 

anybody say that . . . And the Minister of Agriculture chirps 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker, saying they didn't get anything last 

fall.  They did get a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, he said 

he apologizes for that.  Well I accept that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers in Saskatchewan that got their 

cheques, sold their wheat -- hey, this program isn't so bad.  But 

even at that, there's a couple of very important improvements to 

the 1991 GRIP that I would like to have seen a year ago.  But 

this government over here would never go for this. 

 

But the farmers are asking me if you had of gone out, if the 

Minister of Agriculture had of went out and visited with 

farmers instead of calling a select few in, a dozen people or so 

to a committee and said what do you want us to do here, and I 

got my orders from the Minister of Finance that I'm not to 

spend too much money because we didn't get too many votes 

from farmers, and we got a bad financial situation . . . So Mr. 

Minister says to Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, go out there and get something that your farmers 

are going to think they've got something coming but it isn't 

going to cost too much because we can't afford it. 

 

So they get 12 people out there visiting with people around 

Saskatchewan. People and farmers wrote in all over this 

province saying, this is what we want.  I got copies of the letter 

sent from my constituency and from the Humboldt 

constituency and from Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency 

because that's where my sister's seat that I try to help look after 

and we haven't got a member there. 

 

And I tell you what they said in those letters didn't happen  The 

requests didn't happen.  Because it was, their mind was made 

up before.  What did they do, Mr. Speaker, pertaining to GRIP?  

They went and had hall meetings.  They had hall meetings all 

over the province.  I congratulate them for having hall meetings 

all over the province to get people's input about GRIP. 

 

But when did they do it?  When did they do it, Mr. Speaker?  

After they made the GRIP announcement.  After.  After they 

started talking about the changes.  That's when they started to 

have hall meetings. 

 

Why, in the town of Craik there was one person at a meeting in 

Craik -- the hall was full and the Department of Agriculture 

official was there -- and towards the end of the meeting this 

individual got up and said, sir, you must have booked this hall 

a year ago for the government to explain the '91 GRIP.  Now 

you've booked it to explain the '92 GRIP.  Have you got it 

booked for next year to explain the '93 GRIP? 

 

That's the frustration of farmers out there.  They know it's 

going to be changed and changed again. 

 

And you know you jumped the gun because of the finances.  

You jumped the gun because of the finances.  The only thing 

that you needed to do to have everybody happy on '91 GRIP, it 

would of had everybody happy -- everybody, and I'll guarantee 

this -- just say this to any farmer.  I'm covered for X amount of 

bushels an acre.  I'm covered for -- we'll just use the example -- 

I'm covered for 25 bushels an acre at this $4.05 a bushel or 

whatever per acre.  I'm guaranteed that. 

 

But you see what happened, they got such a good crop, one of 

the best in history in '91, that some of the people did get . . . on 

the lighter land they got 40 bushels to the acre or 35 or 50 on 

land that should have produced, on the average, 25.  So all they 

had to do for the improvement was to say to Mr. Farmer:  

you're covered up to your 25 bushels an acre just exactly how 

we did in '91 and anything over that is yours. 

 

(1645) 

 

And you say that to any farmer and they said, that's what we 

want.  And that's what we were close to having implemented a 

year ago when the bureaucrats in Ottawa came out with this 

program. 

 

There isn't one farmer in Saskatchewan, I don't suppose 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

 liked it when it first started to come out.  But there was a lot of 

input from the caucus in Alberta and Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan, and we got it changed to be acceptable. 

 

Now if we could have added that -- that the farmer, he's 

covered exactly up to what his potential of farming is, whatever 

his land's produced for the last 10 years, and then he gets that 

yield . . . That's exactly what he receives.  And he gets his 

guarantee.  But if he gets 5 or 10 or 15 bushels, that's his own 

at market price.  That's what the farmers asked for. 

 

They didn't ask to have the whole plan just wiped, because 

that's what you did.  You swiped the plan and brought in crop 

insurance by itself, revenue by itself, and say, we're going to 

just put a little guess on here and we're going to take your good 

farming practices away from you, and we're going to go with 

an area average.  And we're going to come out and tell you 

sometime what your revenue coverage may be.  You may hear 

before harvest; you may not. 

 

Now I will guarantee, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the minister of Crop Insurance cannot stand to 

their feet in this House and give any farmer that we give the 

example to, and say, this is what you're going to be covered for.  

You can't do it. 

 

The minister, if he can do that, that means he knows exactly 

what the price is going to be in January 1994.  Because you do 

not know what a person's going to be covered for on revenue.  

With your own words, your own meetings, you don't know.  

You don't know. 

 

And he'll have a chance to be able to prove to me that I'm 

wrong, but he can't do it.  And I want that to be said in here, 

because he cannot do it.  Until the price of wheat . . . until the 

Pool closes in July 31, 1993, we'll know what the price, the 

selling price of wheat has been. Then between July 31 and 

January 1, '94, they decide what the final wheat payment is 

going to be.  Then we'll know exactly what the revenue 

insurance is going to be.  Until that, they don't know.  They 

don't know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know why the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

it's awful hard for two people to have a continuous . . . I don't 

mind people, Mr. Speaker, chirping in, and I do that once in a 

while, but when I'm talking and the Minister of Agriculture has 

never quit, you know, it must sound bad for the . . . I hope 

Hansard isn't getting the both of us on there, because it would 

look like Chinese if they were both on there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I feel sorry for the Minister of Agriculture.  I 

really do.  I honestly do, Mr. Speaker, feel sorry for him.  

Because he's in a very bad situation.  He's in a very bad 

situation.  He has been told by the yahoos in the front row, like 

the member from Churchill Downs . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the member before.  I 

cautioned him on using that word in the House, and he's done it 

now the second time.  I ask him to withdraw the word this time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry.  I'll just go 

back to that same word, the arrogant ministers in the front 

row.  And the minister from Churchill Downs, the Deputy 

Minister of Finance is one of those.  Because it's him and the 

Minister of Finance and the House Leader, the member from 

Elphinstone, and the Minister of Justice -- they are the upper 

echelon of this party. 

 

I am sure that the back-benchers, the back-benchers in here 

don't even know what's going on.  I don't think they understand 

that this Bill is an unconstitutional Bill.  I'll bet you they never 

heard about it until the last week or two.  Any time I speak 

about this Bill in this House, I talk about unconstitutional, 

unconstitutional, unconstitutional. 

 

Now I don't know how I could be wrong, Mr. Speaker.  I don't 

know how I could be wrong when the Minister of Justice 

wouldn't get to his feet and explain himself today.  He wouldn't 

stand up for . . . Yes, sir, he didn't stand up and say, Mr. 

Speaker, to the member from Estevan: this is a constitutional 

Bill and we don't have to take it to the Supreme Court of 

Saskatchewan; we don't have to take to the Supreme Court of 

Canada because I'm going to tell you for the obvious reasons 

why it's constitutional. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that every one of the people that helped 

him draft that Bill are very nervous about that Bill.  Look at the 

Bill itself.  I've never, ever seen all those -- as the member from 

Thunder Creek talked this afternoon  

_- all those "whereas's".  They can't explain what the reasoning 

for what they're doing all these things for. You don't see those 

kind of things in Bills. 

 

If anybody can ever, ever tell me . . . I'm not going to get 

anywheres near through my remarks, Mr. Speaker, before 5 

o'clock.  I won't even be close to it.  As I said before, I'll 

probably be the last speaker on the Bill because I imagine some 

time there'll be a foreclosure before I'm through speaking.  

Because perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I could be speaking for hours 

and hours, and I'm sure that when the House Leader gets a 

chance, he'll get up and go closure. 

 

But I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, -- I see a paper had on 

here, I have time to do this before 5 o'clock -- and explain what 

a moral hazard really is on the coverage.  Because this is the 

figures that I got from the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

This came from his office as he went throughout the meetings 

all through Saskatchewan and said to farmers:  here you are if 

you get 10 bushels an acre and you get $3 a bushel, you're 

going to get $30 for income from that grain.  You're revenue is 

going to be $30 an acre.  You're going to get $42 an acre for 

insurance.  That's a total of $103 an acre. 
 

Now this is for a farmer that was before covered for $115 per 

acre -- guaranteed, no matter what, guaranteed 115, rain, shine, 

no matter whether he gets the grain or whether he doesn't or 

more or less. That's all, all he gets. 
 

So what are they doing here?  They're helping . . . What they're 

doing here is . . . I've had crop insurance since 1964 until 1980.  

I carried crop insurance for 16 or 17 years and I always thought 

that crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, was to help you out if you 

lost.  The same as if you had your tractor burn down and your 

house burn down and you lose your crop, you collect 

insurance.  But 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

not on this program. 

 

Because now I'll take you through the next one -- 30 bushels to 

the acre at $3 a bushel is $90 an acre, and you still get the same 

$30 an acre revenue -- and you collect nothing from crop 

insurance of course because you're over the coverage -- a total 

of $120 an acre.  So here's a guy gets $120 an acre, he gets 30 

bushels of wheat, he gets 30 bushels an acre, and so he gets 

$120 an acre and his revenue stays the same. 

 

Now the next example is 40 bushels an acre.  The farmer gets 

40 bushels an acre times this $3 a bushel, he's going to get 

$120 an acre for his wheat and he's going to still get the $30 for 

revenue.  It doesn't change -- good farmer, poor farmer, lucky 

farmer, blessed farmer -- it doesn't make any difference.  That's 

what he's going to get.  He gets $30 an acre all the way 

through.  This is from his example. 

 

So he gets nothing from crop insurance.  He gets a total of 

$150 an acre.  A hundred and fifty bucks an acre is what that 

farmer gets with a 40-bushel crop and gets the same revenue 

exactly whether he gets the ten bushels or the five or the zero, 

whatever. 

 

Now just for the last example, the last example, Mr. Speaker, 

of 50 bushels an acre.  He had $3 a bushel, he gets $150, and 

he still gets the $30.  They're going to still give him the $30 an 

acre.  As I said before and I can't say it enough, $30 an acre for 

the farmer that gets 50 bushels to the acre, 30 for the guy that 

gets 10.  So he gets a total of $180 an acre. 

 

And the member, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, will 

be able to read this in Hansard.  I've put it there before in my 

throne speech last spring and he said he was going to check it 

out and get back to you.  Now we'll just see how he comes up 

contradicting these figures. 

 

So let's talk about now, Mr. Speaker, the farmer that grows 

zero bushels to the acre.  He absolutely grows zero.  So he gets 

zero for his dollars and cents.  But he still gets his $30 an acre 

for revenue.  Okay, he gets his 30 but his crop insurance jumps 

to 90, so he gets a total of 120.  He gets a total of 120.  But the 

farmer that decided maybe to let his crop go, not bother 

spraying, and letting it go from the five or ten bushels to the 

acre by not good farming practices, and by maybe he couldn't . 

. . if it rained enough on it this couldn't happen, but if you 

missed all the rains he's going to get $120 an acre, the guy with 

nothing.  But the guy that sprayed and went out and worked 

hard, he's going to . . . and gets 10 bushels to the acre.  The guy 

that said I'm going to spend every . . . (inaudible) . . . because 

most farmers out there . . . and I do believe, as they told me in 

Crop Insurance when I was the minister, that only half of 1 per 

cent of the farmers cheat.  And that's the way I think it is today.  

I think the farmers are honest. 

 

Because it proves it here.  The 10-bushel guy, the guy with 10 

bushels to the acre, he gets $103 an acre, 103; but the guy that 

let his crop go to nothing gets 120.  Now, Mr. Speaker, if 

anybody thinks that isn't a moral hazard, I'd like them to 

explain differently, because it is.  It's a moral 

hazard. 

 

And then all this talk about moral hazards.  It's in those forms 

and applications.  These 70,000 forms you've sent out for 

farmers and business men, and anybody.  And maybe half the 

farmers will get it and the rest will be non-farmers.  You just . . 

. 70,000 papers went out in bulk.  I talked to the post office.  I 

happened to get one . . . or my sons got one.  And I seen one.  

But I've got an 88-year-old man in the town of Craik, he got 

one too; never farmed in his life, never farmed in his life.  So 

they're going to be asking him all these questions on here. 

 

But the biggest thing seems to lead about is these here agents; 

are they worthwhile or not, and about moral hazards.  If you 

talk enough -- and your form you sent out, the poll they're 

doing -- talk enough about moral hazards, you'll get the person 

filling it out thinking moral hazard.  You'll have his head just 

thinking moral hazard.  What a terrible farmer -- moral hazard. 

 

Well I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture and the minister of 

Crop Insurance, Mr. Speaker, understands how moral hazard's 

policed in this province.  It's well policed.  When I was 

involved in 1982-83, we had some terrible poor crops and I had 

complaints, complaints, complaints about all the people that 

were cheating in crop insurance.  So there were, there were 

some investigators brought in -- and they're still there, but they 

have more now -- to investigate where they figure somebody's 

cheating the system.  And they're investigating. 

 

Like last, Mr. Speaker, here last fall where it talked about us 

not wanting to measure bins.  And they called to go out and . . . 

they called them the police that are going to go out and 

measure these here . . . bin police, they called them.  Well they 

thought it was all right then to take that away.  They didn't 

worry about a farmer with a moral hazard.  They trusted every 

farmer last fall.  They trusted, literally trusted, them all. 

 

I trust you, Mr. Farmer.  I'm not going to have anybody 

measure your bins to make sure that . . . but we want to show 

you and we want to believe in you, that we trust you, that there 

is no way that you're going to cheat.  But now they come out 

with a program that says moral hazard.  Moral hazards.  It's all 

we hear about is moral hazards. 

 

The only moral hazard, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP government.  

They're the moral hazards.  They should have put on that 

application form that went out there, would you . . . who do 

you choose to be the ministers responsible for the GRIP 

program?  Who do you choose?  The Minister of Agriculture or 

the minister of Crop Insurance, or nobody at all?  And I'll bet 

you, nobody at all would have got all the votes.  That's exactly 

the way it would have been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite now, and I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture, looked very 

carefully at the Hansard of the example I give, and I hope that 

he can come back.  Because I challenge him now, Mr. Speaker, 

that when he gets up to speak or whenever . . . and if he doesn't, 

we're going to 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

ask him in the Committee of the Whole to show us and prove 

how he could tell a farmer exactly what his revenue insurance 

is going to be.  That's what I want to have happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's getting close to 5 o'clock.  And tomorrow . . . 

it's private members' day tomorrow, and I won't get on for a 

while.  And I want to say this while I'm still on my feet here, 

that I am absolutely . . . again and again I repeat this.  I've said 

it three or four times in the House. I want to repeat it again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in the front row that brought this 

here Bill in and going to have this clause in this Bill about a 

section in the GRIP program that's just going to be void, that a 

year of our life disappeared, then I'm ashamed of these here 

ministers, Mr. Speaker.  I'm ashamed of the ministers.  I'm 

ashamed of them not explaining to their back-benchers.  And if 

they did, then I'm ashamed of them. 

 

But I don't think they really understand it.  I don't think . . . 

Because I know that I've talked to several MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) out there that aren't ministers, Mr. 

Speaker.  They aren't ministers.  And we have talked to some 

of their constituents and said that I've went to my MLA and he 

says it's over his head, he doesn't understand it, so I've come to 

you.  And it's right, it's right over their head. 

 

Because the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, is chirping 

from his seat.  And I challenge him.  I challenge the member 

from Humboldt, when he's up here speaking on this Bill, 

because I know he will.  I know that so many back-benchers 

will speak on this Bill because it's the most important Bill that 

affects the lives of people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

that every farmer in this here Assembly will be speaking for 

hours on end, defending what this here government has done -- 

defending this here terrible, terrible thing that has happened to 

all Saskatchewan. 

 

And it just didn't happen, Mr. Speaker, to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan -- this here part of taken out of our life, this 

unconstitutional part.  And I'm going to say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

do not believe this here Bill will ever become law. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this 

House stands recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


