




















































Hansard: July 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1555 

 July 20, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I won't go through 

the entire litany of this particular petition because it's the same 

as many others that have been presented in this Assembly.  I 

will, however, go through the three points that people are 

asking for: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 

 

2.) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

3.) that the new revenue insurance program be set up on an 

individual cost-of-production to return ratio instead of risk 

area formula. 

 

And there are people here from quite an area of northern 

Saskatchewan, primarily around the Prince Albert area and to 

the east. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7), and they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program to stand for this year. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the recent trip of the Minister of Economic 

Development to New York: (1) who accompanied the 

minister, including name and position; (2) what was the 

itinerary of each member of the delegation, and in 

particular, what are the details of services provided by the 

ministerial assistant to the Minister of Social Services; (3) 

what is the breakdown of costs for each member of the 

delegation, including the proportion of salaries that would 

accrue during the trip; (4) what other costs are associated 

with the trip that cannot be assigned to any one traveller; 

(5) was a report on the trip prepared for the Premier, and 

when will a copy of the report be 

tabled in the legislature; (6) did any member of the delegation 

attend the Democratic convention, and if so, was the time and 

attendance deleted from the relevant salary; (7) when was the 

trip scheduled, on whose initiative was the trip scheduled, 

and for what purpose was the trip scheduled? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you.  I give notice that I shall on 

Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Terry York, employed with SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology): (1) was Mr. 

York fired with cause or without cause; (2) if with cause, 

what was the cause given; (3) is the government engaged in a 

lawsuit with Mr. York; (4) who represents the government in 

its legal affairs relating to the York firing, and is there a real 

or perceived conflict of interest with any cabinet minister; (5) 

what are the fees and expenses being paid to the 

government's legal representatives, and what are the terms 

and conditions of representation; (6) has a replacement for 

Mr. York been hired, and if so, provide the details of his 

replacement, including salary, qualifications, and method of 

selection. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of my colleague, the member from Regina North West, I'd like 

to introduce some people that are in your gallery today.  They 

are Mr. and Mrs. Bob Pillon from Sudbury, Ontario.  They're 

visiting relatives here.  There's Brian and Diane and my 

friends, Fred and Vera Massier of Regina.  I wonder if they'd 

perhaps stand up and all members welcome our visitors from 

out of province here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As you may be 

aware, we finally received rain in the north-east in the past few 

days, and it's helped our drought conditions extensively, but it 

comes a little too late for many crops.  Early red spring wheat 

and barley have deteriorated to the point of no return, and some 

fields have had to be ploughed under. 

 

I commend our Premier for sending the Prime Minister a strong 

message requesting the much promised but not yet seen third 

line of defence, a defence that would kick in for disasters such 

as drought.  The federal government has access to a much 

larger tax base and therefore has a greater ability to address 

debt.  They must therefore take more responsibility for 

agriculture.  They've taken responsibility for fisheries, Mr. 

Speaker, and the situation there is similar.  Agriculture is 

considered vital by governments in all other countries -- an 

industry of the people, by the people, and for the people. 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

In Canada, Mr. Mulroney simply off-loads agricultural 

responsibilities on to the backs of the already struggling 

provinces and farmers.  This is a step backwards.  We need to 

take the right direction and consider agriculture a national 

industry with every Canadian sharing in its survival and 

therefore positioning ourselves for a very positive future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  I wish to address today the issue of 

federal government off-loading of agricultural programs onto 

the backs of provinces such as ours, provinces who are unable 

because of extreme financial difficulties to pick up the costs of 

this despicable practice.  If the federal government wants 

provincial co-operation in solving these national problems of 

off-loading, off-loading is not the way to solve it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since 1988, Mr. Speaker, western provinces have been forced 

to pay costs for 25 per cent of crop insurance premiums, 25 per 

cent of revenue insurance premiums, and 25 per cent of income 

stabilization premiums.  The dollar amounts we're discussing 

are astronomical.  These percentages have gradually been 

increasing.  Our revenue base isn't sufficient to keep picking up 

federal responsibilities. 

 

The frustrating thing is, prior to 1988 the federal government 

properly took major responsibility for price instability through 

western grain stabilization and production instability through 

crop insurance. 

 

We urge the federal government to revisit their off-loading 

decisions, to consider with compassion what they are doing to 

our farmers and our province.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- It is day 2 of the Saskatchewan legislature since 

an effective democracy has been crushed in this Assembly.  On 

July 16 the Speaker of this Legislative Assembly intervened in 

an unprecedented and dramatic way that is leading to the 

victory of the NDP government over the justice system and the 

right of Saskatchewan people to have their day in court. 

 

This is day 2 since the NDP, while saying they wish to protect 

the ability of members to debate, forced closure after only five 

days of discussions on a unilateral rule of change.  It is day two 

since the rules of this Assembly were changed by the partisan 

will of the NDP government, that cares little for this institution 

or the rights of the opposition and dissent.  It is day 2 in the 

existence of the rubber-stamp legislature where NDP 

government back-benchers themselves are expressing grave 

distress at the unbridled thirst for power of an Executive 

Council made immune from normal checks and balances. 

 

It is day 2 and counting in the life of what now can be known 

as the toy parliament.  This Legislative Assembly has become 

the play thing of the NDP Premier and his friends and indeed it 

is an ugly game. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to 

inform the Assembly of a special initiative taking place to fight 

child hunger in Regina, from July 6 to August 14. Regina 

Education and Action on Child Hunger Inc. or REACH -- 

REACH which was born out of the mayor's hunger inquiry and 

which was formed when I was a member of city council -- is 

funded primarily by the provincial government. 

 

This summer REACH will be preparing bagged lunches to 

distribute to children who attend one of our eight summer fun 

spots in the inner city.  These nutritious lunches will be given 

to any child who desires one without any requirement for prior 

registration. 

 

Furthermore the fun spots will offer sports, arts, and other 

recreational activities for the children during summer weekdays 

in Regina. 

 

I congratulate the city of Regina who sponsors the fun spots 

and the teens who work hard to make all the children feel 

welcome. 

 

People in companies who wish to donate food to this program 

can do so at the Pasqua recreation centre.  Mr. Speaker, we 

must realize the need for child hunger programs does not 

vanish with the arrival of summer. 

 

The fun spots program represents an admirable effort to 

address the problem of child hunger and at the same time 

provide children with recreational activities during the summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf of the government, 

sincerely thank and congratulate REACH for taking this 

initiative for children this summer in the city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, the citizens of Martensville and area gathered together 

in a sincere gesture of support and community harmony which 

filled many people with pride and hope on that most 

remarkable Sunday.  Hundreds of neighbours, families, and 

friends attended a potluck supper put on by the good people of 

Martensville, then proceeded to participate in a silent walk 

throughout the community to show support for all those that 

were so adversely affected by recent events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the walk, which took place during a period 

of light rain in the area, a lone rainbow made a brief but 

magical appearance in the distance -- a rainbow which many 

people felt was a touching symbol for the collective wish that 

the sadness and disbelief would soon come to an end.  And 

while the walk was in silence, one did not need to speak to feel 

the sense of wonder and joy that nature's sign gave to all those 

in attendance. 

 

And I say to friends and colleagues of this Assembly, it is 

difficult to believe that anything good could come out of this 

most painful circumstance, but like the rainbow after the rain 

the way in which the people in this area are 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

rallying together is already beginning to overshadow the sense 

of shock and deep-felt concern that first fell on the community 

and the entire nation. 

 

On behalf of the people of Martensville and area, I ask that all 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

Saskatchewan residents, and indeed all Canadians, join with us 

in beginning the healing process because I know in my heart 

that we all care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Home owners 

who are renewing their mortgages this month or in the near 

future are welcoming the long-awaited reduction in interest 

rates.  Mortgage rates are now as low as 7 per cent, and I 

believe this to be the lowest they've been for 25 years.  Another 

welcome feature is that the spread between term deposits and 

mortgage rates for one year has narrowed to about 2 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. One-year term deposits now purchased will yield 

5 per cent at banks and at credit unions. 

 

Many of my constituents have said repeatedly that the high 

interest rates of the last 15 years were the single biggest 

overhead cost that crippled their businesses, and the same holds 

true for farmers.  When you have to turn a gross margin of 12 

to 15 per cent just to pay interest rate costs, it's very difficult to 

run a profitable business. 

 

This reduction in interest rates is welcome news and will help 

to restore confidence in our provincial and national economies.  

It'll also help us restore our faith in our financial institutions 

and in the banking industry. 

 

When we had runaway interest rate structures, the only way it 

seemed possible to get ahead was to depend on inflation.  High 

levels of inflation bring their own problems.  Our current 

inflation rate is around 2 per cent.  This provides room for even 

additional possible decline in interest rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of my constituents -- home owners, business people, 

everybody -- are hopeful that interest rates will continue to 

remain stable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

Premier.  The minister responsible for Crop Insurance outlined 

that at least three times he has extended the GRIP program 

opting-out clause.  And we would like to know in this 

Assembly, Mr. Premier, whether in fact that you would extend 

it again beyond today so that the farmers have a choice of 

whether they can become involved in opting out, because the 

decision is not concrete as to what is going to happen.  And 

would you extend it to the time at least that the court is going 

to be in place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we've 

been through this before. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Three times. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's right, Mr. Speaker.  And we 

extended the deadline, Mr. Speaker, from March 31 to April 

30, which gave farmers an extra month.  We again extended it 

to May 15, which gave them another two weeks.  Because of 

the court ruling which opened up the option and forced us to 

leave the option open, we left it open until June 24, until that 

was struck down in court and would no longer apply.  We 

again thought that we didn't want to trap farmers into this.  We 

extended them another two weeks option to get out of the 

program, which is four months past the original deadline. 

 

People have had very much time to think this over.  Very few 

people have opted out, I might point out to the members 

opposite.  I would like to also point out, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have had a lot  more people wanting back into the program 

than we had opting out.  And that unfortunately was caused I 

think by misinformation . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, since we have 

a lot of drought in the northern part of the province -- and I 

would suggest to the minister of Crop Insurance that that is the 

reason why people want back in, and it places in perspective all 

of what we have said and what we have done -- would you 

provide the opportunity for the farmers to at least go till the 

time the Bill is dealt with in this Assembly or until the court 

decides what they're going to do with it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, it was our intention to 

allow a deadline until it was dealt with in this legislature.  We 

had a little problem getting the Bill into the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why we had to act this way.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, will you allow the farmers to 

have their day in court before you implement a retroactive 

legislation that deals with . . . dealing with a contract that was 

legally obtained and legally agreed to by the people of 

Saskatchewan in agriculture, and the government. Will you let 

the farmers have their day in court before you unilaterally try 

and change it.  Because the court may tell you when to have the 

date for opting out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we will certainly 

honour any court decision that comes down.  Mr. Speaker, we 

need to have this legislation through this House.  Those 

changes to the Bill are needed so that we can sign a 

federal-provincial agreement and get on with the program so 

that farmers know what program they have. 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

We are now almost . . . as the member opposite says, a drought 

is on the horizon.  We are well into the crop year, well past the 

time when you'd have the normal deadlines for crop insurance 

or revenue insurance.  And I think the reason is obvious why 

we are lagging on these deadlines, is because of the obstruction 

we've had from the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The obstruction, Mr. Minister, was asked for 

by the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan.  Across this 

province . . . and I've got a list of phone calls over the weekend 

expressing exactly those same concerns, from Wishart, Lipton 

-- all in the North -- Tisdale, all over there.  And that's what's 

happening.  One inch of rain in Tisdale isn't going to make a 

particle of difference to that crop. 

 

My question is to you:  are you prepared at this point to just say 

flippantly that you're not going to allow the farmers a day in 

court before you unilaterally change something that they don't 

want to have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we will allow the 

farmers to have their day in court.  They will have their day in 

court and the court will decide.  What I think, the members 

opposite, if they're concerned about drought should be onside 

with us in asking the federal government to come through with 

the third line of defence that we need to solve the drought 

problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, you sent a letter to the Prime 

Minister asking for more money.  Well, Mr. Premier, would 

you be prepared to at least ask for the amount in '91 GRIP and 

the value that it was so that the farmers could be compensated 

for the volume that they're missing because of your Agriculture 

minister's ineptitude in dealing with the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for that question and would point out to the House that in 1990 

a report to the ministers of Agriculture, federal and provincial, 

on safety nets talked about second-line and third-line defences. 

 

And in that report it said the following on page 28, quote:  it 

must also be recognized that: 

 

 "third-line events are largely unpredictable and cover a wide 

range of problems . . . some events may require additional 

income supplements over that provided by second-line 

programs. 

 

GRIP being a second-line program.  And then they use as an 

example output quantities of Canadian crop drought assistance 

program 1988. 

 

We believe that those principles are solid principles and it 

is on that basis that the letter to the Prime Minister has been 

sent in the light of the situation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, we do not believe that the off-loading by Ottawa of 

agricultural financial responsibility onto a province which is so 

dependent on agriculture is fair nor feasible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I have a question to the Premier who on Friday 

last stated that the former government broke contracts with 

farmers by changing the land bank legislation.  And the 

Premier went on to say that since land bank contracts were 

retroactively broken, it would be appropriate that the GRIP 

contract could be retroactively broken. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you confirm the fact that what you said 

was that it was appropriate for your government to 

retroactively break the GRIP contract based on some historical 

precedent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No.  Mr. Speaker, the point that I was 

making, without having all the details of that 1982 legislation 

before me, is this point in general.  Government's from time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You had the book the other day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, I'll get the book in a few 

moments.  That governments from time to time find themselves 

in the situation where retroactive legislation may or may not be 

needed.  Clear that we all want to avoid those circumstances, 

but to give you a specific example, budget-driven matters are 

almost of necessity in a retroactive position.  Those are dictated 

by public policy matters -- public policy matters about cost, 

public matters about whose responsibility it is to carry the 

financial obligation on programs such as GRIP and NISA (net 

income stabilization account), and so forth.  And in this 

circumstance, the legislation which we hope to introduce are a 

reflection of public policy. 

 

And all I wanted to say in general terms was that the former 

administration did it; in fact all administrations have done it 

from time to time.  This administration wants to limit those 

circumstances.  But where of necessity we have to, we have to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is again to the Premier.  Mr. 

Premier, I'm not sure if anybody understood what you just said 

there.  You were all over the map. 

 

You have said that it is not appropriate to have public hearings 

because you're afraid of what you will hear from the real 

people.  You want the GRIP Bill rammed through this House 

and then you're looking for precedent, like land bank, and 

you're not giving people a chance when you're breaking this 

contract. 

 

Will the Premier admit that his government is attempting to 

pass legislation which would have the effect of legitimizing the 

breaking of a contract and he's using land 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

bank for a precedent?  That is what you said Friday, Mr. 

Premier.  You said that land bank contracts were broken, 

therefore it was appropriate to break the GRIP contracts 

primarily for financial reasons.  Isn't that the case you're 

making, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I say with the greatest of respect to the 

Leader of the Opposition and the former premier, that if he has 

difficulty understanding my answer, it may be occasioned by 

the fact that I'm having difficulty understanding the thrust of 

the question.  Because the former premier talks about ramming 

through GRIP legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reality of the situation is that the proposed Bill 

has been on the public agenda now for months -- for sure, 

weeks -- and it has not been able to be introduced.  So it can 

hardly be said to be ramming it through.  And that requires first 

and second reading debate, clause-by-clause debate, and 

third-party reading debate, third reading.  All of these is an 

argument which I think belies the assumption of the question 

that somehow the government seeks to ram through. 

 

Now in the second aspect of the question, I simply repeat what 

I said a moment ago, which I thought was clear.  I'll do it more 

clearly if that's possible, to say to the former premier as 

follows.  From time to time, governments find themselves, in 

the interests of the public at large, for the introduction of 

legislation which may have retroactive features to it.  You 

simply did that, sir, on occasion; we may have to do it.  We 

want to limit it.  We have to act in the public interest when the 

public interest so demands.  And that's what's behind us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- A question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you 

said on Friday, and I quote: 

 

 And the regulations cancel the contracts by changing the 

terms of reference of those rents.  And I know that because I 

was engaged at that time, being out of politics, on behalf of 

farmers who saw this Bill retroactively affect real contracts. 

 

Now that's what you said, that you were involved defending 

farmers because of retroactivity.  And then you used land bank 

as an example.  Well, Mr. Premier, to be consistent, if you look 

at section 6.3 of land bank repeal Act that you provided as an 

example, you can see that any participant, be they farmers or 

the Crown, had the continued right to sue or seek other legal 

remedy despite the legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, the question is simply this:  if you can use 

land bank as your example of retroactivity and how you want 

to do it and must do it, couldn't you at least be consistent with 

the media and the public and the farmers and let them have the 

right to sue to protect their contract?  Because even you, sir, 

when you were in the legal profession, stood up for farmers 

against government so they couldn't break contracts.  Couldn't 

you be consistent, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question.  I do now have in front of me the 

quotation that he refers to, and I think to be fully fair about the 

answer that I gave, you will see on page 1539, Mr. Speaker, 

that I said the following.  I said this: 

 

 So I say to the hon. members opposite they ought to be very 

consistent with respect to GRIP. 

 

Now that's the end of the quotation and that was the point that I 

was making.  Their argument was, as I read it in question 

period the other day and their argument has been over the 

years, that there ought not to be any retroactivity of legislation.  

And I'm simply saying that they are not consistent because in 

government they brought in retroactive legislation with respect 

to the land bank. 

 

But the reality of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we're looking 

at here a situation, as I have just read, by the federal-provincial 

ministers, who called for a third line of defence payment in 

special circumstances which deal with crop drought and crop 

drought situations such as we may be facing now.  And I'd say 

to the former premier and the Leader of the Opposition he 

should join us in the call for funds from Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well we've seen this NDP Premier dance all 

over the place.  A couple of points that I can draw to your 

attention.  Number one, as the hon. member knows, he's 

mistaken with respect to land bank and the analogy but he has 

admitted that he plans to retroactively break the contract of 

GRIP.  Secondly, I point out to the hon. member that land bank 

wasn't really popular and GRIP is, and particularly where 

farmers all across Saskatchewan know that they're not going to 

have a crop and they signed a contract with the provincial 

government and the federal government so they'd have some 

money to back it up and despite what the Crop Insurance 

minister says, crop insurance is to protect farmers against 

drought. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you not at least be as consistent on your land 

bank logic and where we allowed farmers to sue the 

government?  Why won't you stand in your place and say, as a 

lawyer I help farmers look after their rights and defend their 

contracts and I will grant the same privilege to other farmers 

and other lawyers in the province of Saskatchewan today under 

an NDP administration.  Won't you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the Leader of the 

Opposition that popularity is a rather unfortunate basis upon 

which to judge public policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- This is not a matter of popularity, this 

is a question of doing the right thing.  And we say that the right 

thing is, frankly with respect to the GRIP operation is that your 

government -- I say this with the greatest of respect -- 

permitted for the first time ever a large amount of off-loading 

on agricultural products and programs on to the province of 

Saskatchewan which is 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

agriculturally dependent.  And the result was 150 million to 

$200 million on to the GRIP program you negotiated that the 

taxpayers and the farmers themselves, as taxpayers and 

producers, have to pay for. 

 

I'm saying that that's not consistent with this document, sir, that 

was your document in 1990.  And this document said that there 

are some events which require additional income supplements 

that are over and above second-line programs.  That's exactly 

what we want to do is put this thing on a proper basis, and we 

ask him to join us in this approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amalgamation of Rural Municipalities 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- To the Minister of Rural Development who 

has said he intends to force rural municipalities to amalgamate 

into counties whether they like it or not.  The minister knows 

that the further example of school bully government imposing 

its will on the public is causing rural municipalities to be 

extremely angry. 

 

Yesterday the minister received a letter from the RM (rural 

municipality) -- that was last Friday, I guess -- of Reciprocity, 

which said: 

 

 The council of this rural municipality would like to express 

our outrage of the highest order in the plans of this 

government to amalgamate out of existence rural 

municipalities. 

 

Now I'm sure you have that letter and I'm sure you're aware of 

it.  The question: what does the minister have to say to the RM 

of Reciprocity?  Will he tell them he doesn't care what they 

think; that they will just have to grin and bear it?  What will the 

minister say? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister will say 

not to pay too much attention to the members opposite when 

they go around . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has 

no . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has 

no intention to amalgamate RMs against their will.  We have 

made that very clear.  I've talked to the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities);  I've talked to rural 

municipalities.  I met with the president of the SARM and he is 

quite satisfied that our intentions are not to force anything on 

any RMs.  We have asked them to look at their operations and 

to be as efficient as they can.  And they all agree.  I think that 

there's no difference in opinion.  I think the scaremongering 

that's going on by the members opposite is the only thing that's 

raising the fear in the RMs. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The Minister of Rural Development is 

following the footsteps of the Minister of Agriculture, I 

believe.  And I believe that you are worrying councils 

unnecessarily.  And I believe that you're just planning to ram it 

down their throats when they're not looking.  And when they 

cry foul, you're just going to use your retroactive legislation to 

do your dirty work. 

 

I have another question.  Will the minister tell the House 

whether he too will pass retroactive legislation for a policy, and 

deem rural municipalities out of existence?  Is that your secret 

plan, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, the 

secret plan exists only in the minds of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have a very simple question for the minister.  

If this is all in my imagination, why then do you have in 

proposed legislation, one line that gives you the power to 

amalgamate municipalities whether they like it or not?  Why 

are you taking the power if you don't really need it?  If you 

never plan on using it, why take it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the amendment that 

the member refers to was written by the department when one 

Neal Hardy was minister of Crop Insurance.  It was approved 

by SARM.  They were consulted with, and they approved of it.  

And we . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's absolutely true, 

Mr. Speaker.  That was not rewritten by this government.  

That's a housekeeping amendment that was proposed by the 

previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I believe that the minister and the people of 

this province know full well that the SARM is the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and is an 

organization that represents municipal councils throughout this 

province. 

 

As a reeve of a municipality for a number of years and 

councillor for many years before that, I want to assure you that 

the SARM is an honourable institution that always consults its 

membership on what's happening.  And I never, ever heard 

anything of this proposed legislation that you have introduced, 

other than the housekeeping in the rest of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you denying that all of the . . . all of the 

changes in the Bill were in fact from the previous 

administration with the exception of the one line that gives you 

the power to wipe out municipalities in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

that that was in the proposed legislation that was written by the 

previous administration.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I met 

with Mr. Bernard Kirwan, who is the president of SARM, in 

Swift Current last week.  And he has no concern with this 

particular amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance for Drought Conditions 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister responsible for Crop 

Insurance tell us today what the volume of income shortfall 

will occur because of the drought in the Tisdale area, 

Cudworth, and St. Walburg.  Will you give us an indication of 

your department's estimate of that loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in order to do that I 

would have to know the exact yields and predict the yields and 

also the prices that we're going to get for the grain over the next 

18 months.  So I think the question is a little bit out of line.  

And again I think the members opposite should come back to 

help us to get some drought assistance for areas that do indeed 

suffer from drought. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, that's exactly the reason why 

we're asking the questions.  We want this government to 

reintroduce GRIP '91, which will provide for 100 per cent, 

which will provide for 100 per cent . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to call the member 

from Regina Rosemont to order.  Please do not interfere when 

the members are asking questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, that is precisely the point I want 

to make -- 100 per cent of your average will give them 

sufficient income in drought periods of time.  That's the thing 

that we've been arguing all the time.  And it's now for the first 

time beginning to register at Tisdale, Melfort, Cudworth, St. 

Walburg, all across the North. 

 

Are you prepared to allow your government to take some 

responsibility for the crop insurance that they're missing out 

on?  And the federal government's . . . you said off-loading, 

you're forcing the federal government to off-load.  Are you 

now prepared to allow some of that '91 to flow into there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

again neglects to tell the farmers that the old program as it was 

in '91 would have had higher premiums than we had this year, 

would have had lower coverage than it had last year.  So it is 

not the same program that was in existence last year under the 

rules from '91. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that there is no doubt the old GRIP was 

not adequate in a drought situation.  The new GRIP is not 

adequate in a drought situation.  And we were promised third 

line of defence in case of disaster, and we are now asking for 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the professor of agriculture 

economics at the University of Saskatchewan, I think he's the 

dean of agriculture, Mr. Hartley Furtan, sat on your debt 

committee and on the GRIP committee and he said to us in our 

caucus, he said that new 1992 drought . . . or GRIP is not 

worthwhile in a drought situation. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we point this out.  It's 

a disaster.  We want to know from you: are you prepared to top 

up from '91 GRIP . . . from '92 GRIP to '91, on 80 to 100 per 

cent coverage?  Are you prepared to do that and pick up some 

of the money that the federal government could give you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again that shortfall, 

which is 500 million to $1 billion, is a federal responsibility 

and must be picked up by the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the revenue and GRIP insurance 

in the province of Alberta and the province of Manitoba, they 

decided that they were going to be consistent with '91 GRIP 

and 100 per cent coverage.  Why won't you provide 100 per 

cent of average coverage so that those farmers can pick that up 

and have that as a firm, drought protection plan in the province 

of Saskatchewan?  Why don't you acknowledge that and do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the old GRIP 

program was not adequate in drought situations; it hasn't been 

admitted by the federal government, hasn't been admitted by 

the members opposite when they were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Manitoba option -- we've seen them making 

changes to their programs as well when the lentil acreage went 

through the roof because of flaws in the program.  So I think, 

Mr. Speaker, we still have got to get that third line of defence 

from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I go to my question back to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, do you see the point and the logic that 

we have? 

 

Farmers in Alberta, Mr. Premier, who have 1991 GRIP, 

improved, and they get third line of defence and 100 per cent 

coverage.  Farmers in Manitoba have 1991 GRIP, improved, 

and they've got 100 per cent coverage, and they'll get third line 

of defence.  And they'll make more money and more coverage 

than the farmers in Saskatchewan, and we grow most of the 

wheat.  Mr. Premier, won't you now tell your Minister of 

Agriculture and Crop Insurance minister and all your MLAs, 

Mr. Premier, that you will now consider doing your part in at 

least being as consistent as the Government of Manitoba and 

the Government of Alberta in defending farmers here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question, and I would say to him and 

remind the members of the House, the paper in 1990 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

-- June 30, report to ministers of Agriculture -- talked about 

second and third line of defences and talked in terms of the 

third line as events which may require additional income 

supplements over that provided by second-line programs.  This 

is one of the events. 

 

These are the principles, and the 1988 drought program was an 

example of that third-line measure.  You signed that report, sir, 

and you supported that idea.  Moreover the problem of farmers 

is occasioned by matters beyond their control or a province; it's 

the international grains war. 

 

I would say also, Mr. Speaker, in concluding the answer, that 

the federal share of funding of agriculture programs has gone 

from 100 per cent to 59 per cent, and the provincial share has 

gone from 0 to 41 per cent.  And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Opposition is asking us, in the face of the fact that he 

virtually bankrupted this province, to pump some more money 

on those circumstances.  I say that's the wrong way to go, and 

the farmers know it themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Before orders of the day, a point of order, Mr. 

Speaker.  On Friday, the Minister of Health tabled an answer to 

written question no. 43 regarding the so-called wellness team.  

And that answer provides an important point of order which 

I'm going to, as succinctly as possible, outline to you and to 

members of this Assembly because of the precedent that it 

could set. 

 

And I will read the question for the Assembly: 

 

 Regarding the wellness team announced by the Minister of 

Health: (1) what are the names of the members, including 

qualifications; (2) What are the names of the organizations 

and individuals the team has consulted with and on what date 

did those consultations occur? 

 

That was the question, Mr. Speaker, that was put.  And as you 

know that the government has three ways in which to respond 

to questions like that.  It can choose to answer them in five 

days, agreed to under the trial rules that we have before us.  Or 

it can ask them to be converted to orders for return 

non-debatable and answer within the much longer period of 

time, as the minister chose to do.  Or it can simply convert 

them over to orders for returns debatable so that they can 

amend them and then answer the questions and parts of the 

questions as they see most appropriate for the government of 

the time.  Those are the three options, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the government, I would suggest to you, does not have the 

option of tabling a written answer that answers only part of the 

question and refuses to answer the other parts of the questions.  

The only way it can accomplish that is to debate the need for 

such an amendment that would allow them to answer it 

accordingly. 

 

(1415) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the case of question 43, the 

government unilaterally amended the question.  The answer 

provided -- and I have a copy of it in front of me here; I won't 

bother going into the answer -- the answer provided lists . . . 

does list, as I requested, the names of the organizations 

consulted, but it provides only the number of individuals 

consulted.  This is an answer to a different question that would 

have been, simply stating . . . instead of just having the names 

of the organizations and the names of the individuals, rather 

that the team it consulted with, and then name the number of 

individuals only. 

 

And that's a very different question, Mr. Speaker, but it is in 

fact the one that the government has answered. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, if the government wishes to 

keep the names of individuals consulted secret, as it has chosen 

to do, then it can only do so by debating a motion for return 

and setting out reasons for maintaining such secrecy. 

 

Clearly there has been a breach here, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

suggest the only remedy is to replace question 43 on the order 

paper and give the government the opportunity to either answer 

it appropriately or change it to a motion for return debatable so 

that we can indeed debate it in this place.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think it is well established that the 

opposition members cannot use the guise of a point of order to 

quarrel with the information which is provided to them, either 

in response to written questions and Estimates . . . or in 

response to written questions. 

 

It is conceivable, Mr. Speaker, that a government might be so 

flippant in answering questions that it could be a legitimate 

point of order.  However, I think it is well established where 

the opposition doesn't like the answer, doesn't agree with it, 

thinks it isn't accurate, that's not a point of order. 

 

There are other avenues open to the opposition.  They might 

re-ask the question.  They might move a motion.  But I think so 

long as the information is given, the questions are answered in 

a reasonable fashion, that is not a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  This is a fairly complicated situation.  

I certainly will take the point of order under advisement and 

bring back a decision at my earliest convenience. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, with respect to question 44, we 

would request that this be converted to a motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable).  Order. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 3) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I made some extensive 

comments on both The Farm Financial Stability Amendment 

Act (No. 2) and The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act 

(No. 3) on the previous sitting with respect to these matters, 

and I would now move second reading of The Farm Financial 

Stability Amendment Act, 1992 (No. 3). 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take the 

time to make some observations about the role of the Minister 

of Agriculture in changing and making some of these 

amendments. 

 

I want to point out to the Assembly that some observations that 

he made on Friday, I think, probably will frustrate farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan equally as well as they frustrated 

the opposition, some of the statements that were made by the 

Minister of Agriculture.  And I want to point out a number of 

them to you and to the Assembly. 

 

There are a certain degree of responsibilities taken by 

individuals throughout the province when they assume 

mortgages and assume debt, and that is recognized as a serious 

component of what needs to be addressed.  However in dealing 

with that, many people have not had the experience of 

systematically evolving a logical conclusion to an 

over-financed position that many farmers have. 

 

And so what we have in dealing with these three amendments, 

we have some, I think, logical changes, but we also have some 

changes that I don't think make any sense.  We need probably 

at this point in time more people providing information and 

counselling to people than we have ever had before.  And 

dealing not only with financial crisis in agriculture but dealing 

with the life-style crisis that exists because of the financial 

implications made by lenders who are realizing on their assets.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is causing very serious problems and 

concerns within the framework of the agriculture community. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that you need to 

take a serious look at how to help farmers realize and benefit 

from the opportunities that they were being given. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were allowed to have the benefit of 

experience, give them the information that they needed.  And 

now that is being curtailed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Department of Agriculture thinks -- and I don't think that 

they're right -- that their crisis line is going to take away all of 

the necessity to deal with all of the problems that agriculture is 

going to face.  And I believe that many, many farmers have 

been helped over the past 10 years because of other farmers 

giving them advice about what they were supposed to do. 

 

And I think that that is a very, very important component 

of what the community and assistance from the community and 

the benefits of that assistance from the community can provide 

to agriculture.  People want to be talked to by their peers.  They 

don't want some sophisticated individual coming out to their 

place and telling them, you did this wrong and you did that 

wrong and you did the other thing wrong.  They're prepared to 

listen and understand from their peers what it is that they need 

to correct and what it is they need to be advised on and how to 

respond in a reasonable way.  Many of these people do not 

have the experience in dealing with refinancing and how to 

handle that responsibility. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I had individuals come to my office and talk 

to me about some of the things that they were doing in 

realizing what limitations they had and what they could do.  

And, Mr. Speaker, frankly they told me on many occasions that 

now that they had gone through the experience they would be 

able to provide to others some of those visions of opportunity 

that dealt with the kinds of things that they were going to have 

to deal with. 

 

So again, as I did in item no. 1 and item no. 2 under The Farm 

Financial Stability Act, I'm going to adjourn debate and we'll 

continue with the orders of the day. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 1992.  The Personal Property Security Act 

provides for a code with respect to the regulation of personal 

property security transactions.  This Bill contains an 

amendment to simplify the existing input security interest for 

grain farmers and to extend that security interest to livestock 

producers. 

 

Under the existing Act, lenders have found the technical 

requirements of this provision to be unnecessarily restrictive in 

providing operating credit to Saskatchewan farmers.  The Farm 

Debt Advisory Committee and the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan in its tentative proposals for a new Personal 

Property Security Act have both recommended that this change 

take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the necessity of 

operating credit to our agricultural industry and is accordingly 

taking this step to safeguard its continuing provision.  Since it 

was enacted in 1980, the Saskatchewan Personal Property 

Security Act has served as a model for personal property 

security law for several other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the time has come to recognize certain 

changes in the world of computer technology and the impact of 

those changes on the personal property registry of 

Saskatchewan.  The amendments in this Bill provide for a 

change in the definition of "financing change statement" and 

"financing statement."  This will allow for registration of such 

statements by computer data transmission from remote 

locations to the office of the registry. 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Another amendment will limit the liability of the personal 

property registrar for loss or damage suffered by a person 

either because of oral advice received from a government 

employee or by the failure to register or register correctly 

electronic data transmitted to the registry's data base from a 

remote location.  This change is necessary to accommodate 

new technology without creating undue liability on behalf of 

the government for actions taken in good faith. 

 

This Bill also provides for an expansion of the 

regulation-making power of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to provide for the express ability to prescribe the form 

and content of such electronic data registration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Personal Property Security Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks 

and they will be somewhat in the forms of questions.  We had a 

lot of interest given to us and provided to us from credit unions 

across the province saying that they did not have a level 

playing-field in dealing with personal property security as did 

banks under rule 78.  And I was hoping that you would say 

something about that in this context.  I'm not sure that you 

outlined to us that that's what you were intending to do. 

 

And therefore I have a lot of questions that I'm going to raise 

because I had anticipated from the title and the Act, because 

that's what they deal with that there . . . the credit unions did 

and were seeking an opportunity to deal with the kind of 

financing tool that would make a level playing-field in their 

operations in relation to the Canadian banks. 

 

We will take a look at the details of the things that you have 

provided there.  And it sounded to me that it was a 

computerization of the process, more or less.  We will take a 

look at it; we'll do an assessment of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, therefore I move to adjourn debate and we'll 

take a serious look at what you have said. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

Bill that I am about to speak to and will move second reading is 

An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987.  The Bill increases 

the tax on gasoline and diesel fuel from 10 cents to 13 cents per 

litre effective May 8, 1992, as was announced in the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, and is in place. 

 

This change is expected to yield an additional $47.3 million in 

'92-93 in revenues to the province.  Also, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

provides for changes to the farm fuel program to ensure that the 

fuel tax exemption is provided only to those persons who are 

entitled to it. 

 

When the previous administration introduced The Fuel Tax Act 

in 1987 they failed to introduce proper controls.  As a result, 

the amount of tax-free gasoline sold in Saskatchewan increased 

by 32 per cent while the tax-paid gasoline decreased by 21 per 

cent, and a similar 

change occurred with diesel fuel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

By comparison, tax-free farm gasoline and diesel fuel actually 

declined in both the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta during 

the same period the tax-free fuel increased by so much in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The tax loss from the misuse of tax-free fuel in Saskatchewan 

has grown to an estimated $25 million per year.  In some cases 

individuals and businesses who were not entitled to the fuel tax 

exemption were receiving a benefit of up to $50,000 by not 

paying tax on fuel that was used for non-farming or other 

taxable activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan simply cannot continue to sustain 

this type of loss nor is it fair for those individuals and 

businesses who properly report and pay the fuel tax. 

 

The Department of Finance has received two or three 

complaints almost every week for the past three years on the 

misuse of tax-free fuel.  These complaints are being 

investigated and several types of tax evasion have been found.  

They include certain fuel dealers overstating their tax-free sales 

to farmers and individuals using or selling tax-free fuel for 

personal and non-farm business activities. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, fuel tax assessments have been raised for tax-free 

farm fuel use in construction equipment, school buses, 

commercial backhoes, contractual work done for the 

Department of Highways, and for commercial trucking.  

However, often it is difficult to prove the actual amount of 

tax-free fuel that was diverted to a taxable activity and the 

assessments have to be revised accordingly.  Once again, this 

points out that the previous fuel tax exemption program was 

unenforceable. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, starting on May 8, 1992, farmers are 

required to pay the tax on the farm fuel and they will be 

eligible for an annual rebate.  In this way we can minimize the 

amount of fuel tax leakage and ensure that only eligible 

persons receive fuel tax relief, and that is farm operators. 

 

Also, in order to reduce the paperwork for farmers, the 

Department of Finance will use information obtained from bulk 

fuel dealers to calculate the farmers' annual rebate.  This means 

that farmers will not have to submit their fuel invoices for their 

bulk purchases of gasoline. 

 

This Bill also introduces a diesel fuel colouring program 

starting in January 1, 1993.  Under this program tax-free farm 

diesel fuel used in farm machinery, in farm trucks, will be 

coloured to distinguish it from clear diesel fuel that is tax paid.  

This is similar to the fuel colouring program in all other 

provinces with the exception of only one and that is New 

Brunswick. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, contains several enforcement and 

administrative provisions dealing with the new fuel colouring 

program.  We recognize that fuel colouring imposes a burden 

on farmers and fuel dealers; however we are keeping this 

burden to a minimum by only colouring diesel fuel. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

Also the enforcement program will not have to be as extensive 

as was needed prior to 1982 when both gasoline and diesel fuel 

were coloured.   Farm gasoline could have been coloured, Mr. 

Speaker, but this would have added to the inconvenience and 

cost to farmers and bulk dealers.  Alternatively, we could have 

taxed both farm gasoline and diesel fuel, and provided an 

annual maximum rebate.  However diesel fuel is the 

predominant fuel used in farm machinery and it is important 

for farmers to receive the tax exemption on diesel fuel at 

source, rather than wait for a rebate. 

 

We examined many options, Mr. Speaker, before making the 

changes to the farm fuel program.  While these changes may 

not be popular, they were necessary, and farmers will receive 

over $95 million in annual tax relief -- fuel tax relief, that is. 

 

The changes to the farm fuel program, Mr. Speaker, also apply 

to commercial fishermen, trappers, and loggers, so they will 

continue the benefit from the fuel tax exemption and rebate 

programs. 

 

Other amendments contained in this Bill include provisions to 

license fuel importers and exporters to provide greater control 

over fuel imports and exports. 

 

In the past there have been some abuses of tax re fuel imports 

being used for taxable purpose and not being reported.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, fuel importers will be required to 

report their fuel imports in advance and pay a deposit so there 

will be improved controls over tax re fuel coming into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition, persons who export fuel must become licensed and 

account for the burden on their fuel exports.  In the past there 

have been several complaints of persons purchasing fuel tax 

free for export, but not taking it out of the province.  

Subsequently this may end up being sold for taxable use in 

Saskatchewan.  As a result, fuel exporters will be required to 

pay a deposit equivalent to the amount of tax that would 

otherwise be payable.  This deposit will be refunded provided 

they submit satisfactory proof that the fuel was actually 

exported. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill establishes procedures for 

cancelling licences or permits issued under the Act, and 

establishes offences and fines for contravening the new 

provisions. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move 

second reading of this Bill, An Act to Amend the Fuel Tax Act, 

1987. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll be making a few 

comments on this particular Bill to prepare the minister for 

Committee of the Whole at least, on this.  And also I would 

hope that he will take my comments to heart and perhaps do a 

little more consultation with a few people around the piece. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will suggest to you that the two or three 

complaints a day that you claim have been coming in to the 

Department of Finance over the last two or three years over 

people not paying the tax on diesel fuel, you will get 

that same number of calls coming in from people who are very 

displeased with what you are currently trying to do. 

 

I have had nearly every bulk dealer in my constituency and the 

city of Moose Jaw either complain verbally or in writing.  And 

I believe you received a letter from the Moose Jaw Co-op 

recently in your department, signed by the board of directors.  

The costs associated with what you're proposing are not trivial.  

In the case of the Moose Jaw Co-op bulk fuel dealership, 

they're talking between 50 and $100,000 in order to change 

their tankage and put in the necessary environmental 

requirements that are present today. 

 

You are right that in 1982, when this colouring of fuels was 

discontinued by the government, there were far less problems 

involved.  The environmental world has changed out there, Mr. 

Minister, and everyone from the farmer that is having the fuel 

delivered to him, to the bulk dealer, is under considerable 

financial stress these days because of the agricultural economy.  

They now have had many, many environmental implications 

added in the intervening 10 years. 

 

My own farm is an example.  I used to get by with two 

500-gallon tanks -- one for diesel fuel and one for gasoline.  

The diesel tank, even though it has two taps on it, is not 

divided.  The requirement now to separate diesel fuel by 

colour, in my particular operations, means the purchase of at 

least another 500-gallon tank.  And I say purchase, Mr. 

Minister, because most of the companies involved in the 

delivery of bulk fuels no longer like leasing programs like they 

used to in the past.  They all want you to buy the tank. 

 

In the case of underground tanks, the costs are even more 

onerous.  In the intervening 10 years since we last had coloured 

fuel in this province, many farmers have taken the opportunity 

to bury their tanks -- safety, environmental reasons, cost 

efficiency.  Many of the companies had programs in the 

mid-'80s that encouraged the purchase of buried tanks.  Those 

people don't have any choice now but to go to a new overhead 

or to dig in a buried tank if they're trying to keep their diesel 

fuel separate. 

 

Many farmers, because of the agricultural economy in the 

1980s, have diversified.  They quite rightly have got into things 

like custom hauling of hay, custom hauling of grain, many 

custom operations that go along with farming.  They may have 

partnerships involved.  All of this is going to necessitate their 

access to both clear and coloured fuel. 

 

And when one takes the number of bulk dealerships in this 

province, Mr. Minister, and if the numbers of the Moose Jaw 

Co-op, which is not a large dealership, are any indication of 50 

to $100,000, I would suggest to you, sir, that the cost for the 

people that have to implement your change are going to be very 

significant indeed. 

 

That means in the case of the Moose Jaw Co-op, the dividend 

that might have gone to the patrons over the next couple of 

years may in fact be squashed, that individual farmers when 

faced with choices such as that may not have any option, Mr. 

Minister, but to simply try 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

and ignore some of the regulations because -- quite frankly -- a 

lot of them don't have 3 or $4,000 to upgrade their tankage at 

this time.  And that's what you're asking them to do. 

 

I'm not so sure, Mr. Minister, the ceilings that you have put on 

under this particular Act as far as rebates are reasonable either.  

And I know you've gave the indication that all is open for 

review at a later date.  But I will suggest to you, Mr. Minister, 

that there should have probably been a little more consultation 

involved in this process before you launched off with this 

endeavour before we had what we have today here. 

 

Any bulk dealer in Saskatchewan would have told you the 

costs that are associated with this kind of change ahead of time.  

Any farmer faced with buying a new set of tankage would have 

told you what those costs were.  And I would suggest to you 

that any farm organization that truly represents its members in 

asking about the limits, the limits on tax-free fuel, would have 

suggested to you today in a very intensified agricultural 

situation that maybe $900 isn't sufficient. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, there are number of areas about this 

Bill that are raising a great deal of concern with folks in 

Saskatchewan.  I know that I plan on meeting with some of the 

bulk dealers personally and asking them specifics so that I can 

bring it back to this legislature and ask you those questions 

during Committee of the Whole. 

 

And I know that many members in my caucus are receiving the 

same kind of correspondence, same kind of correspondence 

from people in their ridings, both on the commercial side and 

on the end-user side that says that there's going to be a lot of 

unhappiness with what you've done. 

 

Besides I would suggest you increasing the costs that go along 

with the production of a basic farm stuff, farm products, by 

another tax increase when you campaigned so hardily against 

raising taxes in the last provincial election, and that given that a 

number of them do wish to make comments, I would move, 

Mr. Speaker, that we adjourn debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 10 -- An Act to 

amend The Crown Minerals Act and to make consequential 

amendments to certain other Acts resulting from the enactment 

of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to go 

back to a month and a half back in my thoughts here where we 

were dealing with this Bill originally.  And I want to just sort 

of conclude and draw some conclusions from the remarks I 

made then just to refresh the minister's 

memory.  Because I have sincere hopes that after his lengthy 

deliberations and time to deliberate with the people in the 

petroleum industry, that he might seriously be considering 

some amendments to this Act that would perhaps help folks in 

the industry to continue on in our province. 

 

While it would be politically nice for me to see him fall flat on 

the face of his ministry, it certainly would do no pleasure for 

me to watch that kind of harm come to our province that could 

result from this particular Bill going through in its original 

state. 

 

The truth of the matter is that nobody has any faith in this 

government with retroactivity, and especially in an Act where 

retroactivity would result in the potential for people to be 

required to pay royalty taxes from the past back 20 years.  

Retroactive royalty taxes, Mr. Speaker, must not happen, or 

there will never be another new oil business start in this 

province ever again. 

 

And I know that this minister is a man who understands the 

importance of the industry because of the seat that he 

represents and the importance that that industry plays in our 

area of the province.  I know that he has no personal interest in 

destroying the petroleum industry, and if he truly is trying to do 

his job to the best of his ability -- and I'm sure that he feels in 

his heart that that's what he's doing -- then he must consider the 

results of the implications, not necessarily the intent of what 

he's doing, but the implications of what people might read out 

of the wording in the Bill. 

 

We have just gone through a period where we see this 

government giving people a lot of worry.  We have things like 

the right of searching of homes coming into one piece of 

legislation in our environmental Act.  The right to search 

homes without warrants, simply by kicking down the doors and 

the implications there that you could end up being a police state 

situation. 

 

And that throws a lot of fear into people.  People in the 

petroleum industry then see this particular Act with a 

retroactive clause, allowing the minister to simple declare that 

somebody hasn't paid enough taxes and then set the machinery 

of our legal system and our police system after them to collect 

it.  And that throws fear into people whether it is intended to be 

used or not. 

 

It will scare people out of our province and it will scare people 

out of the industry.  And as I mentioned to the minister in my 

deliberation and comments some time back, if I were going to 

be starting an oil business in Saskatchewan and I saw this Bill, 

I would pack up my suitcase and leave right now.  And I 

believe that every other business man would do the same. 

 

We have been threatened with labour legislation, and I'm 

hoping that that never happens in our province the way it's been 

suggested to me that it might be going to.  Because here again, 

we would be throwing a fear into people in business, especially 

in the petroleum industry.  And when they see the potential of 

that kind of thing happening or that being suggested, they go 

back to this particular Bill and they say this one affects us 

directly. If they'll do it to us here, then they'll most likely do it 

some  



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

place else and we're just not going to fool around and take a 

chance. 

 

And so that's just what's happening.  We see Rural 

Development taking power in a Bill that the minister admits 

that he doesn't really need, and he says today that he doesn't 

really plan on using, yet he takes that power.  And it frightens 

people to see a government grabbing up power in Bill after Bill 

after Bill in every different sector of our society. 

 

We have another minister that deems that farmers have gotten 

letters that they never got.  That kind of thing has got people 

very fearful in our society, Mr. Speaker.  They are worried and 

business people who have to deal with cash dollars that can be 

lost at the turn of a hand with the government, just will not take 

those kinds of chances. 

 

And so I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has had time to 

look at this thing again.  I believe that he has had meetings now 

with some people in the petroleum industry, and I sincerely 

hope that he will go back now to the drawing board and bring 

in those amendments.  Having a good confidence that he might 

do that, I'm going to allow this piece of legislation to go on to 

committee and I thank you for your time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

Bill No. 53 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 53 -- An Act 

to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are a number 

of items in this Bill that I think are reasonable and 

commendable. 

 

I have given this . . . taken the opportunity to pass this on to the 

livestock feeders' association and they have some concerns that 

they've expressed to me on dealing with a couple points.  One 

is that the change of how the producers pay the association and 

then the association has to pay the lender is not too clear to 

them from what you have addressed in this Bill. 

 

They would like to have an explanation of that because the way 

the process works now, the individual . . . or the association 

sells the livestock, they pay off that individual's loan.  In the 

Bill it talks about paying off the whole loan of the association 

and that causes a great deal of concern on the part of the feeder 

associations in dealing with those individual commodities. 

 

However if the minister has some explanation about why 

they're doing it that way, we may or not accept what he has to 

say. 

 

But they have expressed a concern at how the wording of the 

Bill is in those sections.  And we want to raise that with you.  It 

deals with sections 5 and 7 and those are the areas of their 

concern. 

They have spoken to me because I belong to a feeder 

association and a breeder association and I know what they're 

about.  And therefore they have approached me and asked me 

whether I'd bring that to your attention as a part of our 

discussion in the Committee of the Whole.  So we'll leave it go 

for now and then we'll resume the debate under that 

circumstance. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 59 -- An Act 

to amend The Agri-Food Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are a number 

of items that need to be taken a look at.  We had a lot of 

discussion in the winter of '91 and the spring of '91 dealing 

with some of the concern that the pork board had in dealing 

with Moose Jaw Packers.  And we are . . . I think these are 

there to deal with some of those concerns. 

 

We were going to ask more questions about how you deal with 

your percentages, how you roll them through, and what you're 

going to anticipate happening.  We're also going to ask you 

some questions about what you perceive in your philosophy 

between the development commissions and the development 

boards and realizing that there is a significant difference in how 

you handle them.  So we'll be allowing this to go to committee, 

but we'll be asking questions in those areas to help the 

producers know exactly what's going on. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Senior Citizens' 

Heritage Program Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

It's my great pleasure to introduce Dan Perrins, who is the 

secretary to the Seniors' Secretariat;  Mr. Del Fuchs, who is the 

director of programs for the Seniors' Secretariat. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I think 

before we agree to clause 1, we certainly must ask a few 

questions of the minister regarding the Act. 

 

First of all, if I understand, this Act is changing the senior 

citizens' heritage grant.  I believe it's eliminated a number of 

people from qualifying for the Act, and maybe the minister 

could just fill the House in regarding the Act and the reasons 

for taking out the individuals . . . or eliminating the ability of 

certain individuals to claim the 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

fund. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  In 

response to that question, what we did this year was we 

lowered the ceilings for eligibility.  In the past, the income 

ceiling for eligibility was $30,000.  This year it's been lowered 

to $22,000. 

 

The other changes that we have made is we have ended the 

distinction between couples and singles.  The thinking behind 

that was that a household is a household.  And the people, the 

seniors who most frequently experience poverty, are single 

female seniors.  So that was something that gave them greater 

protection.  We also eliminated estates in the belief that the 

grant should go to seniors, not to the people who inherit their 

estates. 

 

To return to the lowering of the ceiling, the idea behind that 

was to target the grants better to those in need.  Those were the 

main changes. 

 

The other change was we eliminated grants to 

rent-geared-to-income public housing.  The rationale behind 

that change was that people in public housing are already 

heavily subsidized.  If you take the subsidies coming from the 

two different levels of government, federal and provincial, the 

average level of subsidization in one year is between 6 to 

$8,000. 

 

So the idea was, in the sense of fairness, these people are 

already heavily subsidized.  If you're going to give a grant to 

seniors, you should target, first of all, seniors most often 

experiencing poverty, single female seniors, and especially 

seniors struggling to maintain their own homes.  So that's the 

general nature of the changes and the rationale. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Coming back to the 

ceiling and correct me if I'm wrong, but if I'm not mistaken the 

original program, prior to the changes being implemented by 

this Act, the ceiling was 25 . . . well I shouldn't say . . . it was 

30,000, but actually 25,000 you would qualify for the 

maximum, from 25,000 to 30,000, then it was prorated.  So if 

you had a $30,000 income, you were basically then down to 

zero.  But 25 to 30, you could qualify for anywhere from 5 to 

$100, if I'm not mistaken.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That's right.  It was graduated.  And 

I guess the thinking of the government was that at $30,000 

income, in very difficult financial circumstances, that there was 

no rationale for subsidization. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So that what you're saying now, Madam Minister, 

is the fact that 22 . . . there's a ceiling of 22,000, there isn't a 

prorating of the grant at all whatsoever.  Once you're above the 

$22,000, you don't qualify. 

 

Coming back to talking about couples and singles.  And forgive 

me, I didn't quite catch what you were saying, but do I 

understand that as a couple you wouldn't qualify for as much as 

a single?  Singles are singled out as being able to qualify for 

more.  It's still based on the 22,000.  If you're a couple with an 

income factor of less than 22,000, you'd qualify for the whole 

amount as . . . Maybe I should ask 

you what amount you'd qualify for, because I think maybe, if 

I'm not mistaken, 750 was the ceiling before, and as a single, I 

believe it was $500.  Maybe you could just give us those 

numbers if you don't mind, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Previously a couple would be 

entitled to $700, and a single to 500.  What we've done is we've 

eliminated the distinction.  And the rationale behind that was, a 

household is a household.  So the expenses associated with a 

household are the same, relative whether you are a single or a 

couple. 

 

And the other reason for that change was that the seniors who 

most frequently experience poverty are single women seniors.  

So it was to guarantee protection for that group of people. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So the amount 

that's going out, just for my information, is the maximum $500 

this year, Madam Minister?  It's $500.  And that's both.  As you 

indicated, no distinction between the couple and the single.  

And I appreciate that.  Maybe I'll have to get in front of the 

mike a little easier. 

 

When we talk about singles . . . And I appreciate your 

comments, Madam Minister, because I know, and you probably 

find in your constituency as I do in mine, that certainly widows 

tend to be amongst the individuals that are affected most 

severely by lack of income.  And a lot of that goes back over 

the period of the years where a lot of women chose to remain in 

the home and didn't have any outside income, and our tax laws 

didn't allow for their husbands even to pay them some income 

and get them on, say, Canada Pension. 

 

And even if they were, and the husband was on Canada 

Pension . . . and I know of a similar circumstance. There are a 

number of circumstances in my constituency where a lady lost 

her husband when they were in their mid-50s and he wasn't 

eligible for Canada Pension Plan as yet, their income they had 

from selling their farm was minimal compared to what we have 

seen it, and of course with interest rates dropping off now, it 

has . . . At one time when her investment income was in that 10 

to 12 per cent rate, she had what would be considered maybe, 

and she felt, was adequate to live on.  Now at 5 per cent as her 

deposits are coming due, 5 per cent certainly has taken away a 

fair bit of income. 

 

(1500) 

 

What other sources is the government looking at in light of the 

fact that we've reduced . . . We realize $500 isn't a lot of 

income, but certainly it means . . . $500 would mean a fair bit 

to a person on a low income trying to maintain a home. 

 

Are there any other forms or subsidies or grants or ways of 

reaching out and providing income to single women such as 

I've talked about and maybe that you're familiar with as well, to 

kind of help them through the hoops or get them . . . provide 

the necessary income for them to subsist or to exist, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much for that 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

question.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, first of all to acknowledge your 

point, I think that seniors are having a difficult time because of 

the levelling off of interest rates.  And I think it also means that 

some of their other programs like the federal pension that they 

get is geared to inflation. But as inflation levels off, their 

pension does not go up to the same extent. 

 

But there are at least three different programs that we either 

have enhanced or introduced, that I think will help the single 

senior most susceptible to poverty, and actually will help 

families as well. 

 

We have increased the payments under the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan, which is an income plan directed at low income 

seniors so those payments are being increased this year. 

 

The other program, that we have entered into in co-operation 

with the federal government, will allow grants of up to $2,500 

to seniors who want to renovate their homes to make them 

accessible to disabled people.  So that if you're a disabled 

senior and you have a desire to remain in your own home, there 

are now grants available to allow you to do that. 

 

The final program is through New Careers and it will give 

assistance to low income people, including seniors, whose 

incomes are $25,000 or less.  And it will give them assistance 

in renovating homes as well -- more home repairs.  It will be 

basically a formula whereby the individual will have to pay the 

cost of materials but New Careers will come in and assess the 

work to be done and do the work. 

 

So I think we are trying in the short term to be as sensitive as 

possible to the desire of seniors to remain independent as long 

as possible. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I thank you, Madam Minister.  And maybe before 

the House, you could just inform us what the increase has been 

to the Saskatchewan Income Plan, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The increase will come into effect 

October 1, and it will be $10 a month per person. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, when you talk of public 

housing, and as I understand it, residents of low rental type 

facilities where you had a subsidized . . . your rent was 

subsidized, you did qualify over the previous years for a certain 

amount. And I'm not sure if they qualified for the total amount 

of the grant and I'm wondering if you could inform the House 

whether they qualified for the total amount of the grant. 

 

And when we talk of subsidized housing, am I to understand as 

well that seniors in rental housing or subsidized housing were 

also responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of those 

facilities, or was that maintenance kept up, maintained, by 

Canada Mortgage & Housing, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes.  To give 

you the information, in the past couples qualified, couples in 

public housing qualified for a grant of 400, 

singles for a grant of 200.  To answer the second question 

there, in subsidized housing the individuals, the seniors, are not 

responsible for the upkeep.  It's the housing authority that is 

responsible for the upkeep.  So that is again one of the 

rationales for not including public housing dwellers in the 

grants. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I also note, Madam Minister, that the Bill 

indicates, or the Act indicates that as of December 31, 1992, 

the seniors' heritage grant will be discontinued.  And I would 

assume from that that as of December 31, there will be no more 

money available through this grant.  And my understanding 

when the Act was originally established, the idea was to help 

seniors on low fixed incomes, even though it was a modest 

amount, to try and maintain and keep their houses up. 

 

And you did indicate that there are a couple of programs still 

available but I see they are specifically directed at disabled or 

people with disabilities to help maintain or help them exist in 

their own homes.  And I know that many people prefer to 

remain in their own home as long as is possible.  In light of a 

number of other changes that will be taking place in this fiscal 

year, budget-driven policies it would appear to me, I think it's 

going to be even more difficult for people to not only maintain 

their homes, but more people are going to be forced into trying 

to maintain their homes because of the lack of funding, as I 

understand, that'll be taking place in the area of health, the lack 

of funding for level 1 and 2 care. 

 

I think it would be very appropriate that the . . . and I'm not 

sure where the government is heading down the road as they 

eliminate this grant, but certainly we must look at ways of 

reaching out to help those on low fixed incomes because I think 

we all agree that we should do as much as we can to help those 

who, due to circumstances beyond their control, are on a low 

fixed income which really puts them at an awkward position of 

trying to provide adequately for themselves in light of the fact 

that many seniors do find themselves in a position where health 

begins to deteriorate, the cost of drugs go up, or they run into 

more medical complications which means more drugs are 

involved and the higher expenses.  We see the decrease in 

funding for help for diabetics. 

 

And so as I indicated earlier, Madam Minister, although many 

families may not have necessarily felt that $500 or the $700 

was a very large amount or was an amount that they maybe 

could exist without, for many individuals it was an amount that 

certainly gave them a little added income at the time of the year 

when they applied for the grant which is normally in the 

springtime. 

 

So I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, I would assume that 

it's basically fiscally driven, but I'm wondering if you could 

just inform the House the real reasons for the discontinuance of 

the seniors' heritage program. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes, thank you 

for that question.  I think the first point you made fits in very 

well with the government's wellness philosophy.  I think a big 

part of wellness, from our point of view, is doing what we can 

to work with seniors to allow them to remain in their own 

homes as long as possible.  And in the immediate budget 

before you there are at least two 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

measures which specifically are designed to do that, that is to 

assist seniors in remaining in their own homes as long as 

possible. 

 

And what I would cite there is about a 20 per cent increase in 

home-based health care.  I know home care is something that 

seniors value very highly. And a lot of the seniors I talked to 

said, well all right, if you're going to reduce the heritage or 

eliminate it, this is something that we would consider if in fact 

there is some kind of compensation.  And the compensation 

most frequently mentioned to me was home care.  So there has 

been a close to 20 per cent increase in home-based health care 

services, the biggest component of which would be home care. 

 

The other program that is currently in effect is the one I 

mentioned initially, that is people with incomes less than 

$25,000 who do not have to be disabled can get a assistance in 

making home repairs through the New Careers Corporation.  

So that is an immediate measure designed to deal with that 

situation. 

 

In the longer term though, the aim of the government is to 

review all income programs, including the seniors' programs.  

So there will be two reviews occurring this year.  In fact they're 

already beginning.  One is the government review in which 

we'll take all income programs -- and we use the word income 

very broadly to include health care benefits, housing benefits -- 

we'll take the whole piece and say, all right, are we using the 

dollars in the system as effectively as possible.  At the same 

time, the Senior Citizens' Provincial Council has initiated a 

review of its own which will cover similar territory and work 

with seniors' groups to answer that question as well. 

 

So that's the framework under which we're operating.  No 

doubt the level of debt that we inherited has meant that we 

have to cut back.  We also have to use the dollars in the system 

as effectively as possible. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, you talked about the increase in 

funding to home care.  And I just want to bring this to your 

attention, and maybe you could discuss it with your cabinet 

colleagues and certainly the Minister of Finance because even 

though I agree with the fact that I think some . . . I don't agree 

with large government, the fact that we should have a little 

program here and a little program there.  It would be more 

appropriate if we would deal with people's needs on the basis 

of one aspect in which people can have the assistance at their 

fingertips rather than always having to look for government to 

hand something out through a program such as the seniors' 

heritage grant. 

 

The fact is, regarding the home care program, I think you 

mentioned something like 20 or 21 per cent increase.  And 

certainly the Minister of Health indicated that the government 

has made a commitment to that.  I just want to indicate that one 

of the local care home boards or home care boards indeed put a 

budget together based on the assumption that they believed 

some 19 to 20 per cent increase was going to be coming in their 

level of funding, only to find out when the funding actually 

came through there was only 5 per cent increase allotted to 

them which 

left them with a budget . . . or a budget that they had planned 

being $50,000 short. 

 

And I know a couple people that are involved on this home 

care board.  They were warning the administrator to basically 

hold the line and not to jump to conclusions prior to the day 

that she saw the actual dollars available.  Now they find 

themselves in a position of having to revamp their budget 

because indeed the 19 per cent or the 20 per cent, as we've 

heard in this House, didn't appear. 

 

So I think the government is certainly going to have to take 

some very serious looks at some of the numbers they throw 

out.  And before we . . . if we're going to say 21 per cent, we 

better really mean the 21 per cent.  And maybe home care 

boards should be made aware of exactly the exact dollar value 

they're going to be seeing. 

 

And maybe another thing I would suggest before we start 

throwing out percentages, maybe we should put actual dollar 

figures out because when I hear 21 per cent, I assume 21 per 

cent would be made available to all home care boards. 

 

And I'm not exactly sure what happened in this situation, but 

the actual 5 per cent they've received is quite a distance from 

the 21 per cent.  So that's going to leave them in a position 

where they are not going to be able to meet the demand for the 

services that I know is going to be falling on the doorstep in 

light of a number of other government moves. 

 

Another thing I would like to mention, Madam Minister . . . 

and I think that something that a lot of people really believed in 

and believe in planning for their future is the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  I think that just from some of the comments that 

you've made this afternoon, Madam Minister, that it would be 

appropriate that the government should be looking at ways of 

helping people plan for the future so that they're not looking 

and always expecting . . . or having to rely on government.  

And I believe when you look at the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, it was an excellent plan that gave people an ability to plan 

for the future by looking ahead and investing for their future. 

 

In most cases, as the numbers will indicate, some 80 per cent of 

the people involved in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan were 

women.  And I would suggest that women got involved 

because they wanted to be independent.  They didn't want to 

have to be always relying on other forms or other agencies 

when they reached retirement age only to find that they didn't 

have a pension plan adequately set aside. 

 

So I think I would ask, Madam Minister, that a serious 

reconsideration be given to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  

And I believe it would be very appropriate in the long run for 

governments to indeed inject a bit to help those on lower fixed 

incomes to plan for their retirement -- single women in the 

work place on minimum wage; to offer the challenge, to put a 

bit of an incentive out there; to put, whether it's a hundred or 

$200 matching so that women or individuals on those low fixed 

incomes do plan for the future. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

And when they reach that retirement age, Madam Minister, I 

think as people have the ability to plan for retirement, as 

governments work together to help people plan for their 

retirement, we will find ourselves in a position where we don't 

have to . . . we will not be looking at grants such as senior 

citizens' heritage grant.  Even though it was minimal, to a lot of 

families it was a substantial sum of money and it was really 

appreciated. 

 

(1515) 

 

So unless my colleagues have other questions, I don't have . . . 

member from Morse has a question or two.  But I just throw 

these out, Madam Minister, suggesting that we should look at 

ways in which we can really help people plan. 

 

As I indicated, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was one way, 

and the second factor is rather than just throwing out 

percentages, we should have actual dollars so home care boards 

don't find themselves in the difficult position of the one that I'm 

talking of right now. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

just thought I'd respond to a couple of the points you made 

here. 

 

With respect to the health care issues, I know that you can take 

that up in greater detail in the health care Estimates, but there 

are a couple of points that I did want to make.  What I said the 

increase was, I said it was in the nature of 20 per cent.  It's 19.5 

per cent in home-based services, and home care would only be 

one of such services. 

 

I think it's probably a good idea to get all the local boards to 

check what their level of increase will be, because as in other 

increases, you say the average is such and such a per cent, but 

depending on the district, there will be variances. 

 

And I just wanted to say as well, I think there are some very 

good points made there about pensions, for women especially, 

and some of the long-term strategies we could put in place.  

These are the sorts of things that are going to be looked at in 

the income security review.  And there are other departments as 

well that could be involved in long-term solutions, for example 

the Department of Labour. To ensure pension benefits to 

part-time workers would, in the long term, help a lot of women 

in that 70 per cent of the people working part time are women.  

But I think a lot of the points you raised about targeting 

long-term solutions are very good. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One more follow-up, Madam Minister, and that 

was regarding the home care based support for home care.  

And I think the one point I brought out, I just want to reiterate 

that it would be appropriate to follow through.  Because my 

understanding from the board in questions I bring up, 

obviously the administrator had the same impression that I had, 

and I think my colleagues have. 

 

You indicated that was in one sector, a 19.5 per cent increase.  

And it's certainly thrown them in a position where they took the 

19.5 as coming on their overall budget.  And so they find 

themselves in very difficult 

position.  It would be appropriate to at least let them know 

exactly where the increases were, what the amounts were, and 

possibly they wouldn't have found themself in that position.  So 

I'm just passing it on for information purposes. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, this is regarding clause 3.  How many persons have 

been excluded as a result of those living in public housing from 

eligibility? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, 10,900. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, how . . . I'm curious as to 

the dollars that then are available to the government as a result 

of their lack of eligibility. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total 

savings from the changes to the program as a whole, 10.9 

million; the changes to public housing specifically, 2.2 million. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, did your 

department consult with persons affected before making this 

change?  And if so, can you provide the details of these 

consultations? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke to a 

number of seniors' organizations about the changes that we 

were contemplating.  I spoke with 25 different groups, seniors' 

groups.  And because the meetings were about a variety of 

issues, the information that they all received varied, depending 

on what their interest was. 

 

But I think it's fair to say seniors knew the sorts of changes that 

we were contemplating and the rationale behind them.  In the 

Seniors' Secretariat we're especially advantaged because we 

have a group called the seniors' provincial council which has 

15 people on it, not chosen by government but chosen by the 

seniors' organizations themselves.  All the government gets to 

do is to choose.  Out of say 60 seniors' groups, we pick 15.  

And these people were fully aware as we went through the 

process, of what we were considering.  So I think there was a 

high level of consultation. 

 

I think the idea of excluding people in public housing was 

controversial.  But we felt justified because of the level of 

subsidization occurring to these people, that they were heavily 

subsidized. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Before 

removing their eligibility for those residents in public housing, 

did you calculate what effect this might have on individual 

financial planning, and particularly of course with seniors' 

budgets?  I think that often they're very much stretched to the 

limit.  And I'll add a corollary to this.  Did you do any studies, 

and did you have any idea of how many persons may be 

experiencing difficulties as a result of your proposed actions? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What we did . . . By the way, in the 

consultations, what we talked about most frequently was total 

elimination immediately.  So that this is the softer of the 

alternatives contemplated. 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Part of the reason for the increase in the SIP (Saskatchewan 

Income Plan) grants is to compensate people living in public 

housing.  And if you look at that increase, it doesn't entirely 

compensate the single senior, but it comes close. 

 

So we felt that relative to other groups being affected by 

changes in government legislation, seniors were reasonably 

well off.  And I think there's some support from seniors' 

organizations to that effect as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If I'm able 

to understand then, there may be a means by which individuals 

who have not planned on this reduction being available . . . or 

monies being available to them, that they're compensated in 

some way? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Assuming that if they're in 

subsidized housing they have lower incomes, they will be 

getting an increase in their SIP grants which will in part 

compensate for the loss to people in public housing.  Because 

their grant, in single and public housing, their grant was only 

$200.  So the SIP grant increase over the year will come closer 

than it does to the people in households. 

 

But as I say, the rationale for the public housing was one that I 

can justify I think, in difficult times.  A very high level of 

subsidization -- 6 to $8,000 a year.  And there's not another 

group in our society that we subsidize to that same level in 

housing. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, I thank you.  I can 

understand the financial difficulties not only facing the 

province, but I think I understand that it means that we have to 

have cuts in various places.  What I'm most concerned about is 

for people to be able to do good planning on their own.  And 

one of the things we're wishing of course is not only for 

governments to plan better with their monies but individuals to 

do so as well, to businesses to be able to do long-term 

planning, and farmers be able to do the same. 

 

I guess what I'm concerned about here is that people would not 

know that this is going to happen.  And often with the rigidity, 

the inflexibility in a senior's income, that this would have a 

major impact on a lot of people's lives.  And even if it weren't 

going to be a long-term, deleterious effect financially, 

emotionally with elderly people it can cause an enormous 

amount of concern and stress in their lives. 

 

I'm wondering if you could just give me some consolation 

perhaps, that you have not heard from numbers of people being 

very concerned about what has happened to them.  Because 

that's actually one of the . . . the greatest concerns that I have is 

not that you have to make some changes in financial planning 

for seniors, but that they are unaware of what's coming and that 

it has created difficulty for them. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say of 

all the government cuts that have occurred, this was one that 

was the best known.  That is, seniors' groups, when I talked to 

them I said, yes it is up there on the Table.  The press covered 

it extensively.  I never denied that it was 

under review.  So seniors were aware that this was a program 

which they may very well lose at some point. 

 

I think, in fact we feel, that we're being kind by giving a 

one-year's warning to a lot of them that this is coming.  But if 

you go back in the press reports, I was asked very soon after 

being appointed minister what was going to happen to the 

seniors' heritage program.  And I said consistently, it's under 

review, which means that it may be changed or it may be 

eliminated. 

 

As far as comfort, I have an excerpt from a seniors' newspaper.  

It's called seniors' Commentary, and it talks about the budget.  

And it says: "Bitter medicine" the budget as it affects seniors.  

It says at one point: 

 

 On the whole, though, seniors (particularly those on low 

incomes) didn't fare too badly. 

 

 . . . on the brighter side, the government increased funding 

for home care by $6-million -- a hike of almost 20% which 

most other areas of the budget did not receive. 

 

 . . . the Heritage program was not eliminated which many 

seniors thought might happen. 

 

Again reinforcing the point I was making.  They thought it 

could go this year. 

 

 Instead the eligibility ceiling of $30,000 (total income in 

1991) was reduced to $22,000. 

 

And another point the same article says: 

 

 The government found itself caught between the devil and 

the deep blue sea, but without stern economic measures at 

this time the situation would deteriorate even further. 

 

 Simply stated, taxpayers in a province of just under one 

million . . . cannot afford to pay $1.5 million every single day 

just to cover the interest on Saskatchewan's debt -- not 

without placing our cherished social programs in severe 

jeopardy. 

 

The last line is: 

 

 Tough as it is to swallow, the government did its best to be 

fair -- especially to seniors. 

 

And I think that reflects a lot of the views that I heard as well. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1530) 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Products 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

 

Clause 1 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce 

the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food, Mr. Stuart 

Kramer, and on his right, Mr. John Buchan, director of soils 

and crops branch, Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If you don't mind, 

Mr. Minister, would you provide for us a general overview of 

how your licensing program or process would be implemented 

here in relation to who it would apply and to the amount of 

people you've talked to to see whether in fact they agree with 

what you're trying to do here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say first, with 

respect to the question, appreciate the opportunity to give a 

simple overview of those to whom the Act applies.  It is in fact 

applying to all commercial vendors as defined by Agriculture 

Canada and with respect to the industry support for the 

measures, both the Western Fertilizer and Chemical Dealers 

Association and the Crop Protection Institute organizations in 

Saskatchewan that broadly represent the industry -- probably 

represent around 2,000 businesses and vendors -- are in support 

of these measures and we're the last province in Canada to put 

these measures in place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What reference and what involvement does 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act have so 

that we can put that in perspective in relation to this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there may be further points 

to this question; I was just exploring other possible areas the 

question may apply to.  I'm informed that the Act is superseded 

by the environmental protection Act in one case and that is 

where applicators are spraying over water.  Are there other 

questions related to this that you're also interested too? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No.  I just was wondering how the 

environmental protection Act pertained to his and what . . . 

that's good. 

 

This licence that is going to apply or that individuals will apply 

for, will this be a licence . . . for example will Sask Wheat Pool 

agents be required to have a licence?  Will people in the 

Superstore who sell chemicals for lawns and gardens, will they 

have the same kind of licence requirements?   And will they be 

required to understand what chemicals that they're selling to 

individuals across the counter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the way in which the Act 

applies to organizations like Sask Wheat Pool is that in every 

point of sale where they are selling commercial products, that 

they must have one licensed staff person on the facility.  With 

respect to Superstore, kinds of examples are used, the sale of 

domestic product is exempted from the Act and domestic 

product is defined under the . . . by Agriculture Canada. 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you give me the corresponding control 

that Canada puts on that?  Is that restrictive enough?  And I 

know that cases where . . . provided to me where individuals 

would be selling a chemical like dimethoate in Superstore and 

putting it in a grocery cart and putting lettuce and tomatoes and 

all of those kinds of things on top of it.  That's the kind of 

reference I'm looking for. 

 

I'm not terribly concerned about Sask Wheat Pool not knowing 

what they're selling or the Shell or Imperial Oil not knowing 

what they're selling.  I'm concerned more about the Canadian 

Tire and Superstore and whatever selling these commodities 

that they don't know exactly what implication they have when 

they have food contamination with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm given to understand 

that the example you used in fact would not occur.  A product 

of that kind of toxicity would not be saleable as a domestic 

product, that under the federal Act the products that are for 

domestic consumption are graded by toxicity so that they 

would be limited by their degree of risk. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So will individuals have to qualify for the 

licence that they . . . that you're going to make them write an 

examination on the commodities?  Is that going to be reviewed 

on a regular basis?  Do they have to show that they have 

capacity after five years or three years or whatever?  Can you 

give me an explanation about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the individuals who will be 

licensed will in fact be taking a course.  It's presently being 

developed by SIAST.  It will be required that every five years 

they be renewed in that course, either by personal study or 

attendance at the institute for that course. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have any control over those 

commodities that are moved through a Canadian Tire store or 

-- not necessarily a food store -- but a Canadian Tire store, a 

non-grocery store entity, like a lot of co-ops have hardware 

stores and that sort of thing.  Have you got that these people 

will be required to do their lawn and garden stuff the same way 

that the person in a farm service centre with Imperial Oil or 

whatever will be required to have that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to any product 

for domestic consumption, it is the toxicity regulations' 

guidelines that Ag Canada provides that determines the rules. 

 

Our regulations do apply to those products with respect to 

storage and handling so that you wouldn't be handling your 

lawn weed killer beside the bread in the grocery store.  And the 

example you used, a commercial business that might 

traditionally have been in handling domestic products, could 

upon becoming a licensed vendor sell a commercial product.  

But the rules would be the same. 

 

The distinction is between the domestic product sale, whether it 

happens in a store like Canadian Tire or Superstore on one 

hand and the commercial product of a higher toxicity on the 

other, where the vendor licensing 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

applies. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that based on toxicity, when Canadian Tire 

decides that they want to sell a commodity with that kind of 

toxic level, they will be required to have a licence.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, that's right. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And you said every five years that you 

anticipated that they'd have to renew their licence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it is proposed that when the 

regulations are in place they will be retested every five years 

but the licence will be renewed annually. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- By definition, who will be allowed to spray 

with . . . or use a chemical without a licence?  Will a 

commercial applicator . . . And I think the airplane applicators 

are all licensed, but the majority of farmers who are not aerial 

applicators are not licensed.  Are you anticipating that they're 

going to be required to have a licence to apply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, thanks for the 

question.  It is the same Act that deals with applicators.  And 

there is no anticipated change in that regard other than we are 

changing the terminology from permits to licences.  But there 

is no change with respect to applicators at this time.  These 

amendments deal strictly with vendors. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you define for me why you changed it 

from a permit to a licence -- why the reference change is there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the reason for the change is 

to be consistent with national terminology, to try and conform 

to the same terminology that's been used in other places.  There 

is no substantive issue in the change of terminology. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will farmers be required to take the tests that 

are available so that they can spray for their neighbour, or is 

that going to be one of those things that you overlook?  Or is 

that going to be a reasonable item that they can say that I don't 

have to worry about myself becoming involved with a problem 

with somebody trying to make me have a licence just because I 

go and help my neighbour out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thanks for that question.  

The interpretation has not changed with respect to what 

happens with the farmer under the Act.  The amendments we're 

presently making in the Act have to do simply with the vendors 

of the product. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There are occasions when farmers are also 

vendors.  What will trigger the licensing process when a farmer 

becomes a vendor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the interpretation is that -- 

speaking slightly to your point you previously raised with 

respect to farmers helping each other out -- 

that there's no requirement under those circumstances as an 

applicator under the present interpretation of the existing Act, 

which we're not changing, that in that process of exchange 

there may even be chemical involved.  But that the minute the 

farmer becomes involved in commercially selling a product, 

then they are like any other vendor. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What makes that definition?  When he puts an 

ad in the paper or when he tells his neighbour on the street or 

when he sells a certain volume of goods by dollar?  Just what 

kind of a criteria are you using here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- What I'm informed by the department is 

that whenever it is no longer in exchange.  When it is in fact a 

sale of product. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we could have a lot of bartering going 

on in a short period of time if we only used that.  I'm not going 

to dwell on that a long time, but I think you need to define what 

that is so that it's a reasonable amount and regulations could 

easily identify what that could be because there are certain 

times . . . If you, for example, sell a quart of Roundup, it has a 

significant impact if you . . . or pick up and trade a guy with a 

little bit of Glean for a little bit of Roundup, you know, what 

are you doing? 

 

So I think that you need to define that a little more clearly in 

regulations so that they, the farmers, know what you're talking 

about.  I'm not against the role of what you're doing here.  I just 

think that they need to have a definition of that just to help 

them out so that they know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the point and 

will ask the department, when they're writing the regulations, to 

make sure that point's addressed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the same application be made to 

municipalities who deal with this on a commercial basis?  Will 

municipalities be required to have someone in hand, for 

example, if they sell warfarin or those kinds of gopher poison?  

Will they be required to have a licensed individual on hand for 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it would be my 

understanding that when they are selling a product that is 

described as a commercial pesticide, that they would be 

required to have a trained person there when sale occurred. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well are gopher poison and rat poison 

considered pesticides? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the designation would at 

least be commercial and could be restricted, which is a higher 

level of restriction when we're talking about things like 

strychnine. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not sure that I understand the answer, but 

maybe you didn't understand the question.  Will municipalities 

be required, if they have gopher poison and rat poison for sale, 

be required to have the licensed individual? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

Mr. Martens: -- Does that follow then that they will be 

required, on the same basis as a vendor, to have that person on 

hand?  For example, the RM secretary is probably the one that 

buys and sells the products.  Would he or she then be required 

to have the licence or could they have the guy that's on the 

grader going down the road be the guy that's the one with the 

licence and provides the opportunity for them to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, who in the municipality 

has the training isn't an issue.  There must be a person in their 

employ to supervise the people who will be selling. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do they have to be present at the time of the 

sale?  They're not selling this like a vendor is; they're selling it . 

. . you buy it at the RM office and you pick it up at the shed.  

Who's going to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question.  

This is a matter that will be defined in regulation.  Those 

regulations are not yet written. 

 

In order to be consistent with other provinces, it is likely that 

the direction that the regulations will go is that there must be 

someone in the employ to supervise practices but not present 

when the sale is made necessarily. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you conferred with the RMs about this?  

I know that they will be surprised, I think, if you haven't talked 

to them about what they're going to be expected of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, there have not been any 

formal discussions on that question.  But before the regulations 

are finalized, we will consult with them with respect to the 

regulations and to make sure that we have some mutual 

understanding about that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would I be able to provide this observation, 

Mr. Minister, if I could, that you put a grandfathering clause 

into that component so that over a period of three to five years 

that they would be . . . that they'd know that this had to be done 

or at whatever period of time it would take to not only consult 

with them, but also to deliver an individual who would have 

the experience to do that. 

 

I make that observation because I think that the benefits that 

accrue in those circumstances are an asset to individuals in the 

municipality.  And I think I would not want to see 

municipalities stop doing that.  For example, the one 

municipality that I live in, they provide the gopher poison free.  

So they would not be involved in providing a licence for that 

individual to provide that.  If you're . . . Going into the other 

municipality that I have land, they charge a dollar a can for 

gopher poison; they would be required to have a person who 

would qualify for a licence. 

 

And so I would suggest that you perhaps put a grandfathering 

clause into this.  And if you would, I'd like to have a response 

from you on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to comment in a 

couple of respects on that matter.  The first is that all 

vendors will require some time for the course to develop and 

for them to have staff available for taking it.  It's anticipated to 

be possibly a five-day course, one that could be reasonably 

easily taken over the course of the winter. 

 

And so hopefully we'll have the provisions in place for the '93 

sales year, and hopefully all could comply.  I think many 

municipalities, if not all, have pest control officers who are 

registered already as applicators.  So I suspect if the 

qualifications aren't parallel, they would not be very different 

in terms of the requirements for scrutiny and for care in sales 

and application.  I think it may, through the existing structures, 

be almost a parallel process to what's now happening in most 

municipalities. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well if we hear of some who are having a 

problem, we'll probably let you know. 

 

One of the things that I wanted to ask you, we're dealing with 

pest control, and by my definition that's grasshoppers and rats 

and gophers and that.  Does this have anything to do with 

herbicides? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, this pest control Act applies to not 

only the animal kind but others as well.  So it applies to 

pesticides, herbicides, I suspect all farm-based, toxic chemicals 

basically. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

as an ex-member of the Centre for Agricultural Medicine, I of 

course spoke with some members of the pest control industry 

and was very encouraged to have them talk about how positive 

they see this shift in emphasis from changing from permits to 

licences.  So I do want to commend you on making these 

changes. 

 

What I am wondering about: you had mentioned earlier that the 

training will take place in SIAST.  They are going to be 

offering additional training.  Have they therefore been offered 

additional funding in order to be able to deal with this extra 

responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thanks for that question.  

The understanding is that SIAST will develop the course, and 

those who take it will pay a fee that will compensate them for 

their costs. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I'm wondering how many 

farmers have completed safety courses already.  Are you aware 

of the number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know the number.  

It would presently only . . . In terms of those who would be 

required to have taken a course, would be only those who are 

presently in the commercial application business, so then they 

would have to, under present law, take an applicator's course 

and be licensed for that.  There certainly is a growing interest 

in the farm community and a growing concern for safety, not 

only of the family but of the environment and the community.  

And I think the interest is high, but I have no measure of what 

other kinds of courses have been completed by farmers. 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, do you intend 

on putting forward something that will encourage farmers to 

take these courses?  And if so, how do you plan to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are . . . the courses 

would be available to people who could get into the course, 

clearly people who wanted to commercially engage in sale or 

application would take these kind of courses. 

 

But with respect to less formal instruction, the department, 

through its extension services, does have a strong emphasis on 

safety and safe chemical use.  It's an annual theme in spring 

around extension work, and through regulation and through 

actions like this, try to raise the level of awareness around the 

need for safe chemical use. 

 

There is no opportunity seen for, at this time, present need for, 

any formal kind of licensing with respect to farm chemical use 

by farmers.  We believe that through encouraging the safe use 

of chemicals through the extension efforts of both the chemical 

companies . . . I think the Crop Protection Institute and others 

also do encourage farm safety with chemicals.  And hopefully 

we can reach our goals for safety through those measures. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the last 

paragraph of your explanation letter or notes with the Bill, you 

used the words "to sue".  Now I know what it means to sue 

somebody for some money, but I'm just wondering, under what 

application are you using the words here?  The sentence is: 

authority to issue a permit retained where a permit may be 

issued to sue a certain pesticide or undertake certain control 

activities. 

 

Just what do you mean by the words "to sue" in that sentence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This, Mr. Chairman, is a trick code for the 

word "use" . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I've got one more here, Mr. Chairman.  

Under the Act as it's presently in place, section 23(b), and I'll 

read it: 

 

 defining the expression "open body of water" for the 

purposes of this Act;" 

 

Under your amendment section 23, where you propose to insert 

five clauses after that, (b.1), (b.2), (b.3), they have absolutely 

nothing to do with water, open bodies of water.  Why are they 

being placed in that particular position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I've understood the 

question correctly, I believe in fact section (b) stays and the 

amendment says, "by adding the following clauses after clause 

(b)."  So then there are five subpoints which then define the 

circumstances for the issuance of a licence. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's the way I 

understood the clauses that you had presented.  But why are 

they being put in as (b.1), etc?  Wouldn't it have been 

perhaps more appropriate to have it under section (c), 23(c), 

where it deals with permits and licensing, rather than open 

bodies of water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I may have been careless in 

the use of my language in the previous explanation when I 

think I said that this described the conditions for licensing.  It 

does not.  In fact, it describes the conditions for permits as 

distinct from licences for special application, which in this case 

apply where it applies to the open bodies of water. 

 

So this is the conditions for issuing permits, the five conditions 

relative to the open bodies of water issue raised in point (b). 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would this then apply to 

something like the black flies in dealing with a pesticide?  Or is 

that what you're aiming at doing?  Or would you define what 

the reference to water would be in relation to that? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The example the 

member opposite uses is a good example of a case where a 

special permit would be required in order to make the 

application. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Act and to 

enact a consequential amendment related to the enactment 

of this Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, would the minister provide for us an overview of the 

reference that it has to The Urban Municipality Act and what it 

would . . . Give a general overview of what the Bill does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 

that's been asked.  It is both a specific point that needs to be 

answered and it's in the context of a very broad picture that it is 

asked. 

 

The purpose of the amendments is to deal with the 

ever-increasing risk of the Dutch elm disease and control of it 

in Saskatchewan.  The Urban Municipality Act addresses this 

question specifically.  And this Act, in its reference to The 

Urban Municipality Act, only addresses that very specific point 

in The Urban Municipality Act with respect to control of Dutch 

elm disease. 

 

These amendments set a minimum standard for the control of 

the Dutch elm disease.  The Urban Municipality Act . . . or the 

urban municipalities continue to have the freedom to exceed 

the standard that will be set in the provincial Act. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

Mr. Martens: -- When they're referring to regulation here, then 

they're referring to the regulations under The Pest Control Act? 

 

Okay.  By the minister's observation, the answer is yes.  So 

then the bylaw has to be either better than the regulation or at 

least to where the regulation is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  That's true. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Where urban municipalities don't have a 

bylaw, then this places itself over and above that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  In fact this will 

probably define the standard for control of Dutch elm disease 

because as far as we're aware there are presently no bylaws 

passed under the provision of The Urban Municipality Act. So 

that this in fact, when our regulations are written and passed, 

will for now define the standard that's there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So the city of Regina does not have a bylaw 

dealing with Dutch elm disease in its references? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, I need to retract 

inaccurate information I gave a moment ago.  There are in fact 

not only the city of Regina but several other urban 

municipalities that have passed bylaws under The Urban 

Municipality Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So all of those municipalities that have an 

Act, they will exist, and they have to come up to regulation 

standard at least, and go beyond that.  Now those urban 

municipalities who have no bylaw in, will they have to 

conform to all of the regulations that you point out in here, or 

that you make for this?  Will they have to abide by all of them 

and deal with it in the same way that the minimum requirement 

in Regina would have to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the regulations of the 

provincial Act will apply not only for urban municipalities, but 

to all municipalities where the disease has been identified.  And 

so the regulations will define actions required in the event that 

the disease is identified.  There will be areas designated that 

will be exempt from the Act in areas which are difficult or 

impossible to . . . where it's difficult or impossible to manage 

the disease. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then rural municipalities will be treated on 

the same basis as an urban.  Their regulations, if they don't 

have any, will . . . or through a bylaw, they will have to abide 

by that.  And you're nodding yes. 

 

Is there any compensation made to municipalities in relation to 

this?  We have a lot of shelter-belts in your constituency and in 

my constituency that were some of the very first ones planted 

that have a lot of the elm trees.  Are those municipalities going 

to be required to dispose of all of those trees then if they have 

that, at their own cost, or is the farmer going to do it?  And then 

in an urban setting, the hamlets, are they going to be required 

to bear the cost of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no provision for 

compensation.  The compliance would be required in areas 

where no exemption was issued.  The municipality's 

responsibility would be to provide a disposal site for pruned 

materials. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have we got large areas in the province where 

we have, let's say, a forest of these trees where this could get to 

be a serious problem, along river banks and up in the North?  Is 

that where the problem exists, where you defined where you 

can't get at?  Is that what you're suggesting here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's in those areas the 

member opposite described that in fact are the key areas of 

concern where control is difficult.  The Souris basin from the 

United States border up and north Saskatchewan is becoming 

an area where control is probably impossible because you're 

not able to do appropriate direct pruning and control in that 

regard.  So those are the kinds of areas that are contemplated 

for exemptions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The permitting for destruction and all of those 

kinds of things -- I noticed on television the city of Regina . . . 

or a number of communities got together and they had urban 

municipalities in and they talked to different people who are 

employed by those urban municipalities about what the signs of 

Dutch elm disease are and all that sort of thing. 

 

Are permits and approvals required by the department in each 

of those cases to deal with destroying them, or are they allowed 

to do that on their own when the time comes?  Or do they have 

to apply to the department for some permits to deal with that? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while we have the 

regulatory authority with respect to these matters -- and the 

regulations in regard to the questions the member opposite is 

asking will be written that will define the various specifics 

around handling and transportation of affected material -- we 

will be working closely in co-operation with the Department of 

Natural Resources who will have the lead role in the 

implementation of the policy and the Act with respect to 

interface with municipalities with affected stands. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a few 

questions to the minister in the area.  As the member from 

Morse pointed out, from early days until about 1970 I believe, 

elm trees, American elm, were on the list from PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration).  And I know on our own 

farm we have over six miles of field shelter-belts that have 

these particular trees in them. 

 

Obviously the costs associated with removal of those trees 

would be horrendous.  I took a half a mile of trees out seven or 

eight years ago, and it cost me between 3 and $4,000; plus then 

there was the disposal.  If you had affected wood involved in 

this where you had to separate it from everything else, you're 

looking at tremendous costs. 

 

I'm wondering, is the minister saying that through the RM 

bylaw that they would then assess those costs back to me as the 

individual landowner or would that be the process that would 

be involved here? 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the matter that's raised, I 

appreciate the point that's being raised.  The regulations have 

not yet been written in terms of exactly when it would apply 

and when it would not and I think it's a topic for some 

reasonable discussion. 

 

Certainly the immediate concern of the Act would be with 

respect to the protection of the trees in urban areas and the 

greatest impact on rural municipalities may be on those 

adjoining rural municipalities that are adjoining urban 

municipalities at this time.  But that's a discussion that we 

should engage in in the writing of the regulations.  I appreciate 

the point being raised. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It's very relevant, Mr. Minister, because of 

the number of urban jurisdictions in Saskatchewan which now 

are virtually in name only.  Many of the incorporated towns, 

villages, and hamlets of yester-year which were often supplied 

trees through PFRA now are down to a few ratepayers.  Those 

ratepayers are going to be very hard pressed to handle any type 

of removal program or even an ongoing program as we see 

here in the city of Regina.  And yet they impact on so many of 

the rural areas as a potential breeding ground. 

 

And I guess if we're going to get into very large, cost-effective 

measures here, we're going to have to think about the cause of 

the problem as we design our regulations.  You know, before 

I'm going to lose six or seven miles of trees, I'm going to put an 

airplane in on those things on a yearly basis to kill the beetle.  

And I'm wondering if, as you draw up these regulations, if 

there isn't any thought into promoting some system of attacking 

the beetle before we sort of get into the other side of it which is 

going to be a very large cost to whoever, whether it's the 

individual, the municipal jurisdiction, or the provincial 

government.  At some point we've got to attack the problem 

and I would hope that the Act in some way will be encouraging 

in that way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the point 

the member opposite raises.  That discussion and others 

hopefully will take place.  Presently consultation is going on 

with both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SARM and PFRA with respect to the drafting 

of the regulations.  Their support of the direction this is going 

and those specific points can be raised with them in terms of 

the definition of where priority control efforts should take place 

and through what mechanisms.  I appreciate the raising of the 

point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I don't want to belabour the point, Mr. 

Minister, but I can tell you that there are going to be those on 

the environmental side that are going to be very definitive on 

this issue.  And I suspect there may not be a whole lot of room 

for some of us to operate under in taking this thing on, and that 

. . . I would hope there will be a very broad consideration here.  

I mean I as a person who obviously has a lot to lose, which is 

the efforts of three generations at soil conservation and a few 

other things, as a registered seed grower I pay a premium every 

year so somebody can come and inspect my fields. 

 

I'm wondering if maybe an idea worthwhile looking at would 

be some type of insurance program that towns and 

villages, farmers, parks, people could buy into some type of 

regular inspection.  Then in that process the ability to access 

chemical, that type of thing, that I believe there has to be some 

type of care in this process to take on the beetle before we use 

the stick of legislation to simply say, you must do this, this, and 

this, in certain circumstances.  And I would hope that those 

discussions are broad enough that the agenda doesn't stay very 

narrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I again appreciate the 

desire to have a large encompassing discussion rather than the 

narrow one.  And it's my belief that with the representation on 

the standing committee that's dealing with this issue, along 

with the department, both from SUMA, SARM, and PFRA, 

that that broad discussion will in fact be a topic of discussion 

now and in the future. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to pursue that line of questioning 

just a little bit.  Lots of times when control is required by . . . or 

because of an infection or an infestation -- I should use that 

word -- of something like the Dutch elm disease, it's the 

requirement of the individual on whose property they are to 

pay the cost. 

 

And when in fact a lot of the damage . . . Let's take a deer, for 

example.  Society bears the cost on compensation for those 

kinds of commodities and the farmer is feeding them, that 

society gets the benefit.  Society is also getting the benefit of 

good, healthy trees.  So from that perspective, we would 

seriously consider the involvement of a program that had some 

compensation for the prevention, not necessarily for clean-up 

and all that.  But the municipalities in some areas are going to 

have a serious, serious problem in dealing with this. 

 

And I know that municipalities down in the Weyburn area had 

grasshoppers.  They decided that that was a pest that would be 

controlled on a municipal basis and it would be gotten rid of.  

And other municipalities decided not to do that, so then it 

became the responsibility of the farmers and only certain ones 

did it, and then they had to do it over and over and over again. 

 

And that's, I guess, what we're talking about here on controlling 

something that's going to destroy the trees.  And we've paid the 

price in establishing them, that we paid the price of maintaining 

them.  We've paid the price in providing opportunities for 

wildlife to be a part of and now we're going to have to pay the 

price to destroy them. 

 

And I'd like to have some response.  Because you get in the 

Souris River basin and you start to having to destroy miles and 

miles of these things, it's going to be a significant cost.  And 

the farmers and ranchers along the area are not able to bear that 

cost themselves.  So I'd wonder if you'd give us a point of view 

or two of how you view that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question with respect to 

prevention and control, the greatest risk of spread is through 

dead wood that's infested.  That in fact presumably we wouldn't 

have a serious problem of spread out of an area where control 

is difficult through any other mechanism than people taking 

wood and bringing it into an uninfected area.  So the strategy 

that is being used here that focuses on identifying areas that 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

could be exempted on one hand, but also identifying strategies 

for limiting spread by pruning and controlling transport would 

in fact limit spread to the minimum, and minimize costs to 

everybody in the province. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

thank the individual who is here helping the minister from the 

soils and crops.  Mr. John Buchan is a noteworthy individual in 

his field and well respected, and I want to thank him for his 

time that he took in this Pest Control Act.  And I know it is a 

significant involvement that he has had in it, and I want to 

compliment him on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I thank the members opposite for that 

recognition.  And I too would thank Mr. Buchan for his 

contribution to the preparation of the legislation and the work 

he does, and thank the members for their questions.  They can 

start the questions. 

 

(1645) 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if the minister might introduce the 

officials that have joined them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again the deputy minister 

is still with me, Mr. Stuart Kramer.  And on his right is Mr. 

Stan Barber, the chairman and chief executive officer of the 

Milk Control Board.  And behind me are Mr. Bob Ford, the 

administrator in production and development section of the 

livestock branch in Agriculture and Food, and Mr. Garry 

Moore in the Crown solicitor, Saskatchewan Justice, who has 

worked with this Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are a 

number of concerns that have been raised by me, or to me by 

the milk producers.  And I want to outline them and then we'll 

deal with this.  I don't think we'll conclude with this today, Mr. 

Minister, but we'll get that under way. 

 

One of the things that has been raised as a concern is in the 

area of security in milk quotas -- if there is any or there should 

be, or whether there is going to be.  In dealing with that 

probably is one small phrase that deals with that.  On page 10 

on area no. 16, it says: 

 

 Any grant of an interest in a quota or assignment or transfer 

of a quota or an interest in a quota without the approval of the 

board is null and void. 
 

This is a very . . . and I know Mr. Barber understands this, and 

so do I, that there are a lot of old traditions in the milking 

business in Saskatchewan.  And we have gotten here by a 

degree of move, and going back, and then moving again. 

Is there anything in that section that deals with a security 

interest in relation to that?  Is it going to be required, for 

example, when cows are quota and when they're not quota, that 

you'll not be required or you'll not be allowed to have a security 

interest in a cow or a quota?  Is that the discussion that we're 

going to be having?  Or I'd like to have your overview of that, 

Mr. Minister, on what you are planning to do with that section 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, on this matter the new Act 

makes no changes in terms of the application and the 

assignability of quota. It simply confirms more clearly the 

present practices followed by the Milk Control Board with 

respect to quota and their value. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Minister.  If you wouldn't mind 

repeating that, I'd appreciate it because I was speaking with the 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the new Act makes no 

change in the provisions around the quota or their assignability.  

It is exactly the same practice as is presently in place.  It simply 

defines the practices that you described as having evolved over 

time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So, Mr. Minister, an assignment cannot be 

made.  For example, if Ag Credit Corporation were taking an 

assignment on the individual's livestock and the barn and there 

was a foreclosure on the barn, that the board would have to 

provide an approval if the individual wanted to sell some . . . 

and the individual could move all of those commodities and 

there wasn't enough to deliver him a benefit from the quota, 

then the board would have to approve that quota sale yet too.  

Is that right?  And then the assignment would have to be given 

to ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) or 

they would control that in delivering it to ACS? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, the understanding is 

that if the producer assigns it, then the Milk Control Board 

would follow the wishes of the producer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The question then is the reverse of that, Mr. 

Minister, too, that if he doesn't assign it, would the board have 

the authority, the Milk Control Board have the authority to give 

the assets of the quota or sale to the individual.  It needn't be 

ACS. It could be the credit union; it could be 

Toronto-Dominion or whatever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, not independently or 

without a court direction in that regard. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Pardon me, I didn't hear that, sir.  Sorry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the board would not have 

the authority to do that independently.  They could be directed 

to do it by the court, I understand. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right.  Okay, I understand that. 
 

One of the things that has caused us a great deal of concern is 

that we know that individuals have to have certain access . . . 

from the Milk Control Board have to have access into facilities 

of the individual producer.  And one of the things that really 

has raised a concern to us is 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

that it specifically says, without a warrant you can enter these 

facilities. 

 

Now it does talk a little bit about a reasonable time.  However, 

what really concerns us is that it should not be done that way.  

If it was excluded from that clause, I think it would be in our 

general best interests that we be allowed to have the Bill go 

forward without it.  That's in section 22(2)(a) it talks about not 

needing a warrant to go in there.  That bothers us a whole lot 

and I'd like to have your explanation of why you think it's 

necessary.  And then we'll argue about that point of view, 

probably. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Moose Jaw Palliser on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, I've just noticed, seated in the 

Speaker's gallery here today, a distinguished citizen of our 

province, Mr. Mervin Shaw, who is the director of the Legal 

Aid office in Moose Jaw, and a recently retired member of city 

council.  And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

in extending a welcome to Mr. Shaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 35 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question.  

A couple of comments I want to make about this provision in 

the Act.  One is that it is constructed in a fashion to be sensitive 

to the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  It is also a provision 

which is provided in order to allow the implementation of this 

Act in the form in which it is in order to comply with Canadian 

law.  It's a provision that's also included in the similar 

legislation which is provided under The Agri-Food Act and it 

was passed in 1990, in terms of the manner in which the issue 

of enforcement of the Act is provided for in the Act.  So there 

are parallel kinds of pieces of legislation that Justice defines as 

necessary in order to enforce the Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If there is an opportunity for a requirement by 

the board or the minister to investigate, surely he should have 

enough grounds to go to the court to get the access permission 

in a warrant that would allow that to happen.  And I would say 

that that's what we would prefer to have in here.  I'm not sure 

that you need to have it. 

 

And just placing it in perspective, if an individual would come 

on to my property -- and let's expand this to just more than 

milk, if you want to deal with that -- and then have access into 

my property and your own property, sir, on the whim of an 

individual who thinks he has the 

authority over you.  And I know that you need to keep records.  

You need to have access for health reasons.  And you need to 

have access on that, but define that as a requirement for this 

section.  Don't just explicitly say: without a warrant, we'll be 

able to go in and deal with the problems that we've got in this 

place. 

 

And I think that it would be a whole lot better for you to do it 

without the warrant component in that section than with it.  

And I think that there is more to be gained by that sort of a 

process than with the authoritarian type of process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

of the member opposite.  I only want to quote from the 1990 

Agri-Food Act to suggest that I suspect without either one of us 

getting involved in a full-blown law course here in the 

Committee of the Whole, that the same prerogatives which 

caused section 29(2)(a) and (b) to be put into that Act would be 

the same provisions that would give us direction with respect to 

the present Milk Control Act.  And I would just like to read 

you briefly the one section.  It says: 

 

 A person appointed pursuant to subsection (1) may, at any 

reasonable time, for the purpose of enforcing this Act, the 

regulations or any order of an agency: 

 

  (a) subject to subsection (3) enter, without a warrant, any 

place or premises; and 

 

  (b) make any inspection, investigation or inquiry that the 

person considers necessary. 

 

I think these are kind of boiler-plate provisions that are 

attached in order to properly deal with the implementation of 

the Act rather than any sense of an onerous intervention or 

attempt to intervene against people's interests. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


