




















































Hansard: May 26, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 635 

 May 26, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7) and it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to allow the 

1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, and to start 

working with the federal government to redesign the program 

for the future. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You're getting quite 

good at that.  It's my pleasure today on behalf of the Minister of 

Finance to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to 

members of the Legislative Assembly, eight people seated on 

the floor behind the bar.  These eight people are involved with 

the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, and particularly with the 

life enrichment program.  The supervisors are Lynne Demeule, 

Joyce Sevigny; and the staff are Kari Buchberger and Jill Hunt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be my pleasure to meet with this group 

after question period for pictures, and later on refreshments and 

a bit of a visit with them. 

 

I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming this group to 

the Legislative Assembly on behalf of the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As opposition 

members, we as well would like to extend a welcome to our 

guests who are seated on the floor this afternoon.  Certainly it 

is really something to see individuals having this opportunity to 

come out and certainly take the opportunity and the ability to 

witness the proceedings of our Legislative Assembly.  And we 

extend our best. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker and to the Assembly, I'd also like 

to extend my welcome to the Saskatchewan Abilities Council 

for attending today.  And a special personal welcome to Gary 

Lunde who is from Milestone and who I had the pleasure of 

teaching at Milestone. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take a moment during this time period just to raise an 

issue of concern to a number of constituents in the 

. . . regarding a number of constituents in the Moosomin area in 

my constituency. 

 

It's a concern, Mr. Speaker, in which a group of people 

invested in an investment firm, an investment firm which went 

bankrupt a while back, Mr. Speaker.  And since that time the 

members from my area have been in contact with me.  We've 

been in contact with different ministers, with the Premier and 

with the government.  And to date the members have found 

that they have had very little response.  They've had a response 

back and the response has indicated that there's no help 

available. 

 

We just want to remind the Assembly that when it comes to 

supporting people who have invested in this province and 

invested in other investments . . . certainly the government 

recently, I believe, put some funding into Principal Group, and 

the investors in my area feel that if the government was willing 

and able to put investments and help out the Principal 

investors, that certainly a small group such as theirs should be 

able to receive some finance as well, in light of the fact that the 

investment they made was made in good faith, in good trust.  

And we just want to bring it to the attention of the Assembly on 

the floor of this House. 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise today to 

announce the presentation of funds to the town of Bengough 

and the RM (rural municipality) of Bengough for jointly 

purchasing a mobile command post and rescue equipment for 

approximately $40,000.  Mr. Speaker, I will be receiving on 

behalf of the provincial government, a cheque from the federal 

government for 50 per cent cost sharing of this approved 

project, and in turn I will present these funds to Bengough and 

the RM at a presentation ceremony tomorrow, May 27, at the 

fire hall in Bengough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the citizens of Bengough and 

area for being conscientious and concerned about the needs of 

their citizens in being prepared for emergency response.  I have 

found the people of this area progressive, and in the true 

Saskatchewan spirit they exemplify the traits of compassion, 

community, and co-operation. 

 

The joint emergency preparedness program is sponsored by 

Emergency Preparedness Canada.  The funds are part of a 

cost-sharing arrangement to enhance emergency readiness 

across the nation.  The province of Saskatchewan helps 

administer this program and helps individual communities 

submit proposals to receive this funding. 

 

The communities must first decide on their needs and raise 

their own funding and then submit for 50 per cent cost sharing.  

Communities must therefore show initiative and vision, and I 

commend and congratulate Bengough for qualifying on both 

accounts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's good to have 

this opportunity today to rise to discuss with you and to bring 

to the attention of yourself and through you to the members of 

the Assembly and to the province, the 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

condition of the drought situation as it progresses in the 

South-west. 

 

While we've had some localized showers in the past weeks that 

have helped cereal crop production to begin -- not too bad a 

condition -- the pasture lands of the area, along with the 

dugouts being dry from no run-off as well as the potential now 

for no hay production, looms almost certainly to be inevitable 

fact. 

 

And that inevitable fact, sir, means that we have to encourage 

the people of this province to consider this as a disaster, and we 

will be asking this government to unveil their emergency 

measures program and their disaster assistance programs for 

hard-hit livestock producers in the very near future.  We have 

heard of one farmer who has already moved 70 head of cattle 

north to the pastures, and he will not be alone, as reports are 

coming in that many producers are considering that measure as 

well as buying feed. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, I firstly would like to 

congratulate the Rules Committee for bringing forth a time for 

private members' statements.  I think it will add a lot to the 

Assembly. 

 

I have been advised that Environment Canada is proposing to 

convert the Hudson Bay manned weather office to an 

automated weather observation station.  Local air traffic as well 

as air ambulance, Mr. Speaker -- and Hudson Bay relies on air 

ambulance because of their location -- and fire protection 

services, Mr. Speaker, all rely on the accuracy of information 

currently provided by that manned weather station. 

 

These users have expressed concern with the proposed 

change-over to an automated station.  It is generally felt that 

the automated station will not provide the same level of 

accuracy and detail required for air traffic operations.  

Department staff and local airport users have advised that the 

weather conditions in the Hudson Bay area are very unique 

because of their location again, their geographic location to the 

Pasqua and Porcupine Hills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of these concerns, I would ask that 

Environment Canada reconsider their proposal concerning the 

Hudson Bay weather station, and I would ask all members of 

the Assembly to join with me.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to bring to your 

attention and that of the members the 90th anniversary of the 

founding of St. Nicholas Romanian Orthodox Church in 

Regina. 

 

Starting in 1901 Romanian immigrants in Regina saw the need 

for a church to enable them to practise their faith.  Construction 

started that year and was completed the next year at 1770 St. 

John Street in the constituency of Regina Victoria.  The church 

has remained at that location 

since and continues to serve the Romanian Orthodox 

congregation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Nicholas is also remarkable because it is the 

oldest Romanian Orthodox church in North America.  Groups 

of Romanian peasants began to arrive in Canada in the 1880s.  

Many of these early immigrants homesteaded in Saskatchewan.  

Some of the communities in which they settled in numbers are 

Dysart, Wood Mountain, Kayville, Assiniboia, Canora, 

MacNutt, Pierceland, Edenwold, Lipton and Regina. 

 

Over the years Romanians in Saskatchewan have made a 

valuable contribution to the building of Saskatchewan as 

farmers, workers, business operators, and professionals.  In 

Saskatchewan we are all enriched because of their presence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we rejoice with the congregation of St. 

Nicholas in their anniversary, we salute the Romanian 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today on a matter that concerns my community.  As 

members will know, today is the first day of the Nerland 

inquiry in Prince Albert.  And I want to commend the Justice 

minister for listening to the people of our community and 

responding to their request for this inquiry. 

 

I want to say that the community of Prince Albert does 

sincerely welcome the inquiry and our community believes, the 

people in Prince Albert believe, that this is an important step in 

the healing process and will as well restore trust in our justice 

system and I would ask all members to support me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

bring to the Assembly's attention a matter of concern in my 

constituency -- the Alameda dam.  The government opposite 

and the minister for Souris Basin harps continuously on the 

lack of water in Rafferty yet he fails to mention that there is 

water in the Alameda dam. 

 

There's 35 feet of water at present in the Alameda dam.  Water 

has been going over the outlet of that dam ever since last fall.  

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, it ran until December.  Again this 

spring the water is running through the outlet and down the 

Souris River. 

 

One of the concerns of the people in the area, from Oxbow, 

Alameda, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, all of south-eastern 

Saskatchewan, is the recreational and tourist potential of this 

facility.  Their concern is when will fish be placed in this 

reservoir?  When will the breeding pens be placed in the 

reservoir for fish in this reservoir, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I would encourage the government, Mr. Speaker, to proceed 

with those plans as they are needed and they would be an 

excellent source of revenue for the government when tourism is 

developed.  Thank you. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave to introduce 

some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

That makes up for all of the times you've forgotten the name of 

my riding.  I now owe you one. 

 

I want to take this moment to introduce some special guests.  It 

would have been particularly unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, if these 

people had been overlooked.  These are some exchange 

students who are being hosted by Thom Collegiate.  There are 

14 in number, they're in grade 11, from a variety of different 

cultures.  I know all members will want to join with me in 

exchanging . . . in giving to these people a particularly hearty 

welcome to our city and our province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the Premier have leave to introduce 

some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you, members.  I also have a small group of visitors that I 

would like to introduce to you, sir, and to the members of the 

Chamber, who are seated in the Speaker's gallery, if they've 

arrived.  I think they have arrived. 

 

They are 34 students from grades 3, 4, and 5 at King George 

School in Saskatoon who are here to visit the legislature, 

sample a bit of question period, and do the usual things that 

students do at the buildings.  They are accompanied by 

teachers, Linda Kindrachuk and Lorne Davis.  And I'd ask you, 

Mr. Speaker, and the members to welcome the King George 

School group here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member wish to introduce some 

guests? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to join the Premier in welcoming our guests from King George 

School in Saskatoon, and in particular I want to welcome Max 

Abraham who I believe is the principal of the school.  When I 

was a practice teacher at Brevoort Park in Saskatoon, Max was 

a wonderful grade 7 and 8 teacher.  I think Max also has a 

history of being a fine, outstanding athlete in our younger days 

at university.  And 

 I want to say welcome to the students and welcome to Max. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Expansion of SGI 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, last week your government admitted 

it had secretly set up a new Crown corporation owned by SGI, 

the auto fund, and the Crown Management Board.  You plan to 

use this company to expand SGI CANADA into other 

provinces, expand using taxpayers' money rather than private 

investors. 

 

Mr. Minister, a simple question that requires a simple, 

non-partisan answer.  Since you have applied to set up in other 

provinces, you must have done a cost analysis of your project.  

Can you tell us how much your expansion plans will cost the 

taxpayer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to allay the 

member's fear about this secretive plot that we have.  It's so 

secretive that as a member of the opposition when you were 

trying to privatize SGI, we explained at that time how we 

would look at moving SGI outside the borders of the province.  

And basically what SGI management is now doing is looking 

at opportunities in other provinces whereby SGI might take 

their services and thereby create employment at the head office 

in Regina. 

 

Now you also asked about this secret company that we set up.  

It is basically the company that you set up to privatize the 

corporation.  The only difference is we would maintain this as 

a government owned company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That was a very good answer, Mr. 

Minister, except it didn't answer the question, and that was: 

how much will it cost the taxpayers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, at this time I'd have to 

ask the president, Mr. Bill Heidt, but it would probably be a 

couple of weeks of his time so far. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- To the same minister.  Because either of 

your lack of planning or your lack of openness you refuse to 

answer the question.  Mr. Minister, clearly you are going to sell 

insurance in other provinces.  This requires not only significant 

start-up costs, but also capital base from which insurance 

contracts would be written. 

 

Have you done your homework, Mr. Minister?  Have you 

calculated how much this is going to cost taxpayers, and have 

you determined where the money will be coming from?  Will it 

be coming from SGI or the auto fund, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

that what we are talking about is the potential of the 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

company expanding, at this point at least, into Alberta and 

Manitoba.  It would be done not in the grandiose scale that the 

previous government talked about, of going into Montreal and 

Toronto and Vancouver.  We would very simply extend the 

borders of Saskatchewan to the small, rural communities in 

Alberta and Manitoba.  To this point we haven't got 

confirmation from the governments in Manitoba and Alberta, 

but it might be possible that if the members co-operate and talk 

to their colleagues in those provinces, it might speed the 

process up. 

 

As to whether or not or how the formula for funding will be 

structured, obviously this will be intended to make money, that 

if we don't plan on making money, we won't do business in the 

other provinces.  So far from costing the taxpayers money, it 

will in fact make money and create employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I suggest that it will cost a 

great deal.  It will cost the taxpayers money that could have 

been done with private investment.  You have set up a Crown 

corporation that is owned by SGI, the auto fund, and CMB 

(Crown Management Board of Saskatchewan), so we know 

where the money's going to come from, Mr. Minister. 

 

A new question for the same minister.  Mr. Minister, I have a 

copy of the statement of operations and rate stabilization 

reserve for the month ending October 31, 1991.  The net 

increase in the rate stabilization fund was $15.142 million.  Yet 

at the end of December 31, 1991, the rate stabilization fund had 

suffered a loss of $6.78 million.  This is a decrease of almost 

$22 million.  Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly where 

this money has gone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as you will know and 

members of the Assembly will know, that both SGI CANADA 

and the auto insurance AAIA (Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act) portion of SGI have been a very, very stable operation of 

Saskatchewan for many, many years.  What I want to tell the 

member clearly is we have no intention of privatizing SGI, if 

that's the point you're trying to make here, that we should be 

doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to explain that the reason 

we're not going to privatize SGI is because we've watched you 

people for 10 years privatize corporations in this province, do 

away with assets and drive the deficit to close to $15 billion as 

a result of privatization and mismanagement. 

 

We intend to, if we are allowed to move into Alberta and into 

Manitoba -- and I ask for your co-operation in helping us do 

that -- to expand the company to spread the risk and make 

profits for the people of the province and at the same time 

create employment for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm glad the Minister 

said, if we are allowed, because it's doubtful whether or not you 

will be allowed.  It would seem that the province of Alberta has 

no interest in this new corporation. 

 

Question for the minister:  Mr. Minister, is this what the SGI 

auto fund is doing with the changes to the provision for unpaid 

claims which have gone from $221,000 in December of 1991 

to $25.280 million at the end of December 1991.  Have you 

added additional funds, over and above the actual expected cost 

of claims, such that you could hide this money and not report it 

in the current fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well it may come as a surprise to 

the member that unpaid claims go up during winter months 

when there are more accidents, and this is traditional.  And the 

member for Thunder Creek should have been able to tell you 

that if you had checked with him. 

 

But I want to say to you very clearly that this expansion, if it 

were to go ahead . . . and I say if because we have to get 

approval from the superintendent of insurance in the various 

provinces, and after that obviously a political decision will 

likely be made in the cabinet or the caucuses of the two 

provinces. 

 

And I ask the members opposite, if you know any of the people 

in government in Alberta or Manitoba that you approach them 

and ask that in terms of open trade and removing the barriers to 

trade between provinces, that you allow this Crown 

corporation, as we have allowed Crown corporations like 

Suncor, which is an oil company owned by the Government of 

Ontario, or Pacific Western, the airplane company owned by, 

previously owned by, the Lougheed government in Alberta -- 

flew into Saskatchewan, made money here.  Open up the 

borders and let us do some free and fair trading with our 

provinces and our neighbours. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the difference between 

$221,000 and 25 million is a very significant amount of money 

to have disappear or have shifted around into areas where it 

wasn't before. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is creative bookkeeping.  This creative 

bookkeeping has given the impression that you're stabilization 

fund is not as wealthy as it actually is, giving you an excuse to 

raise SGI rates. 

 

Mr. Minister, how is it that . . . how do you plan to fund your 

new Crown corporation?  Is this how you plan to expand it, 

using money from the stabilization fund from SGI . . . for SGI 

CANADA into other provinces, using hidden money bolstered 

by additional taxpayers' money from rate increases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to explain to 

the member how this will work.  I explained that it will be 

basically in the rural areas of Manitoba and Alberta, and what 

we will be doing is taking the package policies that we have 

and they will be sold by the agents and brokers in those 

provinces. 

 

And in terms of how much it will cost, it won't cost anything 

because we plan to make money at this project if 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

it goes ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to have 

great difficulty in answering the question.  He's very good at 

dodging and giving political answers.  I wish the minister 

would use his leadership abilities to tell the Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan what happened to the $22 million.  

Will he please answer the question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well first of all I want to explain 

again that the total cost of the project to date is a couple of 

weeks work by the president and some of the staff in SGI.  So 

whatever you're talking about, whatever numbers you're talking 

about, is the exact arithmetic that got us to $15 billion in the 

hole.  What it's cost us is a couple of weeks time of some 

employees in the Crown corporation SGI.  That's it.  That's the 

total cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the increase in the 

unclaimed portion of SGI auto fund, will that money be rolled 

back into the rate stabilization fund in the future or will it be 

used to pay dividends to CMB next year or will it be used to 

actually fund the expansion into other provinces?  Which is it, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as the member knows, that the 

rate stabilization fund and AAIA, it isn't transferable, and you 

know that full well.  So to try to make up some sort of a story 

about this money has been spent in terms of expanding outside 

of the province is a bunch of nonsense. 

 

The simple fact is, is that no money has been spent in 

expanding SGI outside of the province because we're still 

looking at getting approval from your counterparts in Alberta 

and Manitoba.  So how could we have spent money expanding 

into those provinces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highways Budget Reductions 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Seventeen days of bell-ringing.  Talk about a 

flip-flop -- $22 million -- poof.  Mr. Speaker, that question for 

the Minister of Highways, the Minister of Highways who has 

already destroyed this GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program is now set . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the minister will want 

to hear the question.  By now, seeing that a thousand 

kilometres will be turned from pavement to gravel, the minister 

is not only causing road building companies to go bankrupt and 

putting hundreds of people out of work, but he is telling the rest 

of the country that tourism is not a priority for the province so 

desperately in need of diversification.  Travel agents are 

already reporting very negative response from eastern Canada. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker:  will the minister tell this 

House exactly who he consulted with in this disastrous 

decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In arriving at all of this year's budgetary 

decisions, we had to deal with a deficit that the member 

opposite ought to know about.  We were trying to get from a 

$1.3 billion projected deficit to the $517 million deficit we are 

projecting for this coming year.  And we will continue to work 

at streamlining government in order to achieve that.  And we 

have to look in every area in which we can in order to achieve 

those efficiencies, and we've done that in my Department of 

Highways as well as in other areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I wonder if the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to take the dancing deficit as an excuse for this 

government becoming the true pot-hole government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the road builders' association says this decision is 

a disaster for their industry and for the excellent highway 

network in this province.  They predict that this is only the 

beginning and that likely thousands of kilometres will be 

turned back to gravel in the coming years. 

 

Now with the Highways' budget reported in the Leader-Post as 

less than in the 1950s and when you take inflation into account, 

my question, Mr. Speaker, is to the minister.  Mr. Minister, did 

you consult with the road builders' association, the Yellowhead 

Route association, the Red Coat Trail Association, the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), or the 

tourist industry, or did you do as your government seems to be 

doing on all fronts and make your decision behind closed doors 

in a cabinet room? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The issue the member opposite raises has 

a lot more to do with budgetary considerations overall and the 

extent to which Saskatchewan can afford to invest in this piece 

of its infrastructure than it has to do about the initial question 

he asked.  So I find it difficult to believe this is a follow-up 

question. 

 

But let me talk about the state of the highway system in 

Saskatchewan.  We have a very large network of highways that 

is important to our economic structure.  We have in this budget 

focused our expenditures in such a way as to maintain the 

highest volume traffic roads in the greatest . . . in good 

condition so that the economic activities of the province can 

continue. 

 

On the question of low volume roads, the member opposite 

needs to know that the guideline for putting roads into blacktop 

is 300 vehicles per day.  And the guideline for reducing the 

surface from blacktop to gravel is 180 per day.  It's necessary to 

make these tough decisions in spite of the fact that we all 

would prefer to travel on blacktop if there was enough money 

left after the disaster you left us with. 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we've 

had a rash of traffic accidents in the last while with a lot of our 

roads still paved.  I wonder if your conscience will rest easy 

when you see the results of turning a lot of those paved 

highways back to gravel. 

 

Mr. Minister, I did not hear an answer to the question that I 

posed to you and so I'm presuming that you did not in fact 

consult with anybody before you made this decision or you 

would have been happy to tell us who you did. 

 

My question.  This minister knows he had choices in how to 

achieve his budget targets.  He is now telling this legislature 

that he failed to consult with major affected interest groups 

before the announcement of this very regressive measure.  Is 

that true, Mr. Minister?  Did you fail to negotiate with anyone? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I could get the member 

opposite a list of the hours that were spent in discussions with 

various pieces of the transportation industry since I've become 

the minister, in which all of these discussions were important in 

laying out what was possible within the province and what can 

be achieved under the circumstances we find ourselves in. 

 

The member opposite mentions conscience.  I do not know 

how he could even think about conscience and ask us about 

that after the unconscionable raping of the Saskatchewan 

economy that the members opposite have done.  I am disturbed 

by the actions of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy that the 

minister has offered to give us lists of the hours that he has 

spent, because our indications are from many of these 

associations that they've had no consultation whatever.  Would 

you table in this Assembly the list of those hours that you spent 

and who you spent them with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, we will continue to discuss 

with our road builders, our contractors, the agencies concerned, 

the communities that have an input into the highway system in 

Saskatchewan, the ones that continue to write and establish 

meetings with us.  And we will spend the required time doing 

the discussions that are necessary to continue to priorize our 

highways expenditure within the limits that we have here in the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It's unfortunate in all that preamble all we got 

was your assurance, which doesn't seem to hold much weight 

in this province any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another question to the same minister.  The government 

members opposite have cried and hollered for increased 

spending on highways for years.  But now in office they reduce 

the budget to its lowest level since the 1950s, fully a 28 per 

cent cut in the maintenance budget. 

 

My question:  will the minister who has gutted GRIP give this 

House his guarantee that the road builders association 

prediction that thousands more kilometres will be converted to 

gravel will not happen.  And will he tell us how the choices 

will be made as to which roads will be turned back to gravel 

this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the guidelines for reversion, 

I believe I outlined them for you in rough a few minutes ago. 

 

The fact is that the road builders are victims of the kind of 

economic mess you've left this province in.  Engineers are 

victims of the kind of economic mess you've left this province 

in.  Farmers are victims of the kind of economic mess you've 

left this province in.  And you sit there and self-righteously talk 

about this kind of thing.  Give me a break. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry, Mr. 

Minister, but we are not going to give you a break.  You get 

paid too much money in this province to be given a break.  You 

are there to do a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question for the same minister.  This 

government's budget has already brought on many, many 

hardships to rural Saskatchewan including major cuts to 

agricultural programs, the elimination of the Pension Plan, gas 

tax increases, rural hospital cuts, and the list goes on, Mr. 

Speaker.  Rural municipalities have suffered cuts in 

revenue-sharing grants and road maintenance transfers.  Now, 

Mr. Minister, you appear ready to transfer an even greater 

burden to the rural municipalities. 

 

My question is: will you guarantee to this House and the RMs 

that this regressive move to convert paved highways to gravel 

roads will not result in an eventual unilateral move by the 

province to transfer responsibility for these roads, for future 

roads, to RMs, especially since they are cutting their operating 

grants at the same time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the developments in this 

province will happen because communities get together and 

discuss with provincial governments the directions they want to 

take.  There are innovative and practical politicians all across 

Saskatchewan -- unfortunately there are very few sitting across 

on the other side of the House -- who know about tough 

measures, who know about managing budgets, and who will 

co-operate and continue to co-operate with government in 

achieving their ends for their communities and will work with 

the provincial government in helping us to achieve our 

objectives for the province.  Thank you very much. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I had thought I'd let you off at that point but 

the minister alludes to the fact there would be nobody over here 

that could handle a budget.  My question is to the same 

minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, have you consulted with 

rural municipalities with regards to a technique and a principle 

to follow in balancing budgets? 

 

Our municipality, for example, has had 11 consecutive years 

with no mill rate increases. I'm proud to have been a member of 

that council in all those years.  Have you consulted with any 

municipalities or municipal people to teach you how, in fact, to 

balance a budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I do not know, Mr. Speaker, whether this 

question deserves a response.  This I think is a member from 

the same government that for 10 years put us in debt $15 

billion and then asked the public of Saskatchewan whether they 

liked deficit budgets or not.  I am amused. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Resignation of CEO of Gaming Commission 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission.  Will the 

minister confirm that the executive officer of the Gaming 

Commission resigned on Friday last week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can confirm that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it's interesting that since you're 

responsible for the Gaming Commission that you wouldn't 

know that, because he did resign as a matter of fact . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I didn't hear that, I'm sorry. 

 

Okay, will the minister outline why the resignation took place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No I won't, Mr. Speaker.  These are 

sensitive matters and they are not I think appropriate matters to 

be discussed in front of public television. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister for the 

Gaming Commission who will know that his party's 

long-standing opposition to electronic gaming is in direct 

contradiction to their recent announcement that gaming will be 

now permitted in the province.  Will the minister not admit that 

the real reason for the resignation of the chief executive officer 

of the Gaming Commission was a fundamental difference 

between him and the government and the philosophy behind 

who controlled the Gaming Commission and how it was 

administered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is not a word of accuracy to the 

comment made by the member from Morse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- With the recent shift in responsibility for the 

Gaming Commission from the Department of Justice to the 

Department of Finance, we now have a perfect example of 

putting the fox in the chicken coop. 

How can the government expect the same department whose 

job it is to generate and redistribute funds to be the policeman 

who administers the entire gambling sector?  Or do you believe 

there is no need to properly scrutinize those people who own 

the instruments of gambling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is . . . Mr. Speaker will not 

permit this debate to continue, but suffice it to say that 

members opposite when they were in government had no 

reason to be particularly proud of the way they handled 

gambling in this province.  There was a good deal of the 

gambling which went on, both in bingo halls and otherwise, 

which did not comply with the Criminal Code. 

 

We are determined to remedy that.  Those matters however had 

nothing to do with the departure of the CEO (chief executive 

officer). 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I want you to answer the 

question that I asked, and is that you are responsible for the 

finance and now also for the control of the gambling measures, 

and I think it was best left in the Department of Justice.  Do 

you believe there is no need for the Department of Justice to 

keep a scrutiny of the gambling sector in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there is certainly every need for 

the Department of Justice to scrutinize it, something that was 

woefully lacking when the former member sat on the treasury 

benches.  That's something that is going to happen now.  I 

repeat again, however, that had nothing to do with the 

departure of the chief executive officer. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to speak to my recent proclamation of Child Care Week 

for the period May 24 to 30.  The Saskatchewan Childcare 

Association asked me to proclaim this week, and I was pleased 

to do so.  The child care community and the Saskatchewan 

Childcare Association, in particular, have worked hard in 

preparation for this week.  I encourage people to participate in 

the many activities that have been planned.  I will personally 

have the pleasure of attending some of these activities. 

 

I want to recognize the importance of child care services to 

working parents, and the contribution of the many dedicated 

people who work in the child care field.  The dedication of 

child care workers is shown by the hard work and caring they 

bring to their jobs despite the low pay for their work. 

 

Child care is a vital part of any strategy to deal with poverty.  It 

is a necessary service to help parents maintain employment or 

attend school to learn new skills.  Developing an adequate child 

care system requires a national commitment.  I will be doing 

everything that I can to help put child care onto the national 

agenda. 
 

There are also things that we can do here in Saskatchewan even 

in these difficult economic times.  In 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

the budget presented by the Minister of Finance on May 7, an 

additional $500,000 was directed towards improving our child 

care system.  This money is being spent carefully and wisely to 

provide: first, an increase in the operating grants to licensed 

child care centres; second, the development and expansion of 

innovative services, such as high school programs for teen 

parents and work-place child care services; third, improving the 

quality of training for child care workers, and providing 

assistance to workers who want to upgrade their skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of 

child care services to working parents.  I ask that all members 

take the opportunity to acknowledge Child Care Week and give 

recognition to those who provide child care services in their 

communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to join 

with the minister in her official recognition of the importance 

of child care to our province and in particular those who 

provide the services to children in care. 

 

I must raise my concerns, however, that it appears as though 

the primary commitment to improving child care is to get the 

federal government to do a better job.  And I think the minister 

knows that the natural follow-up question to this becomes one 

of what happens to the children of Saskatchewan in the interim 

if the federal government in fact delays or does nothing. 

 

Both I . . . I speak for myself and the Liberal Party that I 

believe that the well-being of children should be the priority of 

every government.  In fact if it were the priority of this 

government and every subsequent government, the way that we 

would make decisions and choices in this country and in this 

province would be very, very different. 

 

I do hope that there will be a choice made here to make 

decision-making based on the well-being of the children of our 

province.  If that indeed becomes the case, the way in which 

we select programs, the way in which we choose to spend 

monies, will be very, very different.  In fact partisan politics 

will go aside and we will be seeing long-term commitment to 

things that really matter. 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First I'd like to 

thank Madam Minister for sending me your ministerial 

statement before question period.  I appreciate that. 

 

The Saskatchewan Childcare Association asked you to 

proclaim this week as Child Care Week, and I thank you for 

that.  I'm sure they appreciated it. 

 

I'd like to, Mr. Speaker, congratulate the Saskatchewan 

Childcare Association for their preparation and hard work to 

make that a successful week, as I understand they worked hard 

to make it a very successful week, to let the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan know their situations. 

 

And the minister in her remarks said the dedication of 

child care workers is shown by the hard work and caring they 

bring to the job despite the low pay for this work.  Now that 

should mean something to the minister, that they're saying and 

you're admitting that they're low paid, and perhaps the 

government should be doing something about that.  Then you 

jump right in, Madam Minister, to put the blame on someone 

else -- as this government always does, pass it on to someone 

else -- that it's the federal government. 

 

Now I know you have to have funding, but perhaps you have 

to, as our Leader of the Liberal Party said and I agree with her . 

. . what are you going to do in the meantime?  Because it's your 

government, Madam Minister, that has laid off so many people.  

They are responsible for many, many, as we talked about it 

yesterday in question period.  There have been thousands of 

people who will be going onto welfare for the lack of jobs, and 

there's going to be over the economy in this province and your 

tax grabs, there will be many hundreds and hundreds of people, 

that the spouses will have to go out and work and are going to 

put more of a strain on the child care program. 

 

And I'm saying I feel sorry for you, Madam Minister, because 

the Minister of Finance will control the finances and you'll 

have a hard time getting the multimillions more that you need 

to fund your Social Services department, and which that is a 

very, very important department for people that are on welfare 

that can't work and for the children that need care while their 

parents have to work.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 22 -- An Act to amend The Doukhobors of Canada 

C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

the Bill to amend The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust 

Fund Act. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 

move second reading and consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on the said Bill be waived at this time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, second 

reading and Committee of the Whole waived. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move the 

Bill be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Printer Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move first reading of a Bill to amend 

The Queen's Printer Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 25  -- An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers 

Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move first reading of a Bill to amend 

The Real Estate Brokers Act, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act to amend The Auctioneers Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Auctioneers Act. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to move 

second reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole 

be waived at this time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, second 

reading and Committee of the Whole waived. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that 

the Bill be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

third time and passed under its title. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise today 

on a very serious matter of privilege, and I will send the 

Government House Leader a copy of my remarks for his 

perusal.  If I could get one of the pages . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, I intend to clearly contain my remarks . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before the member proceeds, I 

have to inform the Assembly that under the new rules, the 

notice of two hours notice was to have been before 11:30.  

However, I did receive notice at 11:58, which would have met 

with the old rules. 
 

I am prepared, however, from the serious matter that is before 

us to waive the two hours and let the member proceed.  I do 

want to indicate to the member, however, in his statement that 

he is to be directly on the issue and state why it is a serious 

question of privilege. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I contend that the Associate 

Minister of Finance has committed a contempt of parliament 

last evening in the Committee of Finance, and I further contend 

that the abilities of members to execute their duties have been 

grievously breached by events in our Legislative Building and 

the subsequent conduct of 

the minister. 

 

The background to this matter is one that Mr. Speaker will 

understand.  After an election there is a tremendous upheaval 

as members and offices on one side of the building must pack 

up and physically move everything to offices on the other side 

of the building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the recent election, the member from Arm 

River was hustled out of his office.  In preparing for the move, 

that member packed up all -- and I must emphasize the word 

"all" -- of his files.  Because there was inadequate space 

available in the new location to which he was moving, he 

sought and was granted storage space in the cages that are 

normally reserved for cabinet ministers, as in the building of 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) there was no 

storage space for MLAs.  And it should be remembered that 

this is not a government building, not a cabinet building, but 

the Legislative Building, the MLA building. 

 

The fact that there is only storage space for cabinet ministers 

created a serious problem of privilege for us today because, 

Mr. Speaker, someone removed files from the storage of the 

member for Arm River.  The minister has yet to name the 

people who took these files and provided them to him, but he 

made it clear in offhand and certain remarks that this had in 

fact happened. 

 

This is and of itself is a serious prima facie case of privilege, 

Mr. Speaker.  It gives carte blanche to the removal and misuse 

of constituent records.  It says that these premises are not 

secure and that MLAs cannot use these premises with 

confidence.  I can think of no other more serious interference 

with the member's ability to do his duties. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, even if it is not a matter of theft, it is a 

fact of law, it is a matter of the utmost irresponsibility.  The 

minister said to the member from Arm River that he, the 

minister, had many more of these members' files.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister is attempting to intimidate the member 

using the member's confidential constituent files.  The remarks 

were clearly designed to silence the member from Arm River 

in Estimates examination. 

 

By his own actions and words the minister clearly confirmed 

that his purpose was precisely to interfere with the ability of the 

member for Arm River to do his duty which consists in part to 

asking questions in the Committee of Finance. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, whether or not the minister knew that 

these files were obtained illegitimately, the mere fact that he 

would use them even in the actual belief that they were 

accidentally left behind in the transition, that mere fact itself is 

a contempt of this House. 

 

Our caucus found several things left behind by NDP (New 

Democratic Party) members; and, Mr. Speaker, our caucus 

returned them to the NDP caucus.  That is consistent with the 

right of all members to be treated with respect and to have their 

records and by extension, their constituents, treated with 

respect. 

 

The minister deemed the confidential constituent files of 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

a member of this Assembly to be tools for blackmailing the 

member for Arm River.  This is contemptible and is a contempt 

of parliament. 

 

There is a disturbing pattern occurring in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, and it needs to be addressed quickly.  It appears that 

ministers have provided information from government files to 

their caucus colleagues relating to who has enrolled in 

programs and who has not. 

 

There appears to have been a case where NDP caucus members 

were provided information about the SaskPower account of 

members of an MLA's family.  Now either this information is 

being provided by cabinet ministers contrary to the law or it is 

coming from these additional confidential files that the 

Associate Minister of Finance says he has in his possession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure how to proceed, but there is certainly 

a serious matter of privilege for this Assembly to confront. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the Government House Leader 

proceeds, I want to indicate to the members that I will probably 

take two speakers from each side, and then depending on the 

case that is made or not made, I will probably take notice of the 

serious allegations that have been made and make my decision 

at that time. 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the 

outset that in consulting with the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs, he indicates very clearly that the documents 

the member is concerned about were left in an office that was, 

after the election, occupied by one of our members.  And the 

member forgot them when he left as a government member, 

and they were in the office when our member moved in. 

 

Now one can wonder why the member from Arm River left the 

documents in that office.  But I'm not sure that there's a 

question of privilege when the member from Arm River forgets 

some documents in an office and then wonders where they are, 

and then when they're found by someone else, you say, well 

they took my documents.  That simply isn't an accurate 

reflection of what took place here.  And I know from time to 

time I leave documents laying around, but I would be hard 

pressed to explain if someone picked them up, that they had 

taken my documents. 

 

And clearly what has happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 

transition . . . and I'm not here blaming the member from Arm 

River because I'm sure this happens many times in government.  

I know it happened after the 1982 election where files were left 

and then the next government found those files and read them.  

It's difficult if you find files laying around not to open them up 

and look at them. 

 

But I want to say clearly that any indication that these files 

were taken is not an accurate reflection of the fact that the 

member from Arm River probably left them in the office when 

he vacated it, and a member of our government found them 

when he took over that same office. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this 

matter of privilege.  The member from Arm River had 14 

boxes of files placed into storage after the election campaign.  

Upon checking those file boxes, Mr. Speaker, the particular 

files in question, of the family that was brought up last night by 

the member for Churchill Downs, were all there with the 

exception of the document that the member from Churchill 

Downs raised in this legislature last night.  All that was left in 

that particular file was a memo sheet from a secretary.  The 

actual letter was missing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these files are from 1987.  Upon checking the 

member from Arm River's material, all 14 boxes that were in 

storage in this building, everything is in order.  That member 

has not had access on a regular basis to files that are four years 

old and would have no reason, Mr. Speaker, to have them 

laying around, particularly only one letter out of a number of 

files dealing with that particular area and family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those boxes were placed in storage in this 

building with the trust of this building along with them.  They 

were then moved en masse to the member's office.  And if Mr. 

Speaker or any of his staff wish to go and look at these 

particular boxes and files, they are there, they were opened in 

the presence of witnesses to check into the authenticity of what 

was in them and what was not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that someone had access to the 

member's files while they were in storage in this building.  I am 

not accusing the minister. 

 

How the minister came to those files is his business.  But 

clearly in using those files in this Assembly . . . There are a 

number of sections in Beauchesne's.  I specifically quote 16, 

55, and 67 that impinge on a member's rights.  The member 

was using files obtained, as our member said, perhaps in a 

method that isn't concurrent with normal practice of members 

in this legislature, to intimidate the member from Arm River 

during Estimates. 

 

The member said in offhand conversation last night that he had 

more of these files.  If the minister has those files, Mr. Speaker, 

and they are under, if they are under a cloud of suspicion, 

which I suggest they are, Mr. Speaker, then this member's 

rights as a member have been infringed upon and it's 

incumbent upon that minister to divulge who provided those 

files to him and to this legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it scandalous that 

members opposite would accuse someone of theft just because 

they lost a file.  If I accused someone of theft every time I lost 

something, the jails would be full and the streets would be 

empty. 

 

This is utter and complete nonsense.  It is possible for people to 

forget files.  The Government House Leader has explained 

where the file came from.  The member from Arm River 

appears to have forgotten it and left it in his office after the 

transition in government.  He has not a scintilla of proof to the 

contrary, but that doesn't stop members opposite from making 

wild allegations about theft. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest before this matter goes any further, you 

ask the members if they have any evidence.  I suggest they 

don't.  I say to Mr. Speaker and I say to this Assembly, there 

was absolutely nothing improper about the way the file was 

obtained.  It has been correctly explained by the Government 

House Leader. 

 

If the member from Arm River was foolish enough to leave 

behind files which he now does not want revealed, that now 

finds embarrassing, he is his own victim and no one else's. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, just a short word . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I said that at the time I would make 

my decision depending on what evidence there is.  I do think 

that the member who is directly involved, the member who is 

directly involved should have an opportunity to at least state 

his case.  If somebody else wants to speak on behalf of the 

government after he speaks, fine.  I will take the member from 

Arm River and if somebody from government wishes to speak 

I will take one more member and that will be it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few words 

of clarification.  My colleagues have clarified this quite well, 

but I've been condemned for leaving a file behind.  And I want 

to make this very clear that our House Leader at this time was 

chosen, was the member for Rosthern.  He wasn't able to be 

here the week of the move. 

 

My wife Helen and myself were the ones that stayed here for 

the night of the move. And I spent almost a week here, and I 

was here till 2 or 3 o'clock that morning.  When the NDP 

members, Mr. Speaker, were moving into the offices where we 

were at, at 2 o'clock that night my wife and I and another lady 

went and we started down in the far office and went through it 

with a fine-tooth comb.  And there was nothing left.  And their 

members, Mr. Speaker, were just moving in and putting their 

names on the door. 

 

And to clarify, my own files, I had five cabinets.  They were all 

five cabinets moved empty to my office where I'm at now.  

And everything I had was put into boxes.  We had 14 or 15 

boxes that we called garbage, and we put garbage bags on and 

they were given to someone to shred.  The other 14 boxes were 

files that I had when I was a minister. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that they didn't know that I kept these 

documents this long.  I have everything that was ever mailed 

out for me since 1978.  I have copies of every detail.  They can 

come to my office and look. 

 

And the 14 boxes, I didn't have time to go through.  They were 

put in a box, and I asked someone if they could have some 

place to put them in storage.  And some gentleman said there is 

a place in the government storage, but you're not in 

government.  Then they went to someone else and came back, 

Mr. Speaker, and said, seeing you've been a senior member, we 

will store these boxes and then we'll give them to you at a later 

date. 

 

And they were to come to my office while this session was on, 

for me to go through them one by one and send some to the 

archives, maybe destroy some, and take some 

home.  And I have never opened one of those boxes.  And I 

swear to God that I've never opened a box till this morning 

because those boxes just in the last week or two were brought 

back to my office. 

 

And after this incident last night, I knew exactly, because my 

wife told me, exactly which boxes I would find this 

correspondence in because she put them there.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I sincerely say that I opened two boxes, and I found 

the ends where Norrish were, and there were the files very 

clearly.  And I had several Norrish families that I dealt with 

through 14 years.  And this file was . . . the letter was missing.  

So what else can I think, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, clearly the member from Arm 

River has a problem, and it's a problem of a lost file or a 

problem of lost memory or something like that.  But he brings 

this to the House, Mr. Speaker, and tries to palm it off on the 

House as a problem of a loss of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I bring to your attention a definition of privilege 

of the House, as given to us in the 6th Edition of Beauchesne's 

on page 11.  And here it talks about, in section 24, that: 

 

 The privileges of Parliament are rights which are "absolutely 

necessary for the due execution of its powers". 

 

Those are referred to the definition of a parliament.  Then 

further on, Mr. Speaker, where we're dealing with the privilege 

of individual members, and Beauchesne on page 25, section 92, 

states that: 

 

 A valid claim of privilege in respect to interference with a 

Member must relate to the Member's parliamentary duties 

and not to the work the Member does in relation to that 

Member's constituency. 

 

Now clearly this is a matter related between him and his 

constituency, Mr. Speaker.  It has nothing to do with anybody 

else.  I would suggest if he is looking or trying to find the file, 

he'd be better off not to bring the matter before the House as a 

matter of privilege but place an ad in the paper some place 

under lost and found. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened very carefully to the arguments 

for and against the question of privilege, and because it is a 

very serious matter any time someone brings a question of 

privilege before the Assembly, I will want to have a look at 

what the members have said.  And I will bring my decision 

back just as soon as I can. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Financial Crisis Facing Farmers in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker the Government of Saskatchewan plans to take steps to 

deal with the unprecedented crisis, financial crisis we have that 

are facing farmers in the province.  And 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

we need the support of the Farm Credit Corporation.  However 

the federal minister responsible for the Farm Credit 

Corporation stated on May 20 that he will order the corporation 

not to co-operate with the Government of Saskatchewan to 

solve the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a matter that's of grave concern for all of 

Saskatchewan.  And at the close of my remarks I will present a 

motion urging the federal government to become part of the 

solution and not the problem, and ask our Prime Minister also 

to remove the present Minister of Agriculture and replace him 

with one who is prepared to co-operate. 

 

This is an urgent matter, Mr. Speaker, because it was just 

announced on May 20.  It is urgent also, Mr. Speaker, because 

even as I speak, daily farmers and farm families are losing their 

farm and being foreclosed on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the month of April alone the Farm Land 

Security Board received 166 notices of intent to foreclose; 4 

per cent of them were from the Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan; 13 per cent of them were from credit unions; 

and 25 per cent were from the banks -- all the banks together; 

and 57 per cent of the foreclosures proposed were from the 

Farm Credit Corporation -- 57 per cent.  That's a large 

percentage, that's way over half. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an enormous problem when the federal 

Minister of Agriculture announces that the Farm Credit 

Corporation isn't going to co-operate. 

 

I am a farmer as you know, Mr. Speaker, and I farm in the 

north-east part of the province and I consider it a privilege to 

be here today in this Assembly.  And I have watched over the 

past 10 years in Saskatchewan as neighbours and friends of 

mine have been foreclosed on.  They've lost their land and 

moved on.  And the farmsteads are there to see as you drive by.  

I knew the families, I knew the children, I knew the families, 

and it hurts me when I drive by and I remember them.  But it 

not only hurts me, it hurts all of Saskatchewan.  And not only 

rural Saskatchewan, but it hurts all of Saskatchewan.  The 

towns, the villages, and urban Saskatchewan hurt when people 

are forced to leave.  The whole province suffers. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, for this reason it's unacceptable to me that the 

federal Minister of Agriculture would refuse to co-operate to 

keep families on the farm.  I have worked on agriculture boards 

and with municipalities, with people from all political stripes, 

and we've had to put aside in many cases our political agenda 

to work with one another for the betterment of our community 

and the betterment of the area we lived in. 

 

This is the kind of co-operation that's required once more, Mr. 

Speaker.  In fact if Saskatchewan is going to survive we are 

going to need to co-operate and have the co-operation of 

everyone involved. 

 

We're going to need to put aside our political agendas and help 

Saskatchewan.  Our farmers are facing a crisis, very 

devastating, and they need all the help they can get 

to stay on the land.  And now we have a federal Minister of 

Agriculture saying he doesn't want to be part of that plan to 

keep farmers on the farm, a minister who lives here in 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, this is doubly offensive to me, 

that someone from our province would do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is urgent and important for all the farm 

families and all rural Saskatchewan and indeed all of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, I don't want to heat up the debate 

and I don't want to be confrontational, but this problem with 

the farm families being foreclosed on is real.  They're real 

families and they're real people.  And it's going on even today.  

And the members in this place on both sides of the House 

know what I'm talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone close to this problem realizes that we 

have to act to keep these farm families on the land as much as 

we can.  Now this plan that we had, and some people are 

talking about, is a plan that would allow farmers who have lost 

their land to retain and farm it for some years. 

 

It's a compromise, Mr. Speaker, between the lenders, between 

the farmer, and the taxpayer.  And that's what we need today is 

compromise and co-operation for the good of the community 

and the good of the province.  Forcing these families to leave is 

not good for them.  It's not good for the rural areas, and it's not 

good for our province.  We need these programs aimed at 

keeping farmers on the land.  We are not trying to favour 

farmers for political advantage.  We're not trying to drive a 

wedge between farmers and urban communities.  But we're 

trying to do these things because it's good for the whole 

province. 

 

It brings me no pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to ask a federal minister 

to be unloaded.  But we need an Agriculture minister that will 

co-operate to find ways in keeping farmers on the land.  We 

need an Agriculture minister federally that is willing to 

co-operate and will not order the Farm Credit Corporation to 

continue to foreclose and remove these families from their 

land.  An Agriculture minister we need that will put the good of 

the province and the good of the farmers ahead of his own 

political agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I am from a farming community, 

and our community has had a lot of families and a lot of 

farmers disappear over the last 10 years.  And we've suffered 

from three major problems as I see it: one is bad weather, 

number two is poor prices for our grain, and number three is 

bad government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very restricted in what we can do about 

the weather.  We're even quite restricted in what we can do 

about the bad prices.  But, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province did find the solution for the bad government we had 

last October 21. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, my home town published a 

history book, as many have, just a little two years ago . . . it's 

almost two years ago that they published it.  And this past 

weekend I was reading it again, once again.  It never 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

fails to amaze me how, as I read, the quality of our pioneers.  

And I'm sure it's the same in every area of the province, the 

quality that they had, their hard work, how they shared with 

one and other, how they co-operated.  What an example they 

left us. 

 

They never had very much.  When you read the way they had 

to do things, you realize they were very restricted, as we are 

somewhat today, in the options they had.  They never had very 

much, but each one worked and shared what they did have for 

the betterment of the community.  And it was better because of 

their co-operation, and our province is better because of their 

co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they left an example for us.  And that's what we 

need once more is co-operation.  What we don't need is what 

we've been receiving from the federal Minister of Agriculture.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly requests the Government of Canada to 

actively co-operate with the Government of Saskatchewan in 

finding methods to deal with the growing problem of farm 

debt; and further, that this Assembly requests, in the strongest 

possible terms, that Prime Minister Brian Mulroney replace 

Mr. McKnight in the portfolio as Minister of Agriculture, 

replace him with a minister who is prepared to work for 

solutions to the problems we are facing in our agricultural 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to talk of 

a very serious matter.  The matter before us is the problem that 

we have.  We seem to have a Tory problem in this country.  In 

Saskatchewan we managed to rid part of our problem, but we 

still have the plague in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada has an obligation to 

provide good government for the entire country.  We have 

federal members representing us all through the West, one of 

whom is Mr. McKnight from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would think it would be up to that member, the Minister of 

Agriculture, to provide this province with some credible policy 

in order that he might work with the people of Saskatchewan to 

attain a goal of relieving some of the hardship on farm families, 

to work with the province of Saskatchewan, to achieve 

alleviation of farm stress, and to provide security of tenure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can recall when the last government was in 

power, them stating time after time after time that you had to 

have a Tory government in Ottawa and you had to have a Tory 

government in Saskatchewan because through co-operation we 

were going to get things done.  I can recall hearing that line 

over and over again -- part of their campaign.  And I think 

that's a good line, to co-operate federally and provincially. 

 

The Tories, though, used it for strictly political purposes and I 

won't get into that.  We've been through that many times 

before.  But their purpose was preservation of 

government, not preservation of people and the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a federal minister who has that 

obligation.  Now that there's a new government in 

Saskatchewan, he seems to have forgotten his obligation to 

work with people and co-operate with people in Saskatchewan.  

Because he's still working strictly on his political agenda.  And 

the precedent of the . . . the responsibility of the Minister of 

Agriculture in Ottawa is to the agricultural sector of this 

province and every other province in Canada.  But he is not 

working, he is not holding up his responsibility. 

 

I give you an example.  The GRIP program was designed on 

three levels.  The first line was the farmers' cash from the crop; 

the second line was the GRIP program and the NISA (net 

income stabilization account) programs; and the third line was 

called the third line of defence, or monies that would be made 

available in times of disaster when the first and second lines 

were not adequate. 

 

The former government signed the deal with the federal 

government on that premise.  We renewed the program, 

improved the program on that premise.  This federal minister, 

Mr. Speaker, agreed in the beginning and made statements 

throughout his term that we would have a third line of defence.  

This federal minister, Mr. Speaker, has not delivered.  He 

simply has forgotten his commitment to the people of western 

Canada and Saskatchewan particularly. 

 

Why has he forgotten his commitment?  He has forgotten his 

commitment because he has a political agenda -- not to help the 

farmers of this province, provide them with security of tenure, 

but to try to discredit the New Democratic government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any elected member to an institution like the 

Government of Canada who goes against the mandate that he 

was given by his people and by the people of Canada in the 

position that he has as the Agriculture minister has a 

responsibility, has a commitment that he must deliver on.  This 

member has not delivered on any commitments relating to 

security of tenure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the third line of defence was 

one issue.  Now Farm Credit Corporation is the second issue.  

Farm Credit Corporation is a major institution, a major lender 

in Canada.  It holds almost two-thirds of the farm mortgages.  

About 800,000 acres in Saskatchewan, I believe, is a close 

number that Farm Credit Corporation holds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is now attempting to do and will 

be doing what the former government in Saskatchewan refused 

to do, what the Government of Canada has refused to do all the 

while they had years and years of opportunity to deliver, a farm 

tenure security program. 

 

Two issues when you walk around rural Saskatchewan.  The 

biggest issue is security of tenure.  They have to have security 

of tenure in order to continue the operation.  Not just a big 

issue for the farmer but, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, a 

big issue for the communities, the 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

business people, the teachers, the doctors, and every labour 

person in our province.  Because that creates some stability in 

rural Saskatchewan.  And what does the federal Agriculture 

minister say? 

 

When we announced by way of a committee -- with extensive 

consultation I might add -- that we were going to bring forward 

some security of tenure by a six-year leaseback . . . I want to 

quote from a release on-line, on the wire from Ottawa: federal 

Agriculture minister Bill McKnight says he would order the 

Farm Credit Corporation not to obey any provincial legislation 

that attempts to force it to lease back land to bankrupt farmers. 

 

Isn't that wonderful.  The Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. 

Speaker, I might add the federal Minister of Agriculture who 

has not even waited to see the Bill.  He has no idea what the 

legislation is going to entail.  And yet he is up on his high 

horse, on his high political horse making statements saying that 

he is going to order Farm Credit Corporation not to help 

bankrupt farmers.  Isn't that a wonderful minister. 

 

A minister in charge of a corporation that holds 800,000 acres 

of land in Saskatchewan ordering his corporation to not help 

those bankrupt farmers. 

 

And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I see 10 chairs over there, the 

opposition, who by their silence has quietly been applauding 

the actions of that federal minister. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members today, turn a page on your 

blatant political, manipulative ways that you've learned in the 

past.  Turn the page and come clean with co-operation.  And 

they may laugh, but I'm being very serious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why haven't you stood up in your place?  And you've had the 

opportunity today.  The rules of this Assembly are, we get a 

speaker for 15 minutes, the opposition gets a speaker.  Do you 

think they would stand up in their place and say Mr. McKnight 

was wrong, that we're going to support the Saskatchewan 

government in providing security of tenure?  They sit there 

silent, obviously supporting him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, is that the role of this opposition?  To 

support a wrong-headed direction by the federal Agriculture 

Tories minister, instead of supporting bankrupt, cash strapped 

Saskatchewan farmers.  Again, they have an obligation to the 

people who elected them to do what's right.  Providing security 

of tenure is right, so why would they not stand up today and 

join with us and show the farmers of Saskatchewan that they 

want to sincerely help them have security of tenure -- that they 

want to help them have security of tenure.  But they haven't 

done that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the only thing I can conclude is that Tory 

blood is thicker than water -- putting politics, because 

McKnight's a Tory, ahead of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the elements of the 

motion that we have before us today speaks about co-operation.  

And I believe that not one person in this Assembly would 

dispute that co-operation is going to be needed to deal with the 

farm debt crisis in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I and my colleagues agree that co-operation is necessary. 

However I find it ironic that the province and the provincial 

government requested the federal government to co-operate, 

when it was not the federal government who had to take the 

government to court, it was the farmers who had to take the 

government to court in the changes to GRIP.  It was the 

provincial government who refused to co-operate with farmers 

on GRIP '92. 

 

And I want to point out to the Minister of Agriculture too here 

in the province of Saskatchewan that SARM, for example, sent 

him a letter as early as February 13, or was it February 10, 

outlining the changes that were necessary to GRIP, and they 

did not reflect the changes that the Minister of Agriculture in 

the province of Saskatchewan suggested to them. 

 

I'm not here to defend the federal government.  I am here 

because my constituents will . . . I am here because my 

constituents want me to be here and talking about agriculture.  

And I will tell you what my constituents say about this Minister 

of Agriculture in relation to the things he's doing.  There isn't 

one of them that I have been able to find that would agree with 

his GRIP changes.  I can't find one of them.  And if he can, 

then I'm sure that I would be interested in discussing that with 

that individual.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the National Farmers' 

Union don't even agree with him, and that is the truth of the 

matter. 

 

As it relates to the motion of finding methods to deal with farm 

debt, I want to point out to the Minister of Agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan that he is not co-operating with the 

federal government.  The federal government has offered the 

$200 million in GRIP '91 that he is leaving on the table.  He is 

leaving it there for a specific reason and that deals with his own 

personal agenda as it relates to GRIP '92.  And I think that 

that's wrong. 

 

I also want to point out that the Minister of Agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan has ripped and torn every facet of 

agriculture apart in this province, and what has he delivered?  

Everything is cut back. The livestock industry of which he was 

a part has been shattered, literally shattered by the feed grain 

assistance program that he neglected to put in his budget, the 

livestock cash advance and all of the things related to that. 

 

I want to point out to this Assembly that it's not the Minister of 

Agriculture in Ottawa who has got a problem.  I think the 

Minister of Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan has 

got a problem. 

 

I also want to point out that the Minister of Agriculture has got 

a very serious problem when it comes to the court action in 

relation to GRIP.  If he calculates the volume of grain that was 

seeded last year at 30 million acres and he 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

calculates the volume of loss to the farmers and the producers 

of the province of Saskatchewan, if it averages $30 a cultivated 

acre, that in itself is a $900 million cost to this treasury that he 

probably hasn't even figured in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he isn't the one that's out of step. The 

Minister of Agriculture from Ottawa isn't out of step; it's this 

Minister of Agriculture from the province of Saskatchewan 

that's way out of step.  He's out of step, for example, with Mr. 

Brian Perkins from the livestock feeders association who wrote 

a letter and said to him, would you check to see where the 

livestock industry is going to be in the next few years with your 

changes to the different programs that you have announced in 

the cattle and the hog business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's where the person is who is out of step with 

the agriculture community, not Mr. McKnight.  Mr. McKnight 

probably knows just as well as the Minister of Agriculture from 

Saskatchewan that the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 

would have preferred the '91 GRIP.  As a matter of fact, my 

constituents tell me that they would . . . even though they've 

opted out, they still would want to be a part of '91 GRIP.  What 

does that tell you, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I saw a notice today that we're going to have about 40,000 

people involved in '92 GRIP because they were forced to.  

What does that mean with what the other 8,000 do?  The other 

8,000 decided to opt out.  But, Mr. Speaker, they opted out 

because it was the wrong thing to do. 

 

As matter of fact, on Saturday I visited with a number of 

farmers from my constituency who had opted out -- a father 

and two sons -- and they would be prepared to go back into '91 

GRIP if it was made available.  Now who's not co-operating? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that not only disgusting, but also a serious, 

serious problem.  I'm going to at the conclusion of my remarks 

make an amendment to this motion that says this: 

 

 That this Assembly request the Government of Saskatchewan 

to actively co-operate with the Government of Canada in 

finding methods to deal with the growing problem of farm 

debt. 

 

That's the point that has to be made in this discussion -- the 

co-operation and the problem.  The problem has two things that 

need to be dealt with:  one is debt and one is income.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, these people have lowered the income levels of 

farmers by a significant amount.  They did it in program 

cut-backs and in tax increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know of at least two people who have contacted 

us already that they're not going to start their pivots because of 

additional electrical costs, and that is a serious problem, Mr. 

Speaker.  And there's going to be others who are in that same 

position. 

 

You got increased costs in power, you got increased costs in 

telephones, you got increased costs in the majority of the 

utilities, and what does that do to the producers in the province 

of Saskatchewan?  It seriously infringes on their income.  Their 

income is infringed on and that reflects 

directly onto the payment of the volume of debt. 

 

So what we have to do here today, Mr. Speaker, I believe, is 

not criticize the federal government.  You talk in your 

resolution about co-operation with the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada.  Well you don't 

do that by telling the Prime Minister that he's got to get rid of 

his Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Where do you find that you're walking and co-operating with 

him?  In our discussions with him there are 10 provinces in this 

country who can walk if they want to, step in step with the 

Minister of Agriculture.  From our discussions there's one that's 

out of step.  It isn't the Agriculture minister from British 

Columbia; it isn't the Minister of Agriculture from Ontario.  It 

just happens to be the Minister of Agriculture from 

Saskatchewan who's out of step.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

problem that we have in this province. 

 

He's out of step in a whole lot of ways.  He's out of step in what 

the capacity of the individuals are to deal with the processing 

industry.  He's out of step with primary production in the hogs.  

He's out of step with the livestock industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he's a grain farmer and perhaps formerly a 

hog producer, and he should be able to understand a little bit 

about what's going on.  And I find it very, very difficult to 

believe that he wouldn't change his mind if he couldn't 

persuade his extensive non-agriculture colleagues that that was 

a part of what was promoting Saskatchewan and making it 

viable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole host of things that I could talk 

about where this minister is out of step, the Minister of 

Agriculture from Saskatchewan.  That's where the problem is.  

And I want to say to this Assembly that I'm going to move an 

amendment, and it goes like this: 

 

 That this Assembly requests the Government of 

Saskatchewan to actively co-operate with the Government of 

Canada in finding methods to deal with the growing problem 

of farm debt; and further, that this Assembly requests in the 

strongest possible terms that the Premier replace the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose in the portfolio as Minister of 

Agriculture with a minister who is prepared to work for 

solutions to the problem facing our agriculture community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

to speak on this amendment.  Farm debt is an issue that must be 

dealt with.  The only way to deal with it is to come up with 

solutions and programming to compensate the producers for 

circumstances out of their control. 

 

You cannot deal with farm debt if you do not understand the 

problem.  Farmers in Saskatchewan know what the problem is.  

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that's why they hung the 

problem in effigy the day this House 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

commenced sitting. 

 

Problems in agriculture are nothing new.  We on this side of 

the House worked long and hard developing programs to assist 

producers in this province. 

 

Our record stands on its own.  The federal money and the 

programming that farmers welcomed did not come easy.  It was 

accomplished through intensive consultation and co-operation.  

Farmers were consulted and co-operated.  The federal 

government was consulted and co-operated.  The provincial 

government went to farm groups across this province.  And 

what was accomplished, Mr. Speaker?  Over $13 billion of 

money for agriculture from the federal government -- $800 

million, Mr. Speaker, last fall, the final payment for which we 

received only a few weeks ago. 

 

Why is it that the NDP government today cannot make any 

progress?  I'll tell you why, Mr. Speaker.  It is because they do 

not consult, nor do they co-operate with anyone.  Co-operation 

is a word the NDP use quite loosely. 

 

The government talked of a six-year leaseback program.  They 

condemned the federal government for being reluctant to 

support this NDP government's initiatives.  I find it difficult to 

believe that anyone supports the action of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the credit union system has severe problems 

with the leaseback program.  This leaseback program scheme 

may allow a few farmers to remain on the land. However, 

credit unions that are phoning myself and our members are 

telling us that if this legislation proceeds, it will be very 

difficult for viable farmers to receive credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if anyone should resign, it is the current 

provincial Minister of Agriculture.  The federal government 

over the last few years has worked hard and caused interest 

rates to drop dramatically.  This provincial Minister of 

Agriculture has not reduced interest rates, rather he has 

increased interest rates at ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

This is the same minister whose changes to GRIP are being 

challenged in court.  This is the minister that has a gag order on 

crop insurance agents.  It is this Minister of Agriculture who is 

betraying the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The farmers in Saskatchewan rallied last fall for more money, 

better long-run predictability, and cost of production.  The 

NDP promised to provide cost of production, improve GRIP, 

and get immediate money into the hands of farmers.  What was 

promised by the NDP is exactly the opposite to what they have 

delivered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this applies directly to this amendment.  The NDP 

government has ignored the magnitude of hardship our 

producers are being forced to bear.  Is this co-operation?  

Ignoring the problem, Mr. Speaker, does not make it go away.  

The NDP government had the audacity to brag in the budget 

speech that it is taking almost $120 million out of the GRIP 

program and that this action will save the provincial 

government money.  The 

provincial minister would rather have the province save money 

than give our farmers security through a safety net program.  

Mr. Speaker, the provincial government must quit trying to 

divert the blame.  They must take some responsibility for what 

is happening to our producers. 

 

(1515) 

 

The producers of this province have no faith in this Agriculture 

minister.  That is why they hung him in effigy.  This being the 

case, Mr. Speaker, he must be replaced.  He must be replaced 

with someone who knows the issues and who will work 

together with the federal government, work in co-operation 

with others to deal with the problem of farm debt, a minister 

interested in solving the problems rather than pushing his 

personal political ideology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers want some say.  They want to offer 

solutions.  They are facing the problems.  Allow them some 

input.  Mr. Minister, don't just point the finger and say it's not 

my fault; it's the fed's fault.  Don't just deal with issues when 

they go to court.  That, Mr. Speaker, is absurd. 

 

We ask the members opposite to put aside the politics.  Show 

the people of Saskatchewan that you can go to bat for them.  

You are now the government.  Governments work together.  

We ask that this NDP government co-operate with the federal 

government, work side by side on this massive problem, put 

aside the politics, pull up a chair and discuss how you can work 

together to assist our province's producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members opposite, after their complete 

betrayal of rural Saskatchewan, can talk about co-operation in 

the same sentence that they point fingers elsewhere, in this 

case, namely the federal government and the Minister of 

Agriculture.  It is appalling, Mr. Speaker, this kind of action. 

 

How can this government muster up the nerve to speak about 

co-operation and finding answers to serious farm debt 

problems while they're dismantling the GRIP program, 

cancelling the feed grain adjustment programs, and the natural 

grass program out in the rural areas, even, Mr. Speaker, to the 

point of cancelling the Saskatchewan Pension Plan which many 

farm wives were members of. 

 

Anything and everything, Mr. Speaker, that helped farmers in 

this province, whether it was a program or subsidy, anything is 

being taken away by this government.  Does it make sense, Mr. 

Speaker, to on one hand be saying, now the bad, bad federal 

government has been off-loading on us and aren't they terrible, 

and then on the other hand, turn to Saskatchewan farmers and 

say, you are out of luck because we don't want to give you any 

more money.  Obviously not. 

 

Not to mention the NDP call for the replacement of the federal 

agricultural minister who has worked very hard for 

Saskatchewan in the past.  He's worked for all farmers, Mr. 

Speaker, all through the country. 

 

And it must be an extremely difficult time in a world 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

recession in the food industry.  I guess the NDP don't think the 

federal government's contribution to help bring over $13 billion 

to Saskatchewan farmers over the past 10 years was good 

enough.  But that is beside the point.  The last thing I expect is 

for the members opposite to compliment the achievements of 

previous administrations.  Instead, I expect they are searching 

somewhere for a plaque so they can change the name, so they 

can take credit for something or other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter what the NDP say or how much 

they try to bash the federal government and the former 

provincial government when it comes to agriculture, because 

the people do know better.  Producers know who stood behind 

them through the droughts, the grasshoppers, the spring 

seeding loans, and on it went all through the 1980s.  Mr. 

Speaker, the farm families also know who has pulled the rug 

out from under their feet.  It is the NDP government in this 

province today. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the pot calling the kettle black.  This is 

the government who reconstructed the GRIP program with the 

net effect that if there's a crop failure, $200 million of federal 

government matching dollars will be lost.  And they talk about 

losing a third line of defence.  They just threw away the 

potential of getting $200 million from the federal government 

-- just to play politics. 

 

This is the provincial government who points fingers at Ottawa 

while it guts rural Saskatchewan with fixed-cost increases -- 

increases in power bills worth millions to intensive livestock 

operators, to people who run electric power irrigation projects 

and pumps, right down to the housewife who turns on the 

kitchen light -- fixed costs on increased phone bills, increased 

grazing lease fees up 67 per cent in the Cypress Hills.  In one 

area -- 67 per cent increase.  Can you believe it? 

 

Increased breeding fees in the pastures, the cancellation of the 

bull purchase program, increase in the PST (provincial sales 

tax) from 7 per cent to 8 per cent on everything almost that 

farmers buy, along with everyone else in the province, increase 

in the interest rates on livestock cash advances, Mr. Speaker, 

and cancellation of the feed grain adjustment program, and on 

it goes, to the increase in the gas tax.  This is going to be a 

phenomenal cost to the farmers of Saskatchewan, the biggest 

fuel consumers in this province during the summer months. 

 

An industry under attack, Mr. Speaker -- under attack by a 

Saskatchewan government and nobody else; down-loading on 

the RMs where farmers will have to make up the difference 

because of the cuts in revenue sharing.  Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers of this country will have to pick up those losses 

through increased taxes on their land. 

 

Now they say, join with us and deal with the growing farm 

debt.  Who is causing the growing farm debt in Saskatchewan?  

There are three guilty parties, not just one or two.  Where is the 

leadership in your actions?  Never before have our provincial 

farmers had to deal with an agricultural minister who didn't 

know the first thing about agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, until the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose . . . in fact I have heard his own 

constituents say they would be . . . there would be a better 

response from the member's livestock than there would be from 

him.  Now that's a terrible thing to have to say, but it almost 

seems to be coming true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly why the member from Riversdale 

should do what is best for Saskatchewan farmers, what is best 

for the province as a whole, and replace the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose with a competent person to act as Agriculture 

minister -- someone that the people will have confidence in 

again.  No matter how hard this individual tries now, it's 

unfortunate but his days are numbered.  The people out in the 

country just have lost faith in him and he can never regain that. 

 

We must have someone who will listen to farmers, with 

someone who understands farmers, Mr. Speaker.  Only then 

can we hope to see some real solutions to the farm debt and the 

many other hardships farm families face today.  But until then, 

Mr. Speaker, this minister and this government are just playing 

politics with some very serious problems -- problems that will 

affect us all in the end.  Because our economy works in a 

circle, Mr. Speaker, and what happens at the farm gate will 

continue to work its way through the entire system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked to a young diabetic farmer this past 

weekend.  He said that he had always voted NDP in the past, 

his whole family had.  But looking back, he said that things 

under the Conservatives had been pretty good.  The changes in 

the last budget, he said -- and he pointed out that he is a small 

farmer with a wife who works off of the farm -- the changes 

will cost him another $5,000 on his fixed costs this year.  And 

he told me quite confidentially that he just doesn't know what 

to do because he hasn't got the money and he doesn't know 

where he's going to get it. 

 

A rancher from Maple Creek called and he told me he 

Estimates that the extra fixed costs this year as a result of the 

new budget in Saskatchewan will cost him between 15 and 

$20,000 on fixed costs, a result of this budget from this 

Agriculture minister in large part, that affects his operation. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, we are asking the wrong person to resign.  

It is time for the NDP to stop pointing fingers, to start acting 

like a government, and to start helping rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We all know this government likes to talk a lot about 

co-operation.  It is time to prove they mean business.  So far all 

we have seen is the opposite.  There is no co-operation with 

rural people in this government. 

 

And I want to remind the minister that you can get more flies 

with honey than you can with vinegar.  And if you keep 

kicking the federal minister metaphorically in the shin, how do 

you expect him to sit down and negotiate and to give you help? 

 

It is probably true that we do need more federal money like 

acreage payments and the kind of like that we've just been 

receiving.  But we have a provincial government here that is 

more intent upon political grandstanding than actually going 

down and sitting down and seriously 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

negotiating.  And that is proven out by the simple fact that we 

have 9 provinces out of 10 who have agreements.  No one said 

that they agree that they're all perfect, but they at least have 

agreements and they are working for farmers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is impossible for the members opposite to 

continue to pretend to care about rural Saskatchewan and rural 

agriculture and at the same time slowly dismantle the entire 

industry.  This vendetta, Mr. Speaker, of the government 

against rural Saskatchewan has got to come to an end.  And it 

can only truly end by removing this minister and putting a new 

face in his place so that there will be confidence in him. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate this 

opportunity to speak on both the motion and the amendment 

this afternoon.  I had no intention initially of addressing the 

motion that was put forward.  But after hearing both the 

government and the official opposition give their views on this 

issue, I believe that it's imperative that I say what's on my 

mind. 

 

There is absolutely no question that the people of this province 

in agriculture are suffering.  They believe in part that they are 

betraying their heritage, that they in fact are betraying the 

future of their children.  They are people who have lost pride.  

They are people who feel as though their way of life is 

disappearing before their very eyes.  And these individuals 

have accepted responsibility in part for some of these things 

even though so much has been out of their control.  If we talk 

about what is within their control, it's very, very little 

considering what's happening in agriculture. 

 

As has been spoken about this afternoon, weather is not within 

their control.  Pests and disease are not within their control.  

Commodity prices are not within their control.  Limited cash 

flow with large investment is not within their control.  

Government policies and regulations are not within their 

control.  And the list goes on and on.  And yet it's their lives 

upon which all of these things have an impact. 

 

There are two very important aspects that have to be dealt with 

in agriculture in order for people to be able to regain a sense of 

stability and security in their lives.  The first indeed is farm 

debt, and the second, equally important, is farm income.  And 

what we've heard in this theatre this afternoon is truly theatre, 

is not dealing with the primary concern of how do we deal with 

farm income problems and how do we deal with the farm debt 

issue.  Instead what we've heard are words -- words about 

co-operation, where in one breath someone speaks of 

co-operation and the next breath they chastise each other. 

 

(1530) 

 

And that is not going to help the farmers of this province and 

it's not going to help the farmers of this country.  And I don't 

know when it's finally going to happen in this place, this place 

where decisions are to be made, where people are to come 

together with their ideas to arrive at conclusions, to work in a 

co-operative fashion to do one 

thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is to govern the province of 

Saskatchewan well. 

 

It does no good for the government to call for the resignation of 

the Minister of Agriculture in the federal government.  It does 

no good for the official opposition to call for the resignation of 

the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan.  Where does it do 

no good?  It does not change the lives of farmers and farm 

families in this province.  It does nothing about farm debt, 

which you people are asking about, which you say that you're 

most concerned about.  It does nothing to address the farm 

income problem. 

 

And what we truly need, Mr. Speaker, is a national agriculture 

summit where people who are truly concerned about this issue, 

whether they deal as producers, whether they deal as producers 

or lending institutions, those who deal with marketing and 

transportation, those in research and development as far as 

agriculture are concerned, can come together and truly work 

toward a solution. 

 

This province can lead in that.  We can take a leadership role, 

go forward, and call for this kind of summit.  And we can put 

the partisan politics aside because the people of this legislature 

must begin to recognize that this is not something to simply 

play politics with.  This is not something that is good enough to 

come up with one motion and then an amendment to a motion 

that on the one hand says co-operate and on the other hands 

says, but we don't like you guys on the other side, so resign. 

 

We need to show leadership in this province -- the 

Conservatives, the New Democrats, and the Liberal Party -- 

that this issue is important enough to come together and show 

that we genuinely have a concern for the real people of this 

province. 

 

When we're talking about a farm in trouble, we're not talking 

about a farm.  We're not simply talking about a farmer.  We're 

talking about people who live on this farm.  Very few farms 

have one person working on the farm.  They have two people 

who work as a partnership. 

 

In rural Saskatchewan we have more children per rural families 

than they have in their urban counterparts.  Generally that's 

more than three children per household.  We're talking about 

five people on every farm that we're talking about in difficulty. 

And they are facing real problems, real problems of such things 

that we think are urban difficulties, such things as child hunger, 

people for the first time going on social assistance in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

All of these things are our problems too that we are to be 

responsible in helping to find solutions.  And I find it 

deplorable, and I also find it sanctimonious, that people take an 

issue such as this and bring forward a motion and an 

amendment that try to say that they're concerned about 

something like farm debt and then turn it around and make it 

nothing but a political issue asking for resignations.  This to me 

is unacceptable, and it should be unacceptable to the people of 

this province who elected every person here to govern the 

province well. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I wish to speak on the motion that's been put 

forward, and I wish to speak against the amendment. 

 

Interesting discussion that we've had from members opposite 

today from both parties.  Certainly we understand that there's 

ice water in the veins of the Conservatives sitting across the 

way.  No one discussed the question of farm debt.  No one 

made the comments of putting action forward to deal with the 

problem.  No one talked about 1.2 million acres being taken 

over by the banks and a potential of another 2 million acres 

being taken over. 

 

We're talking about people out there. And then we hear from 

the Liberal Party the question . . . the leader from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the question of a national summit.  What's 

precipitated the question of the motion in the first place is that 

we're coming forward with action.  We're coming forward with 

legislation to deal with debt.  And it's coming.  When we bring 

forward legislation, what happens?  Mr. McKnight says, the 

Minister of Agriculture: oh no, no, we can't have that.  We can't 

have that.  We don't agree with that.  That's not good for us.  

That's not good for the upcoming federal election. 

 

July 1991 at Kananaskis, federal and provincial agricultural 

ministers got together and said yes, we need a leaseback 

program from Farm Credit Corporation.  It was stated in the 

document.  What's happened?  Nothing. 

 

Western premiers met last week to discuss the issue, saying 

that we needed action in farm debt, especially with federal 

co-operation.  What happened?  Nothing. 

 

The members opposite who ruled this province for 10 years 

stated that they're ignoring it, you know, the question of farm 

debt.  Look at the number of foreclosures that have taken place.  

Look at the higher number of voluntary transfers.  We talk 

about foreclosures; that's the tip of the iceberg.  Voluntary 

transfers is the key. 

 

We're bringing forward legislation to deal with those things.  

We have put forward a committee with financial institutions, 

Farm Credit Corporation, farm organizations, and farmers to 

deal with the problem.  They have brought forward 

recommendations, and we wish to act on them.  And you talk 

about co-operation.  We've been co-operating with the people 

of Saskatchewan to bring forward that question of dealing with 

that issue.  So don't tell me there hasn't been co-operation. 

 

I just can't believe the words that have been said today, I tell 

you.  When I hear the question of a national summit on 

farming, how long is that going to be?  Is that 10 years away?  

Is that when we get a Liberal government in Ottawa?  Pie in the 

sky.  Pie in the sky.  It is time for action to deal with debt. 

 

You want to talk about co-operation?  Two letters were sent to 

the Minister of Agriculture asking for discussions on this area 

of farm debt in the end of March.  What did we get?  No 

response. 

 

When we talk about leaseback programs that provide security 

for farmers, I think even the members opposite 

discussed the question of leaseback programs during the last 

provincial election.  They saw it as an opportunity also.  The 

former minister of Agriculture talked about leaseback programs 

at Kananaskis when he signed the memorandum July . . . dated 

1991. 

 

But did these members opposite talk about debt today?  Did 

they talk about debt?  No, they ignored the issue.  They ignored 

the issue, just as the Minister of Agriculture is doing in Ottawa 

-- ignoring the issue, pulling the coat over their heads and 

hoping the problem goes away because that's the way they 

attacked it for 10 years.  They thought the plan was going to go 

away . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, as the member has 

stated to me, friends of the banks. 

 

I didn't see them standing up today and saying, Mr. Hewitt of 

Farm Credit Corporation said: the crisis is over; the crisis is 

over in agriculture.  What a monumental statement.  What a 

monumental statement. 

 

Is it over?  Would the members opposite care to answer the 

question?  Is the crisis over?  No it isn't.  They know that.  

They know the crisis isn't over.  That's why we need action.  

And it's funny when you start to bring action forward how 

people start to say, oh no, that's not what we want.  That's 

going too far.  We're taking away too much from the financial 

institutions.  We're taking too much away from Farm Credit 

Corporation. 

 

Well now it's time to give something back to the farmers.  

When the question becomes . . . and Mr. McKnight's stating: 

well credit's going to dry up, and everything's going to dry 

away . . . dry up in terms of lending and land values are going 

to decrease.  You tell me what's better -- dumping 3.2 million 

acres of land onto the market?  Is that better for the income and 

stability of Saskatchewan?  No it isn't.  No it isn't. 

 

We have to deal with the problem.  We have to provide 

security.  We have to provide long-term tenure.  Financial 

institutions agreed to that.  Farm Credit agreed to that in terms 

of the debt resolution committee.  They dealt with the issue.  

We are acting upon it.  And I am sad today to hear the 

comments that have came forward, very sad. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How come the credit unions don't like it? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- The member opposite talks about the credit 

unions.  The credit union system has agreed to the program.  

They signed the document that talked about the debt 

committee. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not the ones in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Then I say to the member opposite is 

patience, patience when the legislation comes forward to see 

who is in support of the program.  Because I will tell you, it 

will be the farmers in Saskatchewan that are in support of the 

program.  It protects the farmers that are now on the land.  It 

protects the farmers who have land out there as security that's 

bought and paid for.  That at least provides security for them 

that the asset base doesn't erode. 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

It maintains people in the community of Saskatchewan.  Is it 

wiser to see people leave?  Is it wiser to see a bank come in and 

shut the doors and have those farmers leave, go to Alberta, 

B.C. (British Columbia), or Manitoba? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're shutting the doors on credit 

unions. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Oh yes, we're shutting the door, yes, yes.  

It's terrible, terrible.  We're going to turn the lights out.  We're 

going to turn the lights out.  I tell you, it is time for action.  It is 

time for action. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ask where they've been the last 10 years. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- That's right.  Where have they been the last 

10 years?  Where have they been? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- They brought up processes to deal with 

debt.  They brought up with processes, but we still have 

foreclosures, and we still had VTs (voluntary transfers).  It's 

now time to say to farmers: three years isn't enough; one year 

isn't enough.  You want to talk about stress.  You go talk to 

your farmers out there that are sitting on a one-year lease or a 

three-year lease, and they don't know what's going to happen 

down the road. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa stated that farmers are 

participating in a leaseback program that FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation) is putting forward.  They are.  They are because 

that is a worthwhile option.  We're taking the next step forward. 

 

The question I ask in terms of the members opposite, and 

maybe they could find the answer out, is the question of equity 

building program.  Will FCC finance the purchase of that land 

after that six years, after that person's built up that equity?  Or 

is the equity program simply a transition fund, Mr. Speaker?  Is 

it simply a transition fund so the farmer has a savings account 

so he has some money to walk away with?  That question 

hasn't been answered.  That question hasn't been answered. 

 

The question I ask then is: where does the member sit on farm 

debt?  Where will they sit when we bring forward this farm 

debt legislation?  Where will every member sit?  Where will 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone sit?  Because when 

action comes forward, this will be the question.  This will be 

the test when we come to the question of farm debt, when we 

come to the question of protecting family farms, and when we 

come to the question of protecting rural life in Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, as I stated, I will support the 

resolution but I will vote against the amendment.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I view the motion presented 

today, I view it with great regret.  It bothers me, Mr. Speaker, 

that a motion would be brought forward and simply singling 

out another government or another 

person and laying all the blame at the feet of one individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly agriculture, and not just agriculture but 

the whole business sector across this great nation of ours, is 

going to need the co-operation of governments in all sectors; 

not only governments but political parties of all . . . or people 

from all political persuasions in order to address the major 

concerns that we have before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard for I think far too long the fact that 

we continually put the emphasis on blaming someone else 

rather than accepting our responsibilities.  Certainly being 

government is not an easy proposition, especially in light of a 

period of recession or in light of the problems that have been 

facing this country and this province for a number of years. 

 

As we have seen in Saskatchewan, we've seen the efforts made 

by many groups and communities co-operatively to work 

together to develop policies that help them, help their 

businesses, build up their communities, and in working 

together have created a livelihood for families and men and 

women across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of speakers prior to my standing in the 

Assembly today indicated that the provincial government 

would be bringing forward a Bill which would guarantee a 

six-year leaseback. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate today that I've not only 

been contacted by farmers but I've been contacted by credit 

union managers and board members in my constituency and 

certainly a message waiting for me last night when the House 

adjourned.  When I followed up on it, Mr. Speaker, was 

addressing the very question, the fear the credit unions have in 

the fact that the legislation, if it comes forward, is going to dry 

up funding and borrowing or lending to the farmers across this 

province.  This manager of this credit union went so far as to 

say . . . I asked him, well what do you see perceive happening 

or why would this dry up your lending?  And he said because 

of the fact from what we understand of the legislation, as it will 

be introduced, it will take away our ability to have any security 

on the investment or the lending that we are going to be putting 

out in the field. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also asked the manager of the credit union, well 

okay, in any lending that you do give out, what kind of interest 

rates do you think you'll be seeing?  You know what I was told, 

Mr. Speaker?  He indicated to me that they would be looking at 

least between one and a half, 1.5 and 2 per cent higher than the 

normal lending rate to consumers, not only in my constituency 

but certainly towards all farmers across this province.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned, and a number of members 

have indicated we are concerned about the agricultural 

situation in this province. 

 

My colleague from Maple Creek mentioned this morning . . . or 

this afternoon in question period, Mr. Speaker, the problems 

that the ranching community are facing in the Maple Creek 

area -- the fact that they are already looking 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

at other areas in which to move their livestock because of the 

lack of rain, the lack of spring run-off, the lack of moisture this 

winter which has dried up their pastures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are questions and concerns that we 

should be addressing in this House, not just bringing forward a 

motion that condemns the federal minister and that asks the 

federal Prime Minister of this country to fire his minister and 

put someone else in the position of being federal Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

I believe the federal Minister of Agriculture was on provincial 

news last night, Mr. Speaker, and I watched, listened to some 

of the debate that took place.  And certainly the question was 

raised regarding a question brought forward, the motion that 

was brought forward in the House today about his resignation.  

And he indicated to anyone who was viewing the program last 

night regarding the problems that we're facing in agriculture, 

and certainly regarding the dismantling and the disruptions to 

the GRIP programs you see in in this province, that they have 

been consulting with provinces all across Canada.  And they 

have . . . of all the provinces across Canada, there's been only 

one province that really has given them a problem this year in 

trying to negotiate an agreement on GRIP and looking at next 

year when they would get into some major changes to try and 

upgrade the program.  And that province, Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately happens to be the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of farmers in my community, in my 

area -- and in our area I just would like to also indicate that we 

are fortunate in the fact that we do have a lot of moisture.  But 

it is creating a problem for us in the fact that very little seeding 

has taken place.  That, Mr. Speaker, becomes a concern to the 

farmers in my area because the longer seeding is delayed, what 

happens next August?  If we get an early frost, what happens to 

the producers?  If we get an early frost, with the changes to the 

GRIP program, where will producers be next fall in that case, 

in that scenario, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Not only are we . . . producers facing a problem in getting their 

crop in, not only are they facing a problem with low prices, not 

only are they facing a problem in not knowing where their 

bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, we continually have a government 

that continues to put the blame at somebody else's feet instead 

of accepting their responsibility.  And I want to remind them of 

the fact that they have also indicated that the . . . and raise the 

concern of the federal government off-loading programs onto 

the provinces. 

 

But let me remind the members that in the agreement with the 

GRIP program, because of the fact that they changed the GRIP 

program, they have said no thank you to some $200 million 

that would have been coming to this province had the 

provincial government made some minor changes and 

continued in the format of the 1991 GRIP program. 

 

And I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if farmers out 

there had the 1991 program to work with, there are many 

farmers who had secured their credit, secured their line of 

credit, on the basis of the old program.  There are many 

farmers who had been able to negotiate with the lending 

institutions based on the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I must remind members that according 

to the new rules that we have implemented for this week, at this 

particular time since your 65 minutes has expired, that we now 

begin a 10-minute comment and question period.  And I want 

to remind members it will be conducted similarly to question 

period.  So your comments should be relatively brief and your 

questions should be directed to those people who participated 

in the debate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to direct 

my comments and question to the member from Nipawin, Mr. 

Speaker.  He made the statement that the Agriculture minister 

wants people off the land.  Now that's an absurd statement 

because I don't believe anyone in Canada wants anybody off 

the land.  Why would you make an accusation about FCC not 

wanting to go along with the six-year program when, Mr. 

Member, they already have a six-year program in place?  

There's thousands, and I say literally thousands of farmers, 

have three-year leases and then the next three years is the 

leased equity. FCC . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  This is simply not going to 

work if members are going to interrupt immediately when the 

member gets up to ask a question.  It simply can't go on.  And 

if it is, this experiment is not going to work.  So I ask the 

members, let the member ask his question, and would he put 

his question directly.  And then I'll ask the member from 

Nipawin to respond. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We all know that 

the PCs (Progressive Conservative) in the last election came 

out with a lease-to-own program.  So I ask the member from 

Nipawin, why don't you table your farm legislation?  It's the 

banks that you have to get at.  They're the ones that only had 

the . . . give two-year leases.  Get at the banks. 

 

Bring your legislation in.  Why don't you bring it in now, Mr. 

Member, and let's see.  Get it passed.  Because you have said 

very clearly that this Bill will pass, and you can control all 

lenders.  Mr. Member, bring your legislation in and show 

Saskatchewan that you can get this legislation through -- 

control the banks and control farm credit.  Bring it in and we'll 

see. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member continues, it was the intent 

of the committee that it should be a comment and question, but 

it doesn't need to be a question.  If the member simply wishes 

to make a comment and the member from Nipawin wishes to 

respond, then we should allow the member from Nipawin to 

respond to either the comment that is made or the question that 

is asked.  It would be preferable to have a question, but the 

member doesn't need to ask a question. 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we are 

going to bring in legislation, and it's being prepared every day 

now with consultation.  I know yesterday there was 

consultation with the banks, and tomorrow they're consulting 

with some of the leaders in 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

the credit union organization. 

 

Yesterday afternoon I met with credit union managers and 

credit union presidents in my constituency.  I've been on the 

board of credit unions for some time.  And when the legislation 

is prepared, it will be brought in. 

 

One of the problems . . . And I don't take it . . . your comments 

about, you know, criticizing the federal Minister of Agriculture 

I think are fair.  And I tried to in my previous speech, I tried to 

be fair and recognize that it's not simply productive to demand 

someone's resignation.  That's not the answer. 

 

But our legislation is forthcoming.  And in my opinion it's not 

proper for a federal Minister of Agriculture to prejudge, 

prejudge legislation that is not prepared.  He may have been 

quoted misaccurately, but he said that he had saw the draft 

legislation, which cannot be, because there is none.  And he 

prejudged it and ordered the Farm Credit Corporation not to 

co-operate.  That was my complaint. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I get a lot of calls 

from my constituents every day -- young farmers aged 25, 35, 

40 years old in support of a longer-term tenure program -- 

farmers that have a chance of survival, Mr. Speaker, a chance 

to succeed on their farm, a chance to continue their way of life, 

a chance to keep their young family on the farm. 

 

My question is to the member from Souris-Cannington.  How 

can he agree, or does he agree, with the federal minister's 

decision that Farm Credit not participate in the Farm Debt 

Review Committee recommendations? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not exactly 

positive where or how Farm Credit has phrased their responses 

to the minister of . . . for Farm Credit has phrased his 

responses.  The Farm Debt Committee has come back stating 

that there should be a six-year leaseback. 

 

I do know, Mr. Speaker, that FCC has been providing six-year . 

. . three-year block to start off with, and then another three-year 

term.  They've been only three years per group, but they have 

gone for the six years, Mr. Speaker, depending on the 

circumstances.  Some farmers have not wanted to carry on with 

the three-year lease after that point.  They may have purchased 

their land back.  FCC in fact has refinanced those farmers that 

were in a position to do so. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- I have a question for the member from 

Souris-Cannington as well.  In his comments he was talking 

about co-operation; it's time for all governments to co-operate 

together.  And as you all remember in this Assembly very early 

in this session we had an emergency debate, and it called for a 

GRIP extension.  And it called for designing a new committee 

to take this flawed program and try to make a decent program 

out of GRIP -- we all know it's a flawed program -- but to get 

this new committee together and to call on Ottawa again for the 

$500 million third line of defence. 

My question is simply to the member of Souris-Cannington: 

why did your entire caucus vote against that motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, we did not vote against that 

motion.  We voted against the amendment as presented by the 

government side. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

question for the former associate minister of Agriculture.  I'd be 

interested in knowing why his party is supportive of Mr. 

McKnight's view that FCC should not participate in this 

legislation.  And I'd be interested in knowing why his caucus 

has not relayed to Ottawa that FCC is a major forecloser in this 

province.  And in order for the debt question to be dealt with, 

Ottawa, through the federal Conservative Party, must 

participate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that the individuals who 

have spoken earlier have indicated that Farm Credit has moved 

in that direction.  I'm not going to defend their actions in any 

way.  I just want to say that I would be prepared to take a look 

at your leaseback options. 

 

I just know that the credit unions in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, have contacted me already and told me that they are 

in serious, serious problems if what they understand in the 

leaseback program that you're initiating, that they will not be 

able to offer lending to those people on a leaseback basis.  

They will not be able to do it.  And therefore they will be in 

serious financial difficulty. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to ask the member from Morse a question.  Mr. Member, your 

amendment that you put forward basically says that you do not 

agree to farmers having security of tenure.  That's the net result.  

Mr. McKnight says he doesn't agree with farmers having 

security of tenure through a legislative leaseback program.  So 

it's obvious that even though you and the federal government 

say that you want to support farmers, that you are not 

supporting them in terms that would give them a security of 

tenure position on their farms. 

 

You ask us whether or not . . . you ask us to co-operate with the 

federal government.  And we say it's the federal government 

that has to start co-operating.  Now seeing that you've asked us 

to co-operate with the federal government, seeing that you are 

opposed to security of tenure, I have a two-point question.  

One, why do you oppose security of tenure?  The member from 

Arm River says Farm Credit already has a six-year leaseback, 

but I mean we all know that the six 

_year leaseback with the value added, or the . . . What's the 

word I'm looking for? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Equity building. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Equity building, that's right. Thank you.  The 

equity-building component is useless because all you're doing 

is giving your money away because the value of the land at the 

end of the term will increase and you're giving money away. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

The second point is, do you have any correspondence that you 

could table with the federal government encouraging them to 

co-operate with the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker I find it interesting that 

you raise the point of co-operation.  Your constituency will 

probably have the largest feedlot in the province, and it 

probably does.  You talk to me about what your Minister of 

Agriculture is doing to that feedlot in two very important items.  

One is the livestock cash advance.  That's going to cost the 

Sask Wheat Pool; it's going to cost those farmers who are 

investors in your feedlot there a whole pack of money.  Second 

point: in the feed grain assistance program, you're way out to 

lunch on that one. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what your Minister of Agriculture has 

proposed in his budget in the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

think that that's wrong.  That's why I raise the point.  Not from 

whether I agree with Mr. McKnight or don't disagree with Mr. 

McKnight.  It's the point that I don't agree with the Minister of 

Agriculture from the province of Saskatchewan cutting those 

programs that are going to diversify agriculture in this 

province. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Time's up. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I have a question . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Sorry.  Wait till next week. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 20 -- Sunset Clause on Government 

Programs 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

introduce this motion which urges this Assembly to adopt 

sunset clauses on all programs involving expenditure of public 

monies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for far too long the chain of accountability that 

extends over the spending of public monies has been too short.  

Politicians watch over the bureaucrats, but the links between 

the public and the government remain weak.  People still view 

the ongoings of government with mystery and suspicion. 

 

The time has come to open up the process much further so that 

the people know that there is regular evaluation of programs 

implemented with their tax dollars.  We must encourage our 

representatives to be more accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan by forcing them to justify their actions, their 

governing, and their management through sunset clauses.  

Allowing legislation to lapse with a sunset clause will serve the 

people of this province well, Mr. Speaker.  It will complete the 

chain of accountability. 

 

At no time has it been more apparent that we need additional 

tools, new checks and balances to ensure that our money is 

spent responsibly.  In this time of financial 

crisis, never has it been more imperative that new programs be 

successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just this session the government introduced 

programs to fight child hunger.  I commend the government for 

these measures.  But we need to ensure that four years down 

the road this program is achieving its aims and has been 

successful at wiping out child hunger.  We need to acquire 

baseline data and take the next step by implementing a sunset 

clause to complete ongoing checks and balances. 

 

Lord Renton, the chairman of the Committee on the 

Preparation of Legislation at Westminster noted that with each 

passing year a smaller number of Bills fill a greater number of 

pages in the statute books.  Acts of parliament involve greater 

spending and attempt to cover every loophole. 

 

While the volume of legislation grows, public accountability 

does not keep pace.  Mr. Speaker, although reforms in 

education do allow the residents of our province to know more 

about how government spends its dollars, governments 

continue to grow larger and more complex. 

 

Government, Mr. Speaker, should not be difficult to 

understand.  We should make every effort to ensure that we 

make this place approachable.  Only then will people have a 

chance to feel that they can influence how their money is being 

spent.  Only then will they begin to regain their faith in their 

own representation, their institution, and their programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with a sunset clause, we'll be able to give 

everyone a second chance to see that their government has 

done well.  Every parent needs to know how each child is 

progressing.  Likewise every person in this province deserves a 

report card on how their money is spent on each program.  This 

indeed would provide a way for government to act as though 

it's able to produce a report card on itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I support making government more open 

and accountable and more approachable, I also believe that we 

all should have a chance to learn from our mistakes.  

Unfortunately often the only time that we get to see how 

programs have fared is in the after-the-fact autopsy.  Only 

when governments are defeated is the public told how 

programs introduced by the previous government affected the 

public and the public purse. 

 

In some cases, programs become an entity unto themselves, 

and we've seen this kind of discussion particularly when it 

comes to federal government programs that have gone on for 

many, many years.  People actually see that these programs 

have become their own purpose for existence rather than 

fulfilling the needs for which they were created. 

 

All too often as well, Mr. Speaker, government report cards are 

shrouded by partisan rhetoric as one party condemns its 

predecessors for their incompetence or their lack of concern.  

But, Mr. Speaker, I know that everyone in this House does care 

for our province very much, and I know that we can 

demonstrate that care and 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

concern by removing this kind of cloud of partisanship most of 

the time. 

 

We can illuminate with truth instead of clouding it with 

rhetoric.  And we can analyse program spending every four 

years instead of offering a fruitless autopsy report after a 

government is gone.  With a sunset clause we can provide 

understanding where mystery now reigns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if governments must justify their programs every 

four years, the ministers will get an opportunity to learn from 

the deficiencies in the programs as well as the strengths.  

Ministers would have to analyse their programs to see if they 

had indeed achieved their goals, to see if the tools used were 

the best possible, to see if the money spent was spent most 

effectively.  Most importantly, officials too will will have great 

reason to see how their programs truly affect real people -- the 

real people who live and work in this province, the people who 

pay the taxes, and those who are most in need of the services. 

 

By having to justify programs, civil servants will have an 

opportunity to improve their own program delivery.  

Accountability will be served, and people will feel assured that 

government truly values their input, even after the Bills are 

passed.  Truth and fact will replace political condemnations 

and rhetoric, and we will be focussed on what we're all here for 

-- managing and good governing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across the world people have responded to the 

growing of government and the growing of government 

spending by creating large, effective auditing agencies.  The 

United Kingdom created the National Audit Office; the 

Netherlands has its Court of Audit.  Our own country has the 

Office of the Auditor General, while Saskatchewan has the able 

services of its own Provincial Auditor. 

 

These dedicated persons and agencies have given elected 

representatives a better chance to question the actions of 

government, but we must go beyond questioning to take 

concrete action.  While questioning and evaluation are at the 

heart of accountability, government should have to do more 

than answer questions.  The people of this province want their 

elected representatives to do more than answer questions; they 

want them to act on their concerns. 

 

As elected representatives, we can encourage government to 

take action to solve problems that surround programs.  If 

government must abide by a sunset clause, they must not only 

answer for their performance, but they will also be given a 

second chance to act. 

 

In closing, I wish to remind people that we are merely tenants 

in this legislature, that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are our 

landlords.  They indeed should have a right not only to feel 

comfortable in entering this particular edifice, but they should 

have an understanding that what we will do is to put forward 

mechanisms by which they know that there will be checks and 

balances and built-in accountability into the system. 

 

As I brought forward in December when the Minister of Justice 

was talking about the implementation of particular 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that I felt would have a long-term 

effect on the province of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Justice 

agreed that in fact it could have been very valuable to have had 

a sunset clause included in that legislation. 

 

I would like to urge everyone in this House to remember the 

great trust that's been bestowed on each of us by the people of 

this province.  Our constituents deserve to know how every 

dollar of their money is being spent.  They deserve to know 

how each program affects them as a taxpayer or a recipient.  

They deserve a system that not only allows government to 

learn its errors and from its errors, but compels it to take action 

to right each wrong. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I urge my fellow members to rise to the great 

responsibility entrusted to them and support this motion to 

introduce sunset clauses. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with great pleasure 

that I rise today to address the motion of the member opposite.  

I hear her calling upon this Assembly to urge the government 

to place a sunset clause, a four 

_year sunset clause on all new programs so that we can indeed 

be assured that they're accomplishing their intended objectives.  

That, I believe, is an honourable and reasonable thing to do -- 

to make sure that programs are accomplishing their intended 

objectives. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that the whole 

question, the vehicle that the member opposite puts forward, 

that of having a four-year sunset clause program, is a little 

misguided and facile to say the least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, the member opposite sits on a 

great many committees in this Assembly, and amongst these at 

her request are the Public Accounts Committee and the Crown 

Corporations Committee.  So quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm a 

little surprised, not to say a little disappointed, that the member 

opposite seems to have learned so little about her 

responsibilities in the seven months that she's been in this 

Assembly.  Because it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that out of all 

the many committees that function around this Assembly, these 

two in particular should be remembered by the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone as she moves adoption of a sunset clause 

on new programs. 

 

She ought to remember these two committees in particular, Mr. 

Speaker, because they are specifically mandated to fulfil the 

very purpose that the proposed sunset clause would have done 

to ensure that programs are indeed fulfilling their objectives. 

 

So we already have the vehicle in place, Mr. Speaker.  We 

don't need the kind of motion that the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone is proposing. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, not only do we have that vehicle in 

place already in this Assembly, these two committees function 

on an ongoing basis, year after year.  And they address not only 

new programs but existing ones as well.  We don't have to wait 

four years to have an analysis and an evaluation of programs. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

Further, Mr. Speaker, these two committees help to ensure that 

public monies are indeed being spent wisely and not in a 

foolhardy manner, particularly in the last six and seven months 

when we have seen active work by the Crown Corporations 

Committee and the Public Accounts Committee.  We've 

witnessed the ability of both these committees to operate 

properly and to fulfil their own intended objectives.  We will 

continue to see that over the next months and years. 

 

But the member opposite seems to have forgotten this, Mr. 

Speaker, or otherwise she would realize that her proposed 

sunset clause is not only redundant but it's a step backward.  It's 

a step back into the dark ages of the previous administration 

which saw so many government programs operate without 

openness, without ongoing accountability, and without public 

scrutiny.  And we need all three -- openness, accountability, 

and public scrutiny. 

 

(1615) 

 

So I would ask, Mr. Speaker, is this what the member opposite 

is suggesting?  That we wait a full four years before permitting 

our programs to be evaluated, just as the other members 

opposite seemed content to have done.  They waited four years.  

They would only want their programs evaluated by the general 

electorate of Saskatchewan, rather than doing an ongoing, 

consistent, and timely evaluation of programs. 

 

So I wonder, Mr. Speaker, is this the real hidden agenda 

underlying this motion before us, so that her own ideas can lie 

unchallenged by full public scrutiny?  Mr. Speaker, as you are 

well aware and as the people of Saskatchewan are well aware, 

that is not the approach from the members on this side of the 

House. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the moves that we are making towards 

democratic reform and the many changes that this government 

has already made are changes that will ensure openness, 

accountability, and public scrutiny.  These are strong measures, 

and measures that now more than ever need to be in place in 

this province as we try to grapple with the mountain of debt 

that we have been left by the previous administration. 

 

This government is doing that, Mr. Speaker, and it's a 

government that doesn't need an artificial sunset clause to be 

committed to openness and accountability.  We are constantly 

and continuously working on public disclosure, public 

examination, and public debate.  But perhaps that's not the kind 

of scrutiny that the member opposite feels comfortable with, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many problems associated with a sunset 

clause legislation.  I said earlier that I believe it's a shallow 

analysis that we're being delivered.  It is also facile and trendy.  

Some people run around and say, well if only governments 

would do this, then somehow we would solve all our problems. 

 

Quite frankly I would suggest to you that what would happen if 

we had a sunset clause in place is that we would simply see a 

bunch of bumbling bureaucrats running around trying to justify 

their own existence.  We wouldn't 

have people doing services.  We would have people simply 

analysing programs constantly. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if a program isn't 

accomplishing its objective, it should be changed or 

discontinued as soon as possible, not four years from now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Unlike the member opposite, we don't need four 

years to determine the efficacy of a program.  You know, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone constantly 

reiterates her desire to take the politics out of politics.  

However, it seems to me that this motion would do just the 

opposite.  What it's going to do is put politics into almost every 

government service we have.  The sunset clause would put 

programs in jeopardy every four years.  It would encourage 

short-term partisan programs instead of long-term rational 

ones. 

 

The sunset clause would create uncertainty for all sectors in 

this province particularly, I would think, for businesses.  They 

wouldn't know if a program was going to be changed, 

discontinued, abandoned, or what after four years.  And so they 

would have a great deal of difficulty making long-term 

forecasting and business decisions.  It would create a very 

unstable investment climate. 

 

It seems to me that sunset clauses, as proposed by the member 

opposite, would simply entrench partisanship in every 

government program.  And that is wrong, Mr. Speaker, very 

definitely wrong.  It would create uncertainty.  People would 

be stopping and looking at every government program and 

saying, what's going to happen after four years.  Maybe we 

shouldn't put any faith and hope in this program.  From one day 

to the next people would have to say, well are the government 

programs going to carry on? 

 

Unemployed people and those on assistance of any form 

wouldn't be sure if there were going to be income security 

programs from one four-year term to another four-year term.  

Seniors and retired people wouldn't be assured.  A person 

would be 61 and saying, oh my heavens, I wonder if there's 

going to be a pension program for me when I'm 65.  Nobody 

could rest assured the programs vital to their health, their 

education, or other facets of their life would exist a mere four 

years down the road. 

 

Just think of the great number of programs which need more 

than four years before they can begin to bear proper fruit -- 

things like pension plans, unemployment insurance, even 

education.  I mean is the member opposite suggesting that a 

nine-year-old child might be able to come home to his or her 

parents after four years and say, whoops daddy, I think I'm 

going to pack in it because this program doesn't seem to be 

accomplishing its intended objectives.  It's absolutely absurd. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in this motion and in the member's 

other public statements, the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

seems to be insinuating that now government spending is out of 

control and the taxpayers' money is being wasted.  And yet, 

Mr. Speaker, this same member is criticizing the government 

for many 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

cost-saving measures. 

 

In her reply to the Speech from the Throne, I note that she 

criticized us for closing the trade offices in Hong Kong, Zrich, 

and Minneapolis.  That saved nearly $2 million.  Is that the 

kind of cost-saving measure that she disagrees with? 

 

She criticized us for eliminating the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan despite the unfunded liability.  She criticized us for 

eliminating the department of Science and Technology.  I'm not 

certain why that one is so near and dear to her heart.  She 

criticized us for cutting 500 civil service jobs.  She criticized us 

for eliminating the feed grain adjustment program.  She 

criticized us for decreasing funding to the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities and to the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association.  She criticized us for 

increasing deductibles for the drug plan and for partially 

de-insuring optometric and chiropractic services. 

 

But where was the member opposite when this House voted on 

the budget?  It's easy to criticize.  This government is going to 

act constructively and co-operatively to get this province once 

again back on a sound financial footing.  You know the 

criticisms of the member opposite make me wonder just 

exactly where she would make the cuts.  She's not in favour of 

tax increases.  And indeed it seems, reading her speeches, that 

she favours tax reductions.  So you can only conclude that 

somehow she's an advocate of voodoo economics.  Now you 

see it; now you don't. 

 

And one of the members on the government side says, yes she 

is looking for more grants for her caucus.  I'd like to address 

that one because it does seem to me it's time that the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone made up her mind.  Do you want to 

save money or do you want more money for yourself?  It's very 

easy to sit back and give the government self-righteous lectures 

about what you think should be happening, but at the same 

time it is important to take a look at one's own personal 

behaviour and to try to be consistent. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone seems to think that 

she's the only one who cares about this province or can ever 

have a brilliant idea.  Well let me tell you, she's wrong.  Just 

because she's sitting over there by herself without a caucus, 

without anyone to be accountable to, without anyone to temper 

the individualistic, unrealistic attitude of individual greed that 

seems unfortunately to have permeated some aspects of this 

province doesn't mean that all members of this Assembly are 

afflicted with the same notion of rugged individualism that she 

would have us have. 

 

The member opposite stands here and self-righteously lectures 

us.  And it is so hypocritical.  And as an example of that 

hypocrisy, I would point, Mr. Speaker, to the demand put by 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone to have the taxpayers of 

this province hand her over more money for her own individual 

partisan cause. 

 

She's demanded that this Assembly pay her another $175,000 

in funding.  She's already receiving a basic $38,000 in salary as 

a member, plus per diems for sitting 

in this Assembly, plus a travel allowance, plus a telephone 

allowance, and an office constituency allowance.  As well she 

receives nearly 70,000 additional in support funding, plus an 

additional 51,000 . . . the support funding for your constituency 

office plus an additional 51,000 in additional research support 

as recently approved by the Board of Internal Economy. 

 

And yet what does the member opposite say as well as 

demanding that we implement sunset clauses on programs?  

She says, give me more money.  What does she need more 

money for?  Does she have any greater needs than any other 

member in this Assembly?  I would say no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's an attitude of greed that is inappropriate in 

this province at any time and particularly now as this province 

is facing such grave financial difficulties. 

 

I'm tired, Mr. Speaker, of the tele-evangelical approach taken 

by the member opposite.  She lectures us in this Assembly on 

the evils that she sees in our budget -- a budget that is designed 

to protect the future children of this province.  And then she 

turns around and demands more funding for herself.  I want the 

member opposite to know she can't have it both ways.  She's 

promoting the appearance of moderation and indulging in the 

luxury of irresponsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to wrap up my remarks.  I want to 

mention that we need ongoing programs, but we do also need 

continuous evaluation of programs.  We need to ensure that we 

have fiscal responsibility in this province.  It's been something 

that's been sadly lacking over the last nine and a half years.  

We will now as a New Democratic government, bring back 

fiscal responsibility.  We will have continuous monitoring of 

our programs.  We are not going to limit it to simply a shallow 

four-year evaluation. 

 

So I would like, Mr. Speaker, to move the following 

amendment, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton.  The amendment is: 

 

 That all words following "Assembly" be deleted and replaced 

with the following: 

 

 commend the government for engaging in continuous 

monitoring of all programs involving expenditure of public 

monies and amending or discontinuing programs only when 

the need arises. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The members are well 

aware that the new rules do not require seconders and therefore 

I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

only going to make a short few remarks so I'm sure there'll be 

time for the member from Prince Albert to get 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

on his feet in this debate. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I see a great deal of merit in the 

motion as proposed by the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  

And I'm really quite taken aback, Mr. Speaker, to stand . . . to 

be in this legislature and hear the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood, a newly elected member, lecturing the rest of the 

members in this legislature on the merits of the Public 

Accounts Committee and the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until 1982 the Public Accounts Committee in this 

legislature wasn't even open to the public or the media.  It was 

all behind closed doors.  In 1983 finally people were allowed to 

see exactly what was going on in there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the merit that the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone talks about is not the fact that you simply apply 

sunset clauses to government legislation, it's the fact that in 

most jurisdictions where it is used, it works in conjunction with 

the existing institutions, and it works quite well. 

 

(1630) 

 

I remember very well, Mr. Speaker, back in 1975 when the use 

of sunset clauses was part of the PC Party of Saskatchewan's 

election platform.  And the very same reaction took place from 

New Democrats across the province when sunset clauses were 

talked about.  And the reason for that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 

that these people have this terrible urge to be sanctimonious; 

that only New Democrats know how to govern people 

properly; that only New Democrats, who have brought the 

biggest government in our history upon the taxpayer of this 

province in the 1970s, know how to govern people properly; 

that only large Crown corporations staffed by thousands of 

people, the family of Crowns, can govern and provide services 

to people properly; that the most civil servants that this 

province has ever had in its history were with the New 

Democratic Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that attitude was personified in this legislature 

today by the member from Saskatoon Wildwood, a brand-new 

member in this legislature who sat and lectured all of us of how 

wonderful New Democrats were; that they would use the 

existing institutions and that not one taxpayers' dollar would be 

wasted. 

 

Well that member should review those wonderful institutions 

during the '70s and just see exactly how the taxpayers' dollar 

was protected by a New Democratic Party government who 

believed that big was better no matter what as long as the 

government was in control. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the idea that the member from Greystone 

has put forward in this legislature is that as the Government of 

Saskatchewan goes through the process of changing from 

accrual . . . or from cash in to accrual basis of accounting, that 

we will be making significant changes to the way the 

government operates in this province, that we will be going 

through government section by section by section in order to 

achieve that end. 

The government has stated that they are going to take the 

recommendations of the Gass Commission -- 40-some of them 

-- and apply them to the workings of government.  At the time 

you are doing that, it would make sense I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

to take sections of existing legislation, existing programs and 

apply sunset clauses to them.  They work in other parts of the 

world where people aren't quite as sanctimonious as the 

members of the New Democratic Party in this province.  They 

seem to work well. 

 

It means that besides your existing institutions where members 

and indeed the public are allowed to view the expenditure of 

public monies, that you automatically at the end of a given time 

-- and it doesn't necessarily have to be four years -- go through 

a review process.  It is a well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, in the 

British parliamentary system that programs tend to take on 

longevity because of the election periods that are necessary in 

the British parliamentary system, because of personalities, 

either through the minister responsible or the bureaucrats that 

are in charge of that particular agency. 

 

And we have example after example after example.  The 

federal Auditor General has gone through programs.  I believe 

he found payments made to buildings since the Second World 

War just a few years ago that were in munitions production and 

arms production because programs were not sunsetted.  And in 

fact came through with a recommendation that they bring in 

sunset legislation at the federal level so that programs cannot 

take on a life of their own, that bureaucrats cannot take on a 

life of their own, and people that believe in big government is 

better cannot take on a life of their own and foist that on the 

taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many examples.  A classic one in our 

province done under New Democratic Party government, done 

under PC government, and I believe done under Liberal 

government, is the whole question of international aid.  It's a 

question that is bandied about in this legislature every couple 

of years to the level of international aid -- should it be more or 

should it be less; is the delivery system proper; are the people 

at the other end getting the bang for their buck. 

 

It's a classic example, Mr. Speaker, of an area that should have 

sunset regulations attached to it.  It isn't in the public's eye 

every day, but it's there when we in this province are cutting 

back dollars to agriculture, when we are cutting back dollars to 

the point that farm families may go out of business because of 

government moves. 

 

I think it's only fair that before we send dollars overseas that 

there would be some type of regular review taking place 

instead of simply the minister each year looking how to fix the 

line item in the budget.  That is a prime example, Mr. Speaker, 

and there are many more items that simply have taken on a life 

of their own that any reasonable-minded person would say it is 

important to review. 

 

And I would say to the member from Saskatoon Wildwood: 

stick around here a little while, attend your Public Accounts 

and your Crown Corporations meetings 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

and realize that they aren't the be-all and the end-all no matter 

how diligent the members are; that there are opportunities for 

us as legislators to regularly review certain aspects of the 

things that we do. 

 

We can put the partisanship aside in certain things and I think 

come up with some pretty reasonable solutions.  If it's good 

enough for the federal Government of Canada and the Auditor 

General, if it's good enough in many countries around the 

world that have similar democratic systems as our own, then 

surely to goodness we in Saskatchewan should at least look at 

it, review it, and not think that we're so darn smart; just because 

we happen to be a New Democrat, that we don't need to look at 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it was really unreasonable of the 

member to propose that amendment.  What the member did 

with that amendment was simply try to wipe completely off the 

slate of debate in this legislature the idea of having sunset 

legislation or clauses attached to government issues.  And I 

think that is an awful, small-minded, partisan approach to an 

issue such as this. 

 

If this government is truly serious -- truly serious -- about 

reform, about changing the way that the taxpayers' dollars are 

accounted for in this province, then they would have not had 

that member stand on her feet today in this legislature and 

absolutely out of hand reject -- reject -- any mechanism that 

will save taxpayers' dollars in this province. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, shame on the member for absolutely 

rejecting mechanisms which maybe philosophically don't sit 

well with her party, but maybe common sense-wise appeal to a 

lot of people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it's appropriate that the member 

for Saskatoon Greystone be supported in at least bringing the 

idea forward.  That it be discussed, and that we have some 

ability to take this issue, at least discuss it further, and look at 

the options available to us.  And not simply reject it out of 

hand.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I will be brief, Mr. Speaker, because there is 

another motion which I would like to have the members speak 

on this afternoon.  But I do want to make a couple of 

comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's very interesting to see the Tories opposite join hands with 

the Liberals on a sunset clause, and together hand in hand, walk 

off into the sunset and fade away completely on a mission that 

is completely dogmatic and seems to have no practicality onto 

it whatsoever. 

 

The essence of the motion, the substance of the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, was well spoken to by my colleague, the member 

from Saskatoon Wildwood.  She pointed out that putting into 

place some definite time that a program should be evaluated 

and fade out is not a practical thing to do, but instead you 

should be monitoring on an ongoing basis.  All programs which 

involve public expenditure and public monies should always be 

subject to amendment or discontinuation whenever the 

government sees that the need arises. 

 

And that is a position that we are taking, Mr. Speaker.  And 

that is the position that I want to endorse as well.  And because 

we would like to proceed on to the next motion, Mr. Speaker, I 

now move that debate on this motion adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 21 -- Established Programs Financing 

Freeze 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on a motion 

that is having serious impact on my constituents and the 

citizens of this province.  At the end of my speech I will move 

a motion to the effect: 

 

 That the Assembly urge the federal government to end its 

three-year freeze on established programs financing, which 

has seriously impaired the province's ability to provide 

education and health services to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has recognized that 

federal standards for health and education require federal 

funding.  But the federal government has been decreasing 

funding as they are off-loading to this province. 

 

Let me first give a brief history of what has happened to this 

funding.  Prior to 1976 this funding was provided through a 

cost-sharing arrangement in education and health.  In 1976-77 

cost sharing gave way to the current EPF (established programs 

financing) program -- a non-conditional transfer of funds to the 

provinces.  These funds are collected by tax points and cash 

transfers. 

 

The basic problem with EPF as a revenue source for provincial 

health care and education funding, it is in continual decline 

with no sign of improvement.  The eventual outcome will be 

that with the end of cash transfers, EPF funding will become 

solely dependent on income tax revenue. 

 

In the 1991 federal budget, a three-year freeze on EPF funding 

was imposed.  This was in addition to an already two-year 

freeze which in fact has resulted in a total freeze of five years. 

 

The losses in established program funding due to federal 

unilateral changes to the plan, have and will have, a serious 

impact on education and health services in this province.  

Saskatchewan has lost millions of dollars of federal funding 

since 1986.  In 1990-91 Saskatchewan lost $111.2 million; 

'91-92, 149.8 million; and for '92-93 an estimated loss of 

$247.7 million. 

 

The federal government will now be paying only 38 per cent of 

the province's expenditures on health and post-secondary 

education.  This is a very significant drop when one considers 

that as of 1976 the federal government was still responsible for 

50 per cent of spending in these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have established what has been happening to the 

EPF funding -- a continual decrease in funding 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

from the federal government.  This federal off-loading has 

serious impact on our programs in this province.  And not only 

has the federal government off-loaded in EPF funding, we have 

also seen off-loading in agricultural programs by 218 million, 

and other programs by 51.2 million.  The federal off-loading on 

Saskatchewan for '92-93 is estimated at over $500 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this off-loading has serious impact on the citizens 

of our province.  Just earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I spoke of the 

co-operation of federal and provincial governments in funding 

the emergency command post for the communities of 

Bengough and area.  Federal-provincial co-operation can 

produce positive results. 

 

Why then are we seeing this federal government, on the other 

hand, withdrawing its responsibility to health and education 

funding?  The impact of over 500 million less dollars in federal 

funding to our province is critical.  If not for federal 

off-loading, our budget would have been balanced.  Ottawa is 

abdicating its responsibility to vital social programs like health 

and education.  Ottawa's failure is hurting Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but in spite of this off-loading, in health care we 

are moving towards the wellness model.  And within our 

limited financial resources, we are launching new initiatives to 

enhance wellness and prevention.  These measures reflect our 

commitment to community-based, community-driven health 

care founded on wellness and prevention. 

 

(1645) 

 

But at the same time, we've had to make some difficult choices, 

choices that no government wants to make.  There is no joy in 

raising the drug plan deductible, and there is no joy in reducing 

funding for chiropractic services and optometric services.  

There is no joy in reducing third-party funding to school boards 

and hospitals.  But, Mr. Speaker, these choices are part of the 

result of less federal funding to the citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Bengough-Milestone, I 

have visited hospitals and nursing homes who are willing to 

adapt to the wellness model.  And in fact many have been using 

several of the principles of wellness already.  They are 

budgeting carefully and are working hard to run their facilities 

with cost efficiency and yet meet the needs of the patients that 

they serve.  Many of these communities on their own initiative 

have raised money to add equipment to their facilities as their 

funding is limited.  They have concerns about maintaining 

adequate staffing levels.  For some of the facilities there are 

waiting-lists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, federal off-loading has put a greater burden on 

our provincial health care system and the citizens of our 

province.  With proper federal funding, the options we faced 

would have been different.  We could have looked at 

strengthening and improving our drug plan, optometric and 

chiropractic services.  The school-based dental program could 

have been implemented more fully.  The need for improvement 

of facilities and 

equipment of many of our health care facilities could have been 

addressed.  Mr. Speaker, health care must be a priority of both 

federal and provincial governments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I now want to take a brief look at 

education.  As a teacher, a parent, and a member of this 

legislature, I cannot emphasize enough the value of quality 

education for our children and citizens of this province and this 

country.  As never before, we must have a well-educated 

society in order to meet the challenges facing our country 

today.  The federal government would jeopardize our position 

if funding is decreased. 

 

The performance of our education system gives us a barometer 

of the kind of future we as a province and a country can expect.  

When our schools succeed we all succeed.  Our schools, our 

teachers, and our citizens are meeting increasing demands.  We 

know now more than ever learning is a lifetime process.  As a 

teacher I know the value of resource-based learning and the 

need for ongoing curriculum development. 

 

But resource-based learning can only be implemented if we can 

afford to equip our resource centres and teachers with the 

necessary materials.  Our curriculum development has had to 

be slowed down because of budget restraints.  In my 

constituency the school divisions are conscientiously trying to 

maintain a high quality of education within tight financial 

restrictions. 

 

Schools have made tough choices too.  Some have closed.  

There's amalgamations have occurred.  But the communities of 

our province know the value of education, but they must 

wonder if the federal government does. 

 

The facts and figures of the federal government tell us one 

story on the off-loading that they've done -- $517 million story 

this year alone.  It is a sorry tale.  But, Mr. Speaker, if we only 

speak in those abstractions, if we talk only in numbers, we can 

miss sometimes the real impact that this is having on our health 

care and our education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me now talk about my university, the 

University of Regina.  Compared to most universities in 

Canada, it is new.  Most of its buildings were built in the 

1960s.  But they're having problems.  There's a lot of 

deterioration happening. 

 

If you walk down the hall from the library to the laboratory 

building on a rainy day, you will get wet.  And that walkway is 

inside, Mr. Speaker.  You will also have to walk around all of 

the wading pools and tin cans the staff must put out to catch the 

drips.  Funds for wading pools but not for proper maintenance.  

That's the plight of the university and that's the consequence of 

underfunding.  Jokes can be made about leaks in the roof and 

they are. But, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing funny about the 

inevitable deterioration in the quality of education caused by 

underfunding. 

 

My degree is in science.  To study science properly, students 

need adequate equipment in order to conduct proper research.  

In order to teach their students, faculty 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1992 

needs the proper tools.  Notice I said adequate and proper -- not 

elaborate and not extravagant.  At our university the tools of 

the scientist are rapidly becoming shop-worn and outdated.  

You can't teach the scientists of the 21st century with the relics 

of the Diefenbaker era.  Increasingly, that's what the university 

is being forced to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are dozens of other details which tell the 

same story.  Class sizes are increasing, which means less 

individual instruction; library materials are being slashed, 

which means poorer scholarship; materials are being rationed, 

which means fewer hand-outs to the students and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you, I, the other members of this Assembly who 

are fortunate enough to have secondary training, we were all 

provided with the best instruction, the best tools society could 

provide.  We were privileged as were Canadians of our 

generation right across this country. 

 

One major reason we were given the best education possible is 

because the governments of the day believed in federalism.  

They understood that the citizens of this great land could be 

best served through the co-operative efforts of all levels of 

government.  With cost sharing, citizens of wealthy and of less 

wealthy provinces could be provided the same educational 

opportunities and the same quality of health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sadly, what was given to us, what we rightfully 

assumed was our due as citizens of Canada is no longer true.  

The Government of Canada is penalizing my children, all our 

children for being born at the wrong time.  Mr. Mulroney with 

his five-year freeze on EPF is not just off-loading on the 

provinces; he's off-loading on a whole generation of children.  I 

find that incredibly short-sighted, and I find it despicable. 

 

The members opposite often blame us for our budget decisions.  

Our decisions must be put into the context of a province driven 

to the edge of bankruptcy by the previous administration and to 

a federal government who has off-loaded its responsibility in 

EPF funding. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is important to know how the provincial 

Tories felt about this decrease in funding.  How did the former 

premier represent us, the people of Saskatchewan, when the 

Mulroney government imposed the current transfer payments 

scheme?  Did the member from Estevan stand up for 

Saskatchewan and the vital programs in health and education in 

this province?  Did he protest this decrease in funding affecting 

every citizen of our province?  And I'm sad to report the 

answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 

 

And in matter of fact it was widely reported that he played the 

role of advocate and conciliator during the crucial 

federal-provincial negotiations; that the former premier 

sympathized with the Prime Minister's desire to reduce transfer 

payments in order to attack the federal deficit.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, in fact that the former premier had some praise for the 

Prime Minister and at one stage told Mulroney, keep up the 

good work.  Keep up the good work, as education and health 

and other vital services will receive less federal money in the 

province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

I challenge the former premier and the members opposite to tell 

that to the health boards, the school boards, the universities, 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology), and other post-secondary institutions of this 

province which are facing very difficult decisions because of 

restricted funding. 

 

The members opposite are quick to criticize the tough decisions 

we've had to make in the areas of education and health.  If they 

truly care about the people of this province, I challenge them to 

join us in support of this motion, put the political games away, 

and fight for the people of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because I believe in the concept and the 

practice of federalism, because I want my children and the 

children of this province to have the same educational 

opportunities and health care that we have enjoyed, and 

because I believe the present federal government is woefully 

abdicating its responsibility, I move the following resolution: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to end its 

three-year freeze on established programs financing, which 

has seriously impaired the province's ability to provide 

education and health services to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I see I've only got about five minutes left.  

That usually isn't too long for me, Mr. Speaker, but I'll try to 

make some relevant comments. 

 

I'm pleased to have the opportunity to rise in the House and 

support the member from Bengough-Milestone.  It is important 

that the people of Saskatchewan realize that the federal 

government has abdicated the responsibility that it has for 

transfer payments to this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the off-loading of the federal government on the 

province of Saskatchewan has resulted in a loss of $668.8 

million since 1976.  This puts a severe strain on Saskatchewan 

to meet the needs of the health care system and our educational 

system.  The most recent freeze combined with the reduction 

means that the federal government will now only be paying 39 

per cent of costs to education and post-secondary, and it used 

to be 50 per cent.  This decline is of significance to a province 

like Saskatchewan who is experiencing severe economic 

conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I refer to the future educational plans.  I 

believe that the way we must compete in the global village is 

by having a highly trained and skilled work-force.  We will 

attract investors if we have the workers to fill the high-tech, 

modern needs.  As we have seen, throwing money at 

megaprojects has not been successful.  Proportionately our tax 

dollars were not used properly.  What we need is a highly 

trained and educated work-force.  So to secure proper training 

and education for our future needs, we must spend more on our 

education system, not less. 



May 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

For obvious reasons, post-secondary education funding should 

be financed by both the provincial and federal governments.  It 

makes me sad to see the province of Saskatchewan losing out 

due to an insensitive Tory federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have provided well-trained, educated people 

to many provinces in Canada.  Saskatchewan people are 

recognized all over North America as excellent workers -- 

versatile, well-trained, and tenacious.  We are sad to see our 

taxpayers loaded down with taxes to pay for something the 

whole country benefits from. 

 

Folks in my constituency are trying to consolidate and make 

the health system more efficient and effective.  The 

Lloydminster health care boards are working with both the 

Saskatchewan and Alberta governments to amalgamate under 

one board. 

 

So I guess my time is up, Mr. Speaker, but I would like to 

support the member from Bengough-Milestone and I would 

like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


