




















































Hansard: August 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2231 

 August 11, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would 

move that we would move to government business, Bill 87, an 

Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

question 49, I hereby provide the answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to questions put by members, 50 to 

59, I would ask that they be converted to motions for returns 

debatable. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 40 -- Consultations on Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The members of 

the government seem to be expressing some concern that we 

wouldn't want to dwell on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) issue this morning, but this issue, while it is not in the 

same area as GRIP on the surface, is certainly of as much 

importance to those people that it concerns as the GRIP Bill is 

to those people which it concerns. 

 

There are some dynamics involved, Mr. Speaker, in the labour 

industry today that need attention.  If, as the members of the 

government probably would realize by now, if there was 

concern about the breaking of contracts and that kind of 

problem with the GRIP Bill, other sectors of our society are 

seeing the very same kind of situation developing in the labour 

Bills and labour approaches. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it requires a bit of 

time for us to discuss with the government today the reasons 

why they should consult more effectively with the labour 

industry in our province.  The employers as well as the 

employees have very many concerns about the direction that 

government might take in their proposed changes to the labour 

legislation. 

 

The draft Bill, I guess we would call it -- I think the 

government members referred to it as a working paper on the 

matter of the constitutional changes under law -- this draft Bill, 

one which we tabled in this very Assembly ourselves for the 

government after it was leaked, because of fears from people 

within the union structure that it would in fact cost them many 

of the jobs in the province, will probably in effect become the 

basis of the new Bill.  That's what white papers and that's what 

draft Bills are all about.  They're the foundation that you build 

from. 

And if you see things within it that are troubling or not going to 

assist the industry positively, then you have to work very hard 

to get them changed before in fact the government brings them 

in and introduces them into law. 

 

That reality was recognized by many people within the 

structures of the construction industry, and the labour people 

within our province through the unions themselves have seen 

that there are some really big problems that could develop if 

this Bill were to be passed as it stands in its original draft. 

 

And so what these folks have been saying, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we've got to get together, sit down and talk for a while.  We've 

got to talk for a while about what's in the Bill and what effects 

it will have on individuals, as well as society as a whole. 

 

There are some tremendously big things that could happen 

within the structure of this Bill, and they need to be talked 

about.  Things like driving your folks who want to hire 

contractors across the borders, looking for contract companies 

to come in and do the work within our province.  And if that 

would happen, our own labour force could sit idly watching 

people from outside the province come in and grab up their 

jobs. 

 

And of course that would be devastating for the entire 

province.  That would be devastating for our tax base.  It would 

be devastating for the individuals trying to make their livings.  

Families no doubt would have to sell their homes and move out 

of this province again. 

 

And it just seems to compound the problem, Mr. Speaker, that 

we've seen happening in Saskatchewan over the past few years 

with the recession on.  This type of legislation would have the 

effect of deepening the recession in our province.  And there's 

absolutely no way that we can justify going along with a Bill if 

it's going to deepen the recession within the province.  We have 

to oppose that and we have to oppose the process.  And so in 

that opposition, Mr. Speaker,  what we are saying is that the 

only resolution to this situation is if we have meaningful, rather 

lengthy, and very intense negotiations and consultation with 

people from all segments of the province that will be affected 

by this potential legislation. 

 

Now the proposed changes to the labour legislation is causing 

concern to a great majority of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, and the concern is over the NDP's (New Democratic 

Party) lack of consultation on this issue.  We need only take a 

look at letters sent to the Premier in this regard, and of course 

in the normal flow of common respect for the political process, 

copies of these letters are also sent to our office, and so we 

have had a chance to read them and to study them in some 

length. 

 

A letter which spurred the Premier to finally meet with the 

business people is here in my possession.  And the letter very 

clearly outlines how frustrated the business community is with 

this government -- frustrated because they have not received 

equal time in their attempts to discuss the situations that are 

involved with this Bill. 

 

I have a copy of the letter, and I think in all fairness that I 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

should read a little bit of it so that the members of the 

government can be reminded they may not in fact have had the 

opportunity to read this, as it was addressed to the Premier.  I'm 

not sure how their caucus handles these things.  It is addressed: 

 

 Dear Mr. Premier: 

 

 The following Saskatchewan business organizations have 

recently met to share and discuss our serious concerns about 

the economic future of our province.  All of us share 

concerns about the need for a co-ordinated vision of the 

economy of Saskatchewan.  We need a positive climate to 

maintain existing jobs and help create new employment and 

investment.  We have all been frustrated by your 

government's "consultation" process to date and the lack of 

balance in recognizing the vital role of our private wealth 

creating sector in a mixed economy. 

 

 We feel that the need for a joint meeting with you at this time 

is extremely timely and urgent.  We need to meet with you 

before some very sweeping new Act amendments are passed 

this session, before your government releases its Discussion 

Paper on an Economic Development Strategy, and before 

your full Cabinet meets in your fall long-range planning 

conference. 

 

 We are very anxious to work with you and your Cabinet 

colleagues in partnership, not in confrontation.  However, the 

business community is feeling . . . overwhelmed and 

frustrated by your government's legislative agenda and we 

must discuss this privately and immediately. 

 

 We would be pleased to arrange such a confidential meeting 

in an appropriate location. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this letter was dated on July 28, and we're 

very happy to say that a very short meeting was arranged with 

members of this group.  And there were in fact some 

discussions that were held, and those discussions appear to 

have been somewhat productive.  Because just as we have been 

saying ever since this Bill came into our hands some time ago, 

consultation is absolutely essential. 

 

And the reality of that being right is proven by the fact that 

after just a very brief meeting the other day with the Premier 

and a few of his group, it was reported in the newspaper now 

that the Premier is suggesting that there be some consultation, 

or in fact that the legislation might even not be passed at this 

particular summer session, that it may be held over.  So that 

shows that exactly, Mr. Speaker, what we have been saying is 

the right direction that we have to go. 

 

And what we're saying today is that we have to have more 

consultation.  That was a nice start to have that short meeting, 

but it can't just end there.  These folks are going to have a lot of 

input because, facing reality, this Bill covers a tremendous 

amount of ground within the structure of how our society's 

going to develop over the next four years until this government 

is replaced.  And we 

can't just look forward to the concept of replacing the 

government in four years.  We have to look forward to the 

potential of having anything left in the province at all 

worthwhile governing. 

 

If you have a draft Bill that becomes law and that law forces all 

of the labour people in the province to sit idle while other 

provinces come in and take up their jobs, and they in effect are 

caused to go broke and lose their homes and have to move out 

of the province, then in four years time we won't have very 

much of a population base or a structure of a labour force left. 

 

And so we've got to be very careful here, Mr. Speaker. And I 

caution the union folks to look at this as well, because it could 

be killing the goose that lays the golden egg.  And if you 

eliminate your job, what good is it to have a raise?  And that's 

the thing that folks have to kind of take a hard and serious look 

at here.  It's all well and good to negotiate to get a better 

condition at the work place, but if in fact your work place is 

eliminated, it's all for naught. 

 

And so we have to be very careful that we go into these kind of 

meaningful negotiations on an honest basis with folks 

genuinely willing to bend both ways.  I'm not just saying that 

everything in the past would be right, because times change.  It 

may in fact be necessary for us to update a lot of these things to 

bring them into the time frame that we live within.  But if we 

go too fast or if we go too far, we could in fact destroy more 

jobs than what we are attempting to create and the stability for 

our working people could in fact be lessened instead of 

broadened. 

 

(0915) 

 

I just think that I should read for the record, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the people that were involved in the letter that I quoted to 

you so that the people of the province as well as government 

will have an understanding that this is not just a handful of 

people that are represented here. 

 

We have first of all the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce.  

Now that's the entire group of chambers of commerces' 

organization for the entire province of Saskatchewan.  That's a 

big body of people, Mr. Speaker.  It represents many, many, 

many people -- thousands of folks. 

 

And we have the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business.  They are again a tremendously large organization 

that represents a very big group of people that are very, very 

concerned about the implications of this Bill. 

 

The Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association.  

Unfortunately here we have an organization that is somewhat 

depleting in size because of the very nature of the recession 

that we have, not only in the food production industry but in 

the recession as a whole throughout our province.  But they're 

hanging on and they're very concerned about this legislation, as 

well they should be, and they do still represent a fairly 

significantly large number of people. 

 

Now the next one we have on the list was the Hotels 

Association of Saskatchewan.  Here again this is a rather 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

unique group of individuals, but they represent just about every 

town and certainly all of the cities within our province.  And 

the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that they represent themselves as a 

very significant and reasonably large group, but they also 

reflect an awful lot of public opinion, Mr. Speaker, because 

these are the folks that deal on a day-to-day basis with a lot of 

people that come and go throughout their inns and stay for the 

nights and for weeks at a time in some cases.  And they see an 

awful lot of people coming and going, a very big cross-section 

of our society. 

 

And these folks are very concerned about the lack of 

consultation in this process of introducing this draft Bill.  And 

they certainly want to see us take a long and careful and 

deliberated look at making changes to the draft before it does 

become law because they feel, I'm sure -- as everyone in this 

letter has indicated -- that without consultation we will end up 

with a Bill that will in effect do more harm than good for our 

province. 

 

And in all fairness, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the government's 

intention is to try to destroy the province with this Bill or any 

other.  I think they genuinely had hoped that it would be of 

benefit.  Unfortunately they got caught up in the rhetoric of the 

election fever where the bigger unions in our province backed 

the government of the day in their attempt to get elected, and 

there was a feeling of some need to pay back those union folks 

for their assistance and their help in the quest to attain 

government. 

 

Now that's fair ball that you want to help the folks that have 

helped you.  I feel that way about my friends too.  But in the 

situation of government, it doesn't quite play out in that 

scenario.  It happens to be that in the role of government, you 

can't just help the people that helped you unless you take a look 

at how it's going to affect the rest of the people around.  And 

what we're saying here is that we have to consult with the 

people that are going to be affected because if we don't do that, 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, a lot of folks will be hurt and hurt 

seriously and economically in a very adverse way. 

 

So we've said to the government that they should take some 

time, talk to the folks, get their pencils sharpened back up 

again, get some notepads out, go through this Bill clause by 

clause, sentence by sentence, and word by word, with each one 

of these groups collectively in conferences, and perhaps even 

individually in private meetings, and do it and do it right, and 

do it with an open mind, with an open heart, and with 

consideration to how you're going affect all of the people that 

are involved. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association have also 

signed this.  Now there's another significant group of people in 

our province.  The home builders, of course, are often times 

accredited with being the catalyst to an economy.  Home 

building seems to be the part of our measuring stick within our 

society that tells us whether or not recessions are serious or 

whether they're less serious or, in fact, if we happen to be 

coming out of one. 

 

I'm not sure how that got to be the measuring stick for a lot of 

people to use, but it is in fact that way.  We often hear on the 

news media, Mr. Speaker, when the recessions are 

being talked, about folks will get on the media and say, well, 

home building has gone up by 3 per cent or 4 per cent.  And 

everybody gets a big smile and says, yes, it looks like we're 

pulling out of the recession. 

 

And of course, if the next two months down the road it 

suddenly goes down by minus 2 per cent, everybody gets a big 

frown and says, oh, this is really getting tough. 

 

So this is an important segment of our society and, of course, 

labour legislation has got to affect the people involved with the 

home builders because they do employ such a large number of 

people.  And of course, there's an awful lot of spin-off dollars 

that goes into our society, so it make eminent sense that we sit 

down and talk to these folks before we draft legislation that's 

going to affect their entire role within our economy. 

 

We then had the Canadian Petroleum Association, and again 

here is an association that employs a lot of people through 

various methods and at various levels.  Thinking of the 

petroleum association, Mr. Speaker, you can think of jobs all 

the way from the surveying and exploration and from the 

searching for of the product, oil and natural gas, to begin with, 

and you've got people then that go out and actually do the 

drilling of the wells and discover the products.  You've got the 

development of those wells, you've got the development of the 

collection systems, and then after that, the distribution systems.  

And so they employ just thousands of people within our 

province.  It's one of our bigger industries as well. 

 

I suspect that close to the production of food, the petroleum 

association, while it doesn't have a whole lot of companies that 

belong to it, it does in fact account for a tremendously large 

part of the economic base of this province and provides many, 

many thousands of good-paying jobs throughout our province. 

 

For example, out in my community, an awful lot of the farms 

would no longer exist if the farmers hadn't had the opportunity 

to be able to work for someone associated with the petroleum 

association and supplement their farm incomes.  In fact, it's 

almost come to the point where most of the farms out our way 

are hobbies and everybody else works at some other job to 

make their living.  And that's unfortunate, but it's a fact of life. 

And the petroleum association certainly has to be involved in 

any kind of meaningful negotiations with regard to a Bill that is 

going to change labour standards within our province. 

 

Even though the Bill might be touted as being directed at the 

construction industry, the reality is that any Bill of this nature 

will have a spin-off effect into all other segments of our 

society.  No question about the fact too that it could encourage 

the adoption of further Bills and further amendments.  And so 

it's better to start right at the beginning and get everybody a 

chance to look at it and have their input before it gets put into 

law, than to make a law and then try to change it in retrospect. 

 

It just simply never is easy to get an amendment changed once 

it becomes law.  Maybe that shouldn't be quite so difficult, but 

in fact it is the reality of life that we've seen in the development 

of our political process. 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Now we also, Mr. Speaker, had the Independent Petroleum 

Association of Canada sign this letter, and they of course are 

expressing the same views as the rest of the petroleum interests 

of our province would be expressing.  And they certainly need 

to have the government take a long, hard look at this legislation 

before it becomes law. 

 

We then had the Regina Chamber of Commerce.  Now you 

have to admit right out front, members of the government, that 

the Regina Chamber of Commerce would not be here asking 

you to consult with them if they didn't have some very serious 

concerns about what this Bill was going to do to the city of 

Regina and to the economy of the city of Regina.  These people 

represent the entire business community of the city of Regina, 

I'm sure.  They have some major conferences that are reported 

on a regular basis and they take positions on the development 

of our economy and the development of the direction of the 

city here in Regina as well that of the entire province. 

 

And their views are certainly necessary and should be taken a 

long, hard look at before any legislation that concerns the 

labour force in our province goes into effect.  I expect that in 

the city of Regina, probably the labour force is very, very 

significant in terms of numbers, and obviously by looking at 

past situations within our province, that seems to be the fact, 

that the labour group is large here and very important to the 

structure of this city. 

 

We also have the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce expressing 

their opinion through this letter of wanting more negotiations, 

Mr. Speaker, because there too a big city with a large base of 

labour-oriented people looking for legislation that will give 

them fair play and the ability to have jobs.  They, I think, have 

recognized the reality that this Bill, while it could be intended 

to assist unionized workers, might in fact be hurting them more 

than it is helping them, if in fact it is written in such a way as to 

become a detriment to the maintaining of jobs and the 

maintaining of construction business. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those folks have some real concerns.  And 

they want to talk to the Premier and to the ministers in charge 

of this Bill and to the cabinet people who will make the final 

decision.  They want to talk to them and they want to go over 

this Bill.  And I think they should have that right to do that. 

 

And that's why we, as a member of the opposition caucus, 

decided this morning that while the GRIP program is extremely 

important to all of us on this side of the House, this issue, as 

well, needs some time of this Assembly to be discussed and to 

have the points made that this piece of legislation is also 

important to many people of our province, and that it too needs 

to be considered.  And there has to be meaningful consultation 

with the people involved before it becomes law. 

 

We don't just run on one law in this province, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

a fact that we are controlled by probably many hundreds, 

possibly even thousands of different laws that are on our books.  

And many of them while they are more important in terms of 

effect than others, many of them have a direct influence on our 

lives. 

This particular Bill happens to be a rather big type of a 

consequence on the folks of Saskatchewan and the people that 

live in our province.  It potentially, I suspect, could rank about 

second to the effects that the GRIP Bill will have on the people 

of our province in terms of what we've been dealing with in 

this particular session.  The potential for this Bill to cost 

thousands of jobs in the province is definitely there, and that's 

what has gotten people excited to the point that they have 

written this kind of a letter to the Premier and have done some 

very extensive lobbying with the Premier and with the cabinet 

to try to get them to take a long, hard, second and third look at 

this whole proposal before drafting it into a final Bill. 

 

We also have the Saskatchewan Construction Association and 

that too, Mr. Speaker, is a very large group of people that have 

expressed a lot of concern about the fact that they need to 

consult with the folks involved in government decisions before 

any final draft Bill has been put together.  The Saskatchewan 

Construction Association represents hundreds of people and 

thousands of people's interest in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and they certainly have to be listened to very carefully. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that now that we have had a chance 

to get this process started in terms of having the government 

take a second look, that there will be significant changes to this 

Bill if these kinds of consultations are allowed to go on. 

 

The Saskatchewan Mining Association, also very concerned, 

signed this letter and they too are concerned about the potential 

of this Bill. 

 

Now we've got everything from mining to construction and 

chambers of commerces, all of these segments of our society, 

showing an extremely worrisome attention to the fact that this 

Bill was drafted and started into the process of becoming law 

without what they had considered to be meaningful 

consultation and an opportunity for them to put their thoughts 

and views in front of the decision-making process. 

 

The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce was the last group 

to sign this letter, Mr. Speaker, and I think all together that 

looks like about seven on there and 10 . . . 12 different groups 

and organizations representing almost every segment of our 

Saskatchewan economy.  They have signed this request for 

meaningful consultations with the members of the government 

before making this a law. 

 

And there are other people who probably are still going to be 

asking for some input as well as these people, Mr. Speaker.  

Because the reality is that the food production industry -- and 

while I don't see them directly through any of their 

organizations on this particular sheet of paper -- certainly it as 

well has a very big interest in how labour legislation is going to 

affect the province of Saskatchewan.  And so I think that 

having any opportunity to be included in these kind of 

negotiations, those folks would certainly want to be at the table 

as well.  And there are many, many others. 

 

(0930) 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

Now we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where I guess the 

minister in charge of Labour probably thought that he would 

get some professionals to write up a Bill.  He possibly threw 

some ideas at them.  But on the other hand, he may not have 

bothered.  And either way, we have to jog his mind and we 

have to take that time this morning to get him to listen to the 

concept that he has to do more meaningful negotiating with the 

folks that are involved.  And he has to consult with them and 

get their input into this Bill before in fact it becomes law. 

 

The rush meeting that was held may have quietened these 

groups for the moment, Mr. Speaker.  But these people will be 

expecting to see more of these kind of meetings with, as I've 

pointed out, more lengthy deliberations.  These people, Mr. 

Speaker, are reasonable people, and they will not forget that the 

Premier has made somewhat of a commitment to them.  And 

even though it seems like a long time until the next election, I 

would caution the government not to take lightly the needs and 

opinions of these folks that are involved in this request for 

consultation.  Because these are, as I've said, the backbone of 

the economy of Saskatchewan and they're not the kind of 

people that will forget easily.  They expect to see an NDP 

economic plan for Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe that that's so very important, Mr. Speaker.  It's not just 

that they want to talk about this particular Bill at this time.  

These people see the need to press even further and ask for the 

government to present an economic plan for the development 

of our province throughout the future. 

 

We seem to be swimming aimlessly, like a swimmer perhaps 

caught in the middle of Lake Ontario and losing his directions 

and not having a boat around to assist him; he may flounder 

and start to swim one direction or the other but he's got three 

chances out of four of going wrong.  And that seems to be the 

way our Saskatchewan economy is drifting around in circles at 

the moment. 

 

We don't seem to know which direction to go or which 

direction we should go, and that has to come down to a lack of 

an economic plan of direction for our province by our 

government of the day.  We have to have the government sit 

down and talk to these folks, consult with them, talk to them, 

and get an idea of which direction this province should go. 

 

There are a lot of decisions that can be made by a government 

that can assist in the economic development of a province.  I 

think I've said it before, Mr. Speaker, and I'm going to say it 

again, that the decisions made by government are the ones that 

will not just start the direction that you're in today and solve the 

problem tomorrow, it's got to be sort of you go this direction 

and you achieve something way out there that's rather aloof.  

Sometimes it takes three and four years to develop a direction 

of an economic plan to a focus point of where you're trying to 

get to in terms of development of jobs, in terms of developing 

an economy. 

 

One of the reasons that this province has always gone into 

recession ahead of the rest of the country and come out of it 

last is because we are connected to the basic production 

industries of food and natural resources. 

These are the primary elements and they get affected always 

first in terms of recessions when they set in.  But the reality is 

that if you set an economic plan, a direction, you can bring 

yourself out of recession with the rest of the country or ahead 

of it, and we have failed to do that. 

 

This is the kind of consultation that the folks that have signed 

this letter would be talking about, Mr. Speaker.  There is no 

question in my mind that this is the kind of economic 

development that these kind of folks would be wanting to have 

the government discuss and set up a plan for.  If you don't set 

up a direction of where you're going to go to to get there, it'll 

never happen. 

 

These folks are very concerned.  They want to consult with the 

government.  They want to give their input.  They have a lot of 

ideas.  I'm not sure that they would all work, of course, but 

there's bound to be, in a think-tank of that calibre of people, 

some ideas that would come forth that could in fact bring us to 

a point where we might not only be a province that wouldn't go 

into recession first always, we might be the province that 

would go into recession last in the next round if we have some 

economic developmental process within our province. 

 

And instead of coming out of the recession last, we might be 

the first one out for a change.  Not in this particular round, of 

course, because we're solidly into this recession and it will take 

some time to get out of it. But . . . Not a whole bunch of time, 

I'm sure, but it will take time. 

 

But we could set that direction as a future goal, and that's why 

these people want to consult with the minister in charge.  And 

they want to give their opinions and their ideas and do it in a 

meaningful way through this Bill and through the process 

connected to this Bill.  And while they're doing that, they 

would take that one step further and develop some kind of an 

economic strategy for our province. 

 

I had an opportunity to speak to an individual who took part in 

the trade union review commission, Mr. Speaker.  Some of the 

union proposals sent in were shocking, to say the least.  And I 

expect that they might have come from the leadership more 

than from the rank and file.  I realize that the present 

government owes organized labour a huge favour, but to 

impose its desire without proper consultation would be 

extremely disruptive to this province's economy and to the 

small-business sector. 

 

I suggest it would also have a serious impact on the bigger 

businesses in our province as well, but the reality is that 

Saskatchewan is based more on smaller businesses than on big 

businesses.  We often hear the administration and the people 

surrounding the present government speak adversely about 

multinational corporations and big business, and they do that, 

saying that they are of course bad for us and all that. 

 

But the reality is that we don't have a whole lot of influence by 

those kinds of companies in our province.  Most of our 

business is done by small-business men who don't employ a 

whole lot of people within their one little business structure.  

So most of our concern has to do with the smaller business 

sector in our province. 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

As I understand it, the first big fight the trade union review 

commission had to deal with was the Act's name.  And there 

was no way that the Act's name will be changed. 

 

Now I don't know why anybody would be hung up on the name 

of an Act.  It just seems to me that if you wanted to change the 

name of an Act to make it more receptive to people, that ought 

to almost be the easiest thing that anybody could do.  There are 

many words that have the same types of meanings, the same 

types of direction in their description.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I 

quite frankly can't see why we should have started out on the 

wrong foot over something like that. 

 

So I'm saying that today let's sit down, government members 

and folks from these industries and from business, and talk 

about these things.  And do it meaningfully, with some 

flexibility.  Don't just dig in and say, this is the way it's going 

to be; my way or no way; if you don't play by my rules I'm 

taking my marbles and going home, kind of attitudes.  Those 

kinds of things won't work in today's society.  We'll have to 

have some meaningful discussion. 

 

And I'm glad to see that members of the government are now 

taking some note of what we're saying.  I was worried that 

maybe I was talking on deaf ears.  But they're taking some 

notes now, Mr. Speaker, and I'm happy to see that they are 

listening. 

 

The folks from the entire construction industry will be happy to 

take note of that fact, and while they can't observe this through 

the media, they will obviously be happy to hear me say and 

report that in fact members of the government are now taking 

some note of this discussion.  And hopefully that will end up 

with some meetings being organized where people from the 

construction industry and business around our province will be 

invited to go through this Bill on a line-by-line basis with the 

minister and his colleagues. 

 

Now as far as the unions are concerned, it is their Act.  They 

feel that it's something that is being done for them and it will 

remain union legislation, even though it affects employers as 

well as employees.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is where 

consultation is so extremely important, because this can't just 

be a law for one side.  Even though the labour unions may feel 

that the government owes them a debt as a result of their 

participation in the election, in all fairness, when this 

legislation is drafted it's going to affect not just the union 

people but it's going to affect everybody in our society. 

 

And so they have to back off of that attitude that this is just 

being done for them.  It has to be done for all of the people in 

Saskatchewan.  They have to share that role and they have to 

share that limelight, if that's what it is to them.  If they feel that 

they need for this government to do something special for them 

and if this is it, then that's fine.  But it can't just be done for 

them alone.  Otherwise, as I've explained earlier, they could 

end up killing the goose that laid the golden egg.  And in fact, 

they might have legislation that gives them all of the powers 

and rights that they want, when in reality what it does is lose 

the very fabric of our economy, lose the job, and winds up with 

no one having any job at all. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is the way it's going to be, and the 

unions won't even allow for consultation and they want to do 

this in a kind of a ramming-through way, that won't be too 

good for anybody.  And if that is the amount of co-operation 

that we have to look forward, it is frightening.  Because the 

labour unions represent the workers of our province, and they 

are extremely important. 

 

After all, how much work could you get done if there was no 

labour force there to do the work?  These folks are extremely 

important, but their co-operation is also extremely important.  

One side is not more important here than the other.  And I don't 

want to leave the impression when I picked on the union 

leaders that I'm trying to pick on the rank-and-file workers that 

belong to the unions, because obviously without them we'd 

have nothing in our society either.  And they must know that, 

and they must be proud of the fact that without them, our 

society cannot operate. 

 

I think we could operate better if we got rid of some of the 

union leaders some days, but then that's just a personal opinion.  

And I think sometimes maybe the rank and file ought to 

examine their leadership a bit more closely, especially when 

they come forward with concepts like, let's push through a 

piece of labour legislation that isn't consulted by all of the 

groups involved. 

 

Now the people actually want to eliminate an employer's option 

to diversify, in their request to the minister.  And that can't 

possibly happen, Mr. Speaker.  If we eliminate the rights of 

individuals and small business to diversify, in this province 

especially, we certainly would be in a lot of trouble. 

 

Now the legislation apparently is dealing with the needs of the 

union bosses to want anti-scab legislation to make it illegal to 

hire replacement workers.  Now I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is out of my personal scope.  I have never belonged to 

a union that where . . . As you realize, I'm sure, things like the 

farmers' union and those types of things that I as an agricultural 

food producer would have been involved in in my life, we've 

never had anything to do with this type of labour situation.  

And so I can't possibly say that I could understand the 

frustrations that the workers have when there's strikes and 

when there are anti-scab types of movements and those kinds 

of frustrations. 

 

And I guess because I haven't got a personal understanding of it 

from personal experience, I would say that here then 

consultation before a Bill is passed that would affect these 

areas is absolutely, extremely important because part of the 

people may be like myself and don't really understand what all 

of the implications involved would be.  And if you don't 

understand what all of the implications are, how could you 

make a meaningful or anywheres close to a right decision. 

 

The folks involved with this type of legislation are going to 

have to take the time to explain themselves to the people that 

don't understand it.  I suspect that the minister himself may not 

have ever belonged to a major union.  The minister having a 

law background, I'm quite sure has 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

never been attacked by scab legislation; he's never been 

replaced by outside workers. 

 

(0945) 

 

And I don't suspect in reality, Mr. Speaker, that this individual 

would have any more knowledge about what is going on in this 

Bill in this area than I have.  And if he doesn't, then he owes it 

to the people of this province to consult with those people that 

do know what's going on and have an understanding of how 

this process works. 

 

That's why we have to take some time, Mr. Speaker, today to 

discuss with the government the need for taking a second look 

at this whole process.  The Premier did suggest the other day 

that he is thinking about pulling this legislation for this session.  

And I want to take the time today to encourage him to do that.  

I think that would be the proper thing for him to do. 

 

I think if he's serious in that direction, serious in that thought 

line, he ought to do it.  Pull it off the order paper totally.  Take 

it right back to square one.  Start some meaningful negotiating 

processes.  Perhaps start them this fall in October when the 

busier season of the construction industry starts to wind down.  

Because we do have a lot of seasonal work in our province -- I 

think that's recognized the world over -- because of our climate. 

 

And so the meaningful consultations can only take place when 

the majority of the people involved have the time and 

opportunity to be able to get involved directly into these kind 

of talks, and have the time to put together their homework; 

have the time and the resources available to be able to take 

leave from their business activities and go into a board room 

and sit down and discuss these matters. 

 

They may have to find some outside expertise.  It was 

mentioned in this Assembly that other provinces have 

legislation along this line.  I see nothing wrong with calling in 

some folks from Manitoba and Alberta, or even Quebec for that 

matter, or maybe somebody from the American trade union 

bases; or the other side of the coin, the business communities in 

the United States.  Bring some of those folks in, have them 

make some presentations of explanation as to what has 

happened in their jurisdictions, how the legislations that they 

have work, or where they perhaps fail.  If you're going to pass 

legislation that's going to affect as many people as this 

particular Bill is going to affect, Mr. Speaker, I think you have 

to take the time, and yes, spend a few dollars paying some 

folks with some expertise to come in and give us guidance. 

 

I've always said, you know, if things are so good in Alberta, 

why don't we do it like they do in Alberta, and why don't we 

consult with folks over there?  So then people say, well we 

kind of know what's going on and it costs a lot of money and 

then we sort of don't do it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's time we did it.  It's time we 

talked to other people.  It's time we got out there and find out 

what's going on in the real world around us and try to make 

things better by their experience. 

 

We also had some suggestion that they wanted the 

Labour Relations Board to impose an agreement if a contract 

dispute exists.  What Labour Relations Board want . . . rather 

the Labour Relations Board to have the power to interfere in 

collective bargaining processes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here again I can't possibly see how a union 

group would justify asking the government for that.  And if 

they did ask for it, I seriously would say to them that they 

ought to reconsider that position because the whole structure of 

the union concept is based on collective bargaining.  That's the 

one thing that almost everyone agrees is the benefit of people 

getting together and forming unions for.  The reason they do it 

is so that they can bargain collectively and get fair play for 

their workers. 

 

It's even the concept that I personally believe is good.  And yet 

if they would bypass that, then they make themselves nothing 

but powermongers attempting to dictatorial control the labour 

industry.  And so that's almost a two-way street.  You may end 

up having to form unions within the unions to collectively 

bargain against your union leaders after a while because they 

would set themselves up in a mafia-style control mechanism.  

And that certainly cannot be allowed to happen in our province. 

 

It's just simply not acceptable and we have to preserve that 

right of people to be able to collective bargain freely and 

openly in a positive way.  And I'm sure that those are the kinds 

of things that will be brought out, Mr. Speaker, if these 

negotiations and consultations are allowed to continue. 

 

The SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) alone presented 

61 changes that they want to see in the legislation.  Now that is 

a lot of changes in a province where a lot of us, I guess, 

thought that labour relations weren't really all that bad.  Now 

certainly there are some instances that have gone by where 

folks haven't been very happy.  And, you know, there's always 

those kinds of situations. 

 

But in general, in general when you look around the world and 

watch the late-night news in our province, we've had an awful 

lot less labour problems than just about any place else in the 

world.  Life is not really in the fast, fast lane in Saskatchewan, 

but we happen to be on a pretty solid and safe road.  And I 

think, metaphorically speaking, Mr. Speaker, that life really 

hasn't been all that bad in Saskatchewan for the majority of 

people, as compared to a lot of the other countries in our world. 

 

And the result of that, even though we're into some extremely 

difficult times right now and have been for the last four or five 

years, the result of that long-term kind of stability that we've 

had is that we have produced a rather peaceful society, a rather 

safe society.  Now you might not think that if you parked your 

car on Albert Street and had your window broken by a rock 

some day -- that happened to a member of my family, 

incidentally, not too long ago -- and of course that might sway 

your thinking for a little while. 

 

But generally speaking, compared to the rest of the world, we 

live in a rather safe society here, a rather comfortable 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

society.  And if we can get our economy turned around and get 

out of this recession, we can build this province into the best 

place in all of the world to live -- the safest, the soundest, and 

yes, we can be on that high, fast road to success and happiness 

for most people. 

 

There are always going to be exceptions, and I know you'll 

always be able to dig up some instance of where somebody's 

hurting or somebody's being given a bad deal.  But in all 

fairness, we've got a good foundation here.  And for the unions 

to suggest that labour legislation is so badly outdated, so badly 

archaic in our province that it needs 61 changes in one fell 

swoop, done by a strong mandated government without 

consultation, that to me is an insult to our province and to the 

development of our province.  There certainly aren't that many 

big-time problems here that we have to change the entire 

legislation without anybody being talked to, without anybody 

else's input. 

 

And as I've said earlier, Mr. Speaker, this cannot be a one-sided 

program or situation.  This has to be a give-and-take proposal.  

We've got to have all sides of this . . . life in this context has to 

work in that metaphorical circle where people all contribute 

equally to the rotation or evolving of society around us.  And 

we certainly have to have those consultations if one side is 

going to start suggesting those kind of massive changes and 

wanting it done in an arbitrary manner. 

 

Apparently there was even a presentation by the Grain Services 

Union, and they want to unionize all the domestic and farm 

labour.  They want a sectoral bargaining, and of course this 

would probably be a bit of an outrageous proposal at this 

particular time because we can't just throw our whole society 

into a totally new concept without having tremendous spin-off 

effects. 

 

This is the type of situation, Mr. Speaker, above all other 

things, where we have to gradually evolve into a system that is 

workable, because you're bound to make some mistakes and 

you're bound to have some things go wrong and you have to 

change them gradually and slowly.  Otherwise you will have 

such serious repercussions that too many people get hurt and 

the economy itself might be destroyed in the process. 

 

I expect that there would be an awful lot of concern -- not only 

through the food production industry at the producer level, at 

the farm-gate level -- if in fact the grain services unions were to 

come in and be allowed to unionize all of the workers in the 

domestic and farm labour forces.  This has got tremendous 

implications for our province.  All of these areas that have 

never been unionized before, if they were suddenly to be flung 

into a forced situation of having to become unionized members 

in one fell swoop, would certainly disrupt and upset the 

economy of our province beyond recognition. 

 

I'm not saying that this will never happen; I'm saying that there 

is a tremendous amount of reluctance to have it happen at this 

time.  And even though it may happen some day, it certainly 

shouldn't happen without meaningful consultation by all of the 

people and principals involved in the process.  So we draw 

your attention once again to this need to consult with people 

before you take the advice of one side or the other, no matter 

how much you owe to that one side. 

 

And of course again I will allude to the fact that there are some 

union leaders out here who believe in our society that this 

government owes them something.  If you owe them 

something, you will probably feel a need to accommodate that.  

But do it without destroying the economy of the entire 

province.  Do it without destroying the jobs themselves for the 

basic needs of our province and for the basic needs of the 

individuals involved. 

 

The ordinary worker on the street can't afford to lose any more 

jobs in this province.  We are a job-poor province, in spite of 

some of the statistical data that we've been shown in the last 

few days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's a bit of a deceptive type of use of figures, the way we throw 

these averages and numbers around.  At the moment we can 

take some pride that our province has the lowest percentage of 

unemployment in terms of numbers that compare with the rest 

of the provinces in the country.  But the reality is that 

unemployment numbers are really up as compared to last year.  

But then your job force increases by numbers and the whole 

thing becomes a mishmash of figures being used to prove 

whatever point that you want to prove. 

 

And so it's little comfort to the 8 or 10 or 12 per cent of the 

people in a city like Saskatoon that don't have a job and can't 

find one to know that we have the lowest numbers in the 

country.  That would be little comfort to me if I were sitting 

around doing nothing and had no way of earning an income to 

feed my family or to educate them.  And I'm sure that their 

feelings are exactly the same. 

 

So that's not just good enough, is to say that, well compared to 

the bad, we are the least of the worst or anything like that.  

That's not good enough.  We've got to try to find ways to bring 

more jobs to our province, and this legislation won't help to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people that are involved in signing this letter that I 

showed you today, those folks are definitely, definitely 

concerned, and they want to consult, they want to get their 

input put into this whole process, they want to help the 

government to find ways to develop an economic long-term 

strategy, they want to help the government to find a way to 

diversify our province to bring in more jobs. 

 

These are the people that are genuinely concerned with the 

direction our province goes and with the way that the economy 

of our province is going to develop.  And they want a bigger 

job market for people that need work.  And they're willing to sit 

down with the government and discuss these things and talk 

about them and give their suggestions and their opinions.  And 

I think that's the opportunity that they should be availed, Mr. 

Speaker, without question. 
 

And the process could be started now and worked on through 

the winter.  I can't see the world coming to an end if this 

particular draft legislation weren't passed by next year.  I really 

can't see that the province of Saskatchewan would stop in its 

tracks at all.  We do have labour legislation in the province that 

keeps things going at the 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

present time.  And we can work on this draft for six months or 

a year with meaningful consultations and develop it so that it in 

fact can give us the direction that we need to go. 

 

It's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the business community fears 

this legislation, because it was put together one-sided.  Only 

one group had any input into it.  And of course, with this draft 

having been leaked -- and I suspect it was done so deliberately 

because they needed to have some input into it -- with that draft 

being the basis, it was no wonder that there would be a lot of 

fear and a lot of concern.  And I'm not surprised at all that the 

amount of pressure that was exerted is in fact being exerted to 

have some consultation before the rest of this package is put 

together. 

 

It's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the official opposition wants 

to take a hard look at this sort of thing, because we've had an 

awful lot of approaches by the construction industry, by the 

entire provincial base of our economy, to assist them to bring 

to the attention of the government their genuine needs and 

concerns. 

 

And just to reinforce our argument with the government that 

they should give this matter more consideration, we have many 

other letters that we have received from various sectors.  And I 

just want to read little bits of them to reinforce our argument 

with the government that they should give this more serious 

consideration and not just say well, one meeting is enough, 

now we'll ram it through. 

 

(1000) 

 

The "Business sector airs grievances with Romanow," and I'm 

quoting from the Saskatoon paper here.  And it goes on: 

 

 Saskatchewan business is "overwhelmed and frustrated " by 

the government's legislative agenda and says there is no 

apparent plan for economic renewal. 

 

Now that's pretty serious stuff, Mr. Speaker.  And that sort of 

headline has been going on for quite some time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you 

and to the Assembly I would like to introduce Mr. Jim 

Gunningham who is the director of education for the 

Eston-Elrose School Division.  Mr. Gunningham at one time 

was the director of education down at the Oxbow School 

Division.  I'd like to welcome him to the Assembly and ask all 

the other members to welcome him also. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Boyd: -- With leave, for the introduction of guests as well. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

welcome Mr. Gunningham to the legislature this morning.  Mr. 

Gunningham worked long and hard for the situation with 

respect to the radon gas in the Eston school and the people of 

Eston and area certainly appreciate all his efforts in that area.  

So welcome to the legislature this morning, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 40 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was going to just 

read a few of the excerpts from some of the letters and from 

some of the media that has been going around in the last little 

while here, because I think it's important that we, at this point, 

reinforce our argument with the government that they should 

carry on with the consultation before introducing the final draft 

of this labour legislation.  More meaningful consultation has to 

mean more than just one meeting, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

reinforce that argument for you by the comments that are being 

made by a lot of people. 

 

It says here, "Labor Act excludes the majority,"  and I will 

quote here from . . . now this one is from the Leader-Post, not 

the Star-Phoenix.  The Leader-Post says here: 

 

 Organized labor's demand for what it calls "fair-and-open 

tendering" by the provincial government is perfectly 

understandable.  The problem arises when you examine what 

labor actually wants. 

 

 There is no doubt that during the 1980s, the labor movement 

took it on the chin in this province.  The former Devine 

government came to power believing 11 years of NDP rule 

had tipped the labor-management balance in favour of labor.  

It quickly set out to reduce the power of unions in the 

province. 

 

 One of the changes was to eliminate legislation governing the 

construction industry that had been established by the 

previous Blakeney government.  It had required 

provincewide bargaining in the various building trade sectors 

and forbid the practice of what is known as 

"double-breasting", where union contractors form spin-off, 

non-union companies. 

 

 The Tory government believed that by opening the labor 

market to non-union contractors, competition would be 

enhanced.  As well, the end to provincewide bargaining 

would allow local economic conditions to become a greater 

factor in the bargaining process. 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

 Naturally, the changes by the Devine government were 

bitterly opposed by the labor movement.  And not 

surprisingly labor is demanding the NDP government bring 

back a new construction industry labor relations act similar to 

the one under the Blakeney government. 

 

 One of the primary tools labor is using to win public support 

is this call for "fair tendering." Implicit, and explicit, in the 

campaign is the message that tendering was not fair under the 

Tory government. 

 

 On the surface, labor's case seems to be built on the 

double-breasting issue.  It argues that by allowing spinoff 

non-union companies, union workers are shut out of jobs by 

their own union contractors who create non-union companies 

and bid on jobs. 

 

 But in fact, the issue goes further.  What the building trade 

unions and the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor are saying 

is that all major government contracts should be tendered 

only to union companies. 

 

 (Now) the union case was stated in a pamphlet handed out on 

an information picket line recently and the same case was 

made Friday in a demonstration on the steps of the 

Legislative Building. 

 

 "In spite of the NDP's announced pro-union policy, SaskTel, 

SaskPower and other Crowns have now awarded major 

construction contracts to the non-union sector.  This merely 

continues the legacy of union-bashing and corruption left by 

the previous government. 

 

 "Crown corporations have a responsibility to further the 

public good.  At no additional cost, by encouraging union 

work the Crowns could help ensure good pensions, 

comprehensive health and welfare benefits, safe and decent 

working conditions and a real future for Saskatchewan 

workers." 

 

 This is a fascinating argument that tells you a great deal 

about organized labor's priorities.  It is based on the 

traditional labor doctrine that, by definition, the public good 

and what's good for labor are indivisible. 

 

 In this case, what labor wants is effectively a union 

monopoly in the labor market.  If major government 

contracts, and by extension sub-contracts, can go only to 

unionized companies, it means non-union companies and 

their workers will be shut out. 

 

 And what does that mean? 

 

 In Saskatchewan it means the vast majority of working 

people would be excluded from work by their own 

government. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's an extremely important sentence to 

note.  It says, and I will have to repeat this just to make sure 

that the folks on the government side take note of this: 

 

 In Saskatchewan it means the vast majority of working 

people would be excluded from work by their own 

government. 

 

 According to the Labor Department, in 1991 one-fifth of the 

total workforce, or 103,647 people, was unionized.  Of that 

unionized total, less than 30,000 -- or 28 per cent of all union 

members -- work in the private sector.  If you extrapolate 

further, that means about 5.6 per cent of the labor force in the 

private sector is unionized. 

 

 A logical labor response to these figures would be that the 

low numbers of people in a union is proof the labor 

movement needs to grow to improve the condition of wage 

earners. 

 

 But a national poll conducted by Angus Reid for the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business last year found 

that the highest level of job satisfaction was in small, 

non-union businesses.  It also found that 56 per cent of 

employees in businesses of (let's see now) 50-299 employees 

did not want to be in a union. 

 

 The point here is that there is no social justice when 

organized labor expands its argument against 

double-breasting to demand that people who work for 

non-union companies be excluded from government 

tendering. 

 

 If the provincial government was to adopt that kind of policy, 

it would be aggressively discriminating against the vast 

majority of working people in the private sector, who do not 

belong to a union. 

 

Now it goes on to say that: 

 

 That is not to say that the building trades are not right to 

demand "fair-and-open tendering." Everyone believes it 

should be exactly that.  After all, we're talking about public 

money. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that kind of summarizes a whole lot of the 

kinds of things that the people that signed the original letter 

that I read this morning are saying, that it reinforces their claim 

that consultation could not have taken place.  Because surely, if 

the union leaders are demanding that the government pass a 

Bill that in effect would cost the majority of Saskatchewan 

people not to be able to work for its own government, then it 

has to be a one-sided argument.  And that one-sided argument 

leads to the conclusion that we have to have meaningful 

consultations with those people of the opposing views in order 

to get a balance in the legislation.  And that is what we're 

seeking, Mr. Speaker, more than anything. 

 

We're not trying to stop this Bill from ever being passed or 

from the amendments being done in some way.  But what we're 

saying is that we want it to be done with a balance. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

We want a balance that will allow people to have fair and open 

tendering.  We want a balance of the labour force being able to 

in fact continue to work in Saskatchewan.  We want more jobs 

for Saskatchewan people.  Those are the kinds of things that we 

as an opposition want. 

 

And we want the government to take the time to listen to the 

other side of the story from those people who may have even 

differing views than ours.  We're not saying that they will 

necessarily . . . all of the people that signed this letter will 

necessarily say and want the things that we will agree with.  In 

fact they may even come up with a Bill in the end that 

promotes some of their ideas that we would be opposed to.  

And we might in fact even at that time have to oppose some 

parts of the Bill. 

 

But at least it will be a balance through consultation, and we 

would have to, at least if it's done in that process, concede that 

everybody's had a fair and open opportunity to have input. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I have to wind my remarks up 

because there are some of my colleagues that are going to want 

to discuss this matter in some depth and they want to have 

some input in this as well because it is such an important and 

crucial issue. 

 

I hope that the members of the government have taken enough 

notes and have considered enough what we have said this 

morning so that in fact they will pull this Bill, not introduce it 

this session -- that's what we are asking for.  Bring it back in 

after meaningful consultation.  And once they have done that, 

next year if they bring it back in, then we won't be probably in 

a position to argue so strongly to have it held off. 

 

I do want to move a motion, Mr. Speaker.  The original motion 

resolution no. 40, moved by myself, the member from Maple 

Creek.  It'll be seconded by the member from Kindersley.  And 

the motion is: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the government to engage in 

genuine public consultations before introducing labour 

legislation that infringes on individual rights, in particular 

removing the right of individual workers and employers to 

voluntarily choose their own collective bargaining options. 

 

It'll be dated the 11th, 1992, and I will sign it now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think it's 

important that I just go over that motion again for us.  I'm 

pleased to be able to speak to the motion and second the 

motion from my colleague, the member from Maple Creek: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the government to engage in 

genuine public consultations before introducing labour 

legislation that infringes on individual rights, in particular 

removing the right of individual workers and employers to 

voluntarily choose their own collective bargaining options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that motion is an absolute excellent 

motion.  I think it goes to the very heart of the issue 

surrounding labour legislation and all things associated with it. 

 

The New Democrats, the NDP Party, Mr. Speaker, in an 

election campaign promised an open and honest government, a 

promise to consult with various interest groups before 

proposing new legislation.  They made that promise, Mr. 

Speaker.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are beginning to see the other side of this government -- a 

government, Mr. Speaker, that makes promises during election 

campaigns to get elected with absolutely no thought to carrying 

out those promises. 

 

(1015) 

 

Mr. Speaker, they promised to set up a review committee to 

review labour legislation.  And they did do that.  And they did 

do that.  And to the credit of the Minister of Justice, that seems 

to be one thing that he's very good at, is setting up committees 

to come up with predetermined results, predetermined results, 

Mr. Speaker.  That's what they did. 

 

They set up a committee.  That seems to be the only area of 

competence that this government has, is setting up a committee 

to come up with predetermined results.  And that's what 

happened in this case as well, I believe.  I believe that's the 

case, Mr. Speaker.  And the Justice minister, he may not agree 

with me, but I believe that's the case. 

 

Union-only contractors, Mr. Speaker, union-only contractors 

come up with the idea that union contracts should be the only 

thing in this province.  Is that any big surprise, Mr. Speaker?  Is 

that any big surprise to the people of Saskatchewan that union 

contractors would suggest that union-only contracts are the 

way to go?  That's like saying, Mr. Speaker, to the board of 

governors of the National Hockey League, that we don't think 

that there should be another hockey league set up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm absolutely surprised, I'm surprised that 

anyone could say anything different, that union-only 

contractors would suggest that.  Naturally they're going to 

suggest that, Mr. Justice minister, naturally they're going to 

suggest that.  And naturally this government is going to follow 

those recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a government that had the support of unions during the 

last election, and now those unions, Mr. Speaker, are looking 

for their pay-off.  They're calling in the marker, Mr. Speaker, 

that's what they're doing -- calling it in. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, one only has to look at the marker, 

as I call it, just look at the electoral financial contributors to the 

NDP over the last election.  And it's open to anyone.  Anyone 

can get a copy of it.  We have a copy of it.  Anybody in the 

general public's allowed to have a copy of it.  Just write to 

Elections Canada and they'll send you one.  Interesting little 

piece of information that every person in Saskatchewan should 

just have the chance to peruse it a little bit.  Union after union 

after union contributing thousands to hundreds of thousands of 

dollars to the NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

And not only that, I took the time as well in my constituency to 

ask for the list of contributors for the various parties, Mr. 

Speaker.  And what do you find?  And I suspect that my 

constituency is no different than any other constituency, Mr. 

Speaker.  What you will find is not only lists of financial 

contributors that unions have put into the NDP Party, but you'll 

find lists of workers that worked on behalf of the NDP that 

were union people, Mr. Speaker.  There were six in mine, six 

Ontario union workers worked the Kindersley constituency.  

And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they worked hard, they worked 

hard.  They worked literally night and day in Kindersley to try 

and elect an NDP candidate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think . . . I'll just give you one short little illustration of 

the kind of work that they did.  And whether they are aware of 

it at all, Mr. Speaker, it was incredible the kind of tactics that 

they went to to try and elect an NDP candidate, Mr. Speaker.  

I'm sure . . . this is relevant, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with the 

kind of pay-off that the labour legislation . . . the reason why 

we see this labour legislation being brought forward is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have a sign corridor set up 

that the people of the various political parties are authorized 

through law to put up signs all over the place during the 

election campaign.  The two other parties, the Liberals and the 

Conservatives, respected, respected the rights of the property 

owners in the Kindersley constituency.  We only put up signs 

where we were asked and were given explicit instructions to 

put them up on the people's property. 

 

Well, the NDP, they didn't pay any attention to that.  The union 

organizers out of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member detailed 

discussion of what happened in the last election on that issue of 

putting up signs has really nothing to do with the debate that is 

before us.  Referring to it, fine, but detailed discussion of that is 

not relevant to the discussion that is before us. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it only 

illustrates the kind of support and the reason why this labour 

legislation is being brought forward.  They showed no respect 

at that time for property owners, Mr. Speaker.  And now they're 

showing no respect, Mr. Speaker, for non-union contractors in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The proposed labour legislation is causing a great concern with 

business organizations in this province, Mr. Speaker.  This 

government promised that they would consult business 

organizations.  They made that sweeping promise in the 

election campaign, that they were going to be open and 

accountable, going to consult people all over the province on 

any issue and every issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet now we see, in the last few days, a letter from business 

organizations all over the province to the Premier, appealing to 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker, appealing to the Premier to keep his 

promise with respect to labour legislation in this province. 

 

The letter dated July 28 to the Premier of the province: 

The following Saskatchewan business organizations have 

recently met to share and discuss our serious concerns about 

the economic future of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're concerned about this kind of labour 

legislation.  They're concerned particularly about a government 

that does not want to consult with business organizations. 

 

 All of us share our concerns about the need for a co-ordinated 

vision of the economy of Saskatchewan.  We need a positive 

climate to maintain existing jobs and help create new 

employment and investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are concerned.  They're deeply concerned.  

They have business interests here.  They employ thousands of 

people in this province.  They want to stay in this province.  

They want to work in this province.  They want to employ 

people in this province. 

 

 We have all been frustrated by your government's 

"consultation" process to date and the lack of balance in 

recognizing the vital role of our private wealth creating sector 

in a mixed economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the labour legislation that is being proposed by 

this government has been put forward without consultation.  

Oh there was a small little committee of union people set up to 

sort of . . . I would say give the impression to some that there 

was consultation. 

 

But was there genuine consultation, Mr. Speaker?  I don't 

believe there was.  And I don't believe that the people that are 

represented on this letter to the Minister of . . . or to the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan -- I think they agree 

with me: 

 

 We feel that the need for a joint meeting with you at this time 

is extremely timely and urgent.  We need to meet with you 

before some very sweeping new Act amendments are passed 

this session, before your government releases its Discussion 

Paper on an Economic Development Strategy, and before 

your full Cabinet meets in your fall long-range planning 

conference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don't believe there was consultation.  They 

don't believe that there was any consultation whatsoever.  The 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce says there was no 

consultation.  The Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business says there was no consultation.  The Prairie 

Implement Manufacturers Association says there was no 

consultation, Mr. Speaker.  The Hotels Association of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, says there was no consultation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Home Builders', no consultation; Canadian 

Petroleum Association, Independent Petroleum Association, 

Regina Chamber of Commerce, Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce, Saskatchewan Construction Association, 

Saskatchewan Mining Association, Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

Mr. Speaker, one can only wonder who they did consult with.  

I'm not sure how many people that these various groups would 

represent, Mr. Speaker, but I'm sure it would number into the 

thousands, tens of thousands of workers in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  Tens of thousands of people in Saskatchewan that 

their representatives, their representatives say never had the 

opportunity to consult with this government with respect to this 

labour legislation. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, this government says that they were 

going to be open and honest and consult with various interest 

groups all over the province.  Have they done that?  No, Mr. 

Speaker, they absolutely have not done that and have broken 

yet another promise to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This letter finally spurred some interest in the government 

circles, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier of the province and I think 

the House Leader met with the various business groups.  And 

I'm sure the Premier, as he usually does, waxed eloquently 

about how he would be forthright and how he would promise to 

consult with them in the future.  And, Mr. Speaker, these 

people won't forget.  They have a long memory, Mr. Speaker.  

They won't forget the Premier's promise, his once-again 

promise to consult with them. 

 

And one can only wonder how long it will be, Mr. Speaker, 

before there's another letter like this one to the Premier of the 

province, suggesting that they weren't consulted with again; 

that the Premier promised it again and that they were given no 

opportunity to put their various concerns forward. 

 

This meeting, very much a rush meeting, may have quieted the 

groups for a little while, Mr. Speaker.  But I say it will only be 

a little while.  Because this government has an agenda that has 

to be met.  It has an agenda that has to be met.  The union 

contractors and the unions of this province are demanding, 

absolutely demanding labour legislation that is sweeping and 

extremely strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The contractors and various groups that were outlined in this 

letter to the Premier, they expect to see an economic plan put 

forward in Saskatchewan by this government.  The government 

promised it.  Why shouldn't the people of Saskatchewan expect 

it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, but there is no economic plan.  There is no 

economic plan with respect to anything in this promise.  What 

happened to the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

agreement?  What happened to the upgrader in Lloydminster?  

What happened to Promavia?  What's happened to Piper?  

What's happening at Saska Pasta in Swift Current?  Impact 

Packaging? 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that even their union friends would like 

to see these projects go forward.  Jobs for them, Mr. Speaker, 

that's what it would be.  The AECL agreement alone would 

promise thousands and thousands of jobs and millions of 

dollars in investment in this province.  But yet no, Mr. Speaker, 

they have an agenda to go forward.  They have an agenda that 

suggests that these projects can't go forward because they have 

the Tory touch on 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The review commission, all-union contractors recommended 

union government contracts.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't 

surprise me that they're getting their pay-off now with all of the 

support and work that they did throughout the election. 

 

Some of the unions' proposals sent in were shocking, to say the 

least, Mr. Speaker.  And we realize, as I said earlier, that we 

understand that they have a huge favour to pay back.  Mr. 

Speaker, they are suggesting that the amount of co-operation . . 

. the contractors of this province, that they have been consulted 

with, is absolutely frightening.  There hasn't been any 

consultation and yet the government claims there has. 

 

One only has to wonder who is right in all of this, Mr. Speaker.  

When they take the time to sit down and have at least 12 

representatives of various groups in this province sign a letter 

to the Premier of the province, one can only suggest that they 

are the ones that are telling the truth, and not the government. 

 

(1030) 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of this labour legislation, part of this labour 

legislation suggests that anti-scab legislation should be put in 

place which makes it illegal to hire replacement workers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give you an example of what these folks 

in the unions claim is anti-scab type legislation, what they think 

of replacement workers, Mr. Speaker.  This is the kind of thing 

that I will read into the record here in a few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, as an example of what people think in the union 

organizations around this country -- people that we don't need 

in Saskatchewan, the kinds of things that Saskatchewan people 

don't need. 

 

They don't need this kind of attitude.  They don't need this kind 

of attitude that permeates the various union hierarchy through 

the country.  Mr. Speaker, this was reported in Maclean's 

magazine last fall. 

 

 On October 10 Daryl Bean, president of the 170,000 strong 

Public Service Alliance of Canada, wrote this letter to three 

women, all grandmothers, in which he called them scabs (Mr. 

Speaker). 

 

And this legislation speaks to that kind of thing -- replacement 

workers. 

 

 The three women are all public servants who chose to 

exercise their freedom to earn a living during the recent 

nation-wide strike by the Public Service Alliance 

Commission. 

 

Beans's letter quoted this passage, Mr. Speaker.  And I think it's 

important that the people of Saskatchewan know what the 

union organizers of this country think of replacement workers.  

And here's what he said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad, and the 

vampire, he had some awful stuff left with 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

which he made a scab. 

 

Do we need that kind of thing in this province, Mr. Speaker?  

That's what this labour legislation is suggesting. 

 

 A scab is a two-legged animal with a corkscrew soul, a 

waterlogged brain, and a . . . backbone of jelly and glue.  

Where others have hearts, he (simply) carries a tumour of 

rotten principles . . . No man has a right to scab as long as 

there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a rope long 

enough to hang his body with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of thing that the union people, the 

union hierarchy -- some of them at least -- suggest replacement 

workers are, Mr. Speaker.  And I suggest that that is wrong.  

That is not the kind of thing that the people in Saskatchewan 

think about replacement workers, Mr. Speaker.  They don't 

believe that kind of stuff.  They don't believe that the 

government should be putting forward legislation of that kind, 

Mr. Speaker.  They don't agree with that kind of thing. 

 

And that's the kind of people, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that are 

advising this government on labour legislation.  People that 

will suggest those kinds of things to three people, three women, 

three grandmothers in this country, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 

he wrote.  That's what he wrote them in his letter.  I didn't write 

that.  Mr. Bean himself wrote that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan expect the 

government to carry out their promises, they expect the 

government to carry out their labour legislation, but they 

expect it to be done in a fair, open, and consultative way, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the people represented on the letter to the 

Premier of Saskatchewan don't agree that that has taken place, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was even a presentation by the Grain 

Services Union that they wanted all domestic and farm labour 

to be unionized.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure how many of 

them ever get the opportunity on the government side to get out 

into the rural areas of this province, but I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, in the rural areas of this province there's thousands of 

farmers that employ part-time help, full-time help, with their 

farming operations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they're treated very well, those 

workers.  I think generally the farmers of this province are very 

responsible employers, very responsible employers.  And I 

don't think they're being treated badly.  But, Mr. Speaker, they 

want the freedom, the farmers of Saskatchewan, they want the 

freedom to be able to pick and choose the workers that are 

going to be carrying out the work on their farm. 

 

They don't want the interference of union organizers like the 

likes of Mr. Bean suggesting how they should be running their 

business, Mr. Speaker.  We in the official opposition will be 

doing everything we can to point out the kinds of things that 

are in this labour legislation, and anti replacement workers is 

just one of those things. 

 

In Ontario today, Mr. Speaker, we're seeing all kinds of 

this same, similar legislation coming forward.  And the 

business groups and people in general are voicing their 

concerns against it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Speaker, will ban double-breasting -- the practice 

of union contractors setting up non-union spin-off companies 

to avoid paying uncompetitive union wage rates.  In fact the 

Bill will retroactively force non-union construction companies 

which represent the vast majority of contractors in the province 

to become union shops.  It will also impose collective 

agreements upon those employees, whether they like it or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again we see the heavy hand of this 

government touching another sector of our society.  Mr. 

Speaker, they again . . . and it suggests: 

 

 It will also cause some contractors to go out of business, 

inflate the cost of construction projects, and stand the 

relatively peaceful construction industry on its head. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what the people of Saskatchewan are telling 

this government.  That's what the representatives of business 

told the government in Saskatoon a few short days ago, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's what they told them. 

 

Now we will wait, and they will be waiting as well, to see the 

results of their consultation that they finally got with the 

Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today only 20 per cent of the industry is 

unionized in this province.  Strikes, for the most part, on large 

construction sites are a thing of the past, unlike the 1970s and 

early '80s.  Construction costs have come down, not because 

skilled trades are getting less money but because non-union 

contractors can use more unskilled labour at lower wage rates 

than unionized contractors can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 The election of the NDP though, the unions saw their chance 

to regain control of the construction sites of this province.  

Hence the Bill was put together by the Labour minister of 

this province. 

 

 Not content with that, the unions have set their sights on 

making every government-financed construction site a union 

site, something the Labour minister is going to do for them. 

 

 The Canadian Federation of Independent Business says a 

policy of tendering projects totalling non-union firms is fair 

tendering to all, but a self-serving call for unionized labour 

market monopoly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what it is.  They're asking for a 

union monopoly in this province with this type of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker.  And this is again part of the pay-off to the 

unions, part of the marker that's being called in on behalf of the 

unions to the NDP Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many, many groups have sought consultation 

with this government, and yet none of them have had the 

opportunity to do that, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan business is 

overwhelmed and frustrated by 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

the government's legislative agenda and says there's no 

apparent plan for economic renewal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an article in the Star-Phoenix, August 6: 

 

 In a letter to Premier Roy Romanow calling for an "urgent" 

meeting to the business people he said: "We have all been 

frustrated by your government's "consultation" process to 

date and the lack of balance in recognizing the vital role of 

our private wealth-creating sector . . ." 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on: 

 

 "Clearly, we're not happy with the consultative approach 

because it doesn't exist . . ." (The chamber of commerce is 

saying.) 

 

 "The budget document was entitled deficit control and 

restoring confidence in the provincial economy and that 

doesn't sound like an agenda to me. 

 

 "Certainly, a lot of this looks like a payback agenda" to labor 

with no specific direction in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that is what is concerning everyone in this 

province.  That's what exactly is concerning everyone in this 

province, is this government simply putting this legislation 

forward in an effort to keep their union people on side.  And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, there's beginning to be resounding and very 

clear evidence that that is the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's no wonder that the business community fears 

this legislation.  It's no wonder that they fear it.  If you aren't a 

union contractor in this province, Mr. Speaker, in the next short 

time -- next few months or a year -- you may not have a 

business left in this province, Mr. Speaker.  If you're not a 

unionized contractor, where are you going to be in this 

province when a government suggests that unions should have 

the majority of work in this province.  Where will you be? 

 

You'll be sitting on the outside looking in.  You will not have 

an opportunity to participate in the work in this province.  And 

the employees that you have under your employment right 

now, they will also be sitting on the outside looking in. 

 

When, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this government going to come 

forward with their economic plan?  The people of 

Saskatchewan are waiting, Mr. Speaker.  We're waiting to hear 

what's happening with all of those companies I mentioned 

earlier  

_- AECL, Promavia, Piper, the upgrader in Lloydminster, 

Saska Pasta, Impact Packaging.  Everyone's waiting.  

Everyone's waiting for the Economic Development minister, 

the Associate Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Finance 

himself to stand up in the legislature and suggest, here's our 

plan for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And yet we haven't 

seen it. 

 

Well we're wondering, Mr. Finance Minister.  We're wondering 

when you're going to say that kind of thing.  When are you 

going to put forward your plan for 

Saskatchewan?  The people of Saskatchewan are waiting; the 

business sector is waiting; the unionized people . . . contractors 

and unionized workers of this province are waiting.  They 

would like those jobs, I'm sure. 

 

But let's, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let's in Saskatchewan hold this 

government to its promise of consultation, to its promise of an 

economic plan, to its promise of jobs, to its promise of lower 

taxes, to its promise of everything for everyone, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what they promised during the election campaign.  They 

promised the farmers; they promised union-organized people; 

they promised the unions themselves; they promised business 

groups; they promised seniors.  They promised everyone and 

yet we see very little, Mr. Speaker, very little of a plan that sets 

forward the agenda for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's incumbent upon this government to set 

forward that plan.  They promised it and now the people of 

Saskatchewan want to see it.  They don't want to see the kind 

of labour legislation that's going to unilaterally do away with 

non-unionized companies in this province. 

 

What the building trade unions and the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour are saying is that all major government 

contracts should be tendered only to union companies -- 

tendered only to union companies.  That's what the unions of 

this province want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that fair and open, fair and open and 

honest tendering?  Is that fair and open tendering when only 

one sector of society is allowed to compete for jobs in this 

province?  Unionized contractors and unions only, is that fair 

and open tendering?  Well I don't believe it is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

 But a national poll conducted by Angus Reid for the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business last year found 

that the highest level of job satisfaction was in small, 

non-union businesses.  It also found that 56 per cent of 

employees in businesses of 50-299 employees did not want to 

be in a union (Mr. Speaker). 

 

But they will be forced to with this kind of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker.  They will be forced to join a union or not work in this 

province.  That's the alternative, Mr. Speaker -- join a union or 

don't work in this province.  That's the type of thing that this 

legislation has put forward and that's what's concerning 

business groups in this province. 

 

 The point here is that there is no social justice when 

organized labour expands its argument against 

double-breasting to demand that people who work for 

non-union companies be excluded from government 

tendering. 

 

 If the provincial government was to adopt that kind of policy, 

it would be aggressively discriminating against the vast 

majority of working people in the private sector who do not 

belong to a union. 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

It would discriminate against them.  It discriminates against 

non-union people in this province, Mr. Speaker -- again, 

something that this government said it would never do. 

 

It said it would consult with them.  It would put forward an 

agenda that was open and honest tendering, allowing people, 

union or non-union, to compete.  And yet they're being advised 

by their union friends on their review committee to do this kind 

of thing. 

 

To exclude the majority of working people because they don't 

carry union cards will be amoral, to say nothing of being 

against the public good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There's no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that business 

interests don't believe there's been consultation.  There hasn't 

been to date.  They were promised it, Mr. Speaker.  They've 

received a short briefing with the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and 

now they want to see action from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, labour legislation is extremely important in this 

province.  We all recognize that.  Unions are important in this 

province -- we all recognize that -- and so are non-unionized 

companies in this province, Mr. Speaker.  What the people in 

the business interests, and I think all fair-minded people, 

believe is exactly what this motion suggests that my colleague 

from Maple Creek has put forward: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the government to engage in 

genuine public consultations before introducing labour 

legislation that infringes upon individual rights, in particular 

removing the right of individual workers and employers to 

voluntarily choose their own collective bargaining options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support that motion on behalf of my colleague 

and on behalf of the official opposition.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 

rise to my feet to enter into debate on this important private 

members' resolution here today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to admit that over the past hour and 

three-quarters I've had an experience unique to everyone in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Because, Mr. Speaker, as different 

from virtually everyone who has tuned in to the Legislative 

Assembly proceedings on television and in fact virtually all of 

the members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to 

what the two previous members have said in this debate. 

 

I thought it was kind of telling as well, Mr. Speaker, and I am 

pleased to see the mover of the motion in his seat here today.  

And I know that we're not entitled to refer to the presence or 

absence of the members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but so 

let me simply say that I noted with great interest that during the 

deliberations brought to this Assembly by the member of 

Kindersley, as I glanced in the direction of the desk by the 

member from Maple 

Creek, I had a very clear view of the door behind him, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, not even, not even . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Whatever can of worms 

the member has gotten into, he's not getting out of it very 

successfully, and I remind him that he's not to refer to the 

presence or absence of members in the House. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the 

members would be sensitive, and I respect your ruling.  It is 

truly a wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker, to observe and to behold.  

Because there would be, quite frankly in the minds of many 

people here and around the province of Saskatchewan, a great 

deal of difficulty differentiating whether members are present 

in their seats or absent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me get to the point.  Let me get to the point at hand.  

You know, I thought, Mr. Speaker, back on October 21, 

regarding the way that this province conducted its affairs and 

its government on behalf of the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, a very significant decision was made. 

 

And I was disappointed as I listened to the content of the 

members who spoke to this resolution earlier this morning, to 

see that in the Tory caucus in the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, things have not changed.  As a matter of fact, 

there was a loud and clear message given last October 21 and 

the message was this:  is that when it comes to conducting the 

affairs of the government of the province of Saskatchewan, 

those who see it to their political advantage to drive a wedge 

between the people of this province are headed by the way of 

the dodo bird, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there were a large number of the former PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus who went the way of the dodo bird on 

October 21.  What I'm saddened to see, Mr. Speaker, is that of 

the new members of the PC caucus who we've heard from here 

today, they have not learned the lesson of history.  They have 

not learned that the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired 

of politicians who see it to their political advantage to drive 

wedges between the people who sent them here to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I listened carefully to one and 

three-quarter long, weary hours of words coming from the 

opposite side, I heard wedge after wedge after wedge being 

driven politically, by the new members of the PC caucus.  And 

I say, shame on you. 

 

Gentlemen, you still have time, you still have time to learn 

your lesson to be part of having a chance of rebuilding that PC 

caucus.  And you still have some time to teach some lessons to 

the old fellows, to the old boys on those benches over there, to 

teach them the new ways of politics in Saskatchewan -- the 

politics of co-operation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to give notice at the conclusion of 

my remarks I'm going to be moving an amendment to this 

resolution so that this resolution before us will read that this 

Assembly: 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

recognizes the need for the government to engage in genuine 

public consultations before introducing labour legislation to 

bring Saskatchewan in line with other provinces; and that 

this Assembly commends the government for building 

bridges between workers and farmers, management and 

labour, and the rural and urban people of this province. 

 

And it is with pride, Mr. Speaker, as a private member of this 

Assembly, that I will move that resolution. 

 

Now let me just refer to some of the comments made by the 

members, by the hon. member for Maple Creek and the hon. 

member for Kindersley in their debate here, Mr. Speaker.  Both 

of them said that what they saw in labour legislation being 

considered to come before this Assembly -- which I point out, 

Mr. Speaker, is not here -- both of them said and went to great 

pains to say that what they saw was legislation that they called 

pay-back to the unions. 

 

Well that reflects, Mr. Speaker, that reflects the old style of 

politics that got the Tory caucus where it is now, the old style 

of politics that got the Tory caucus where they are now -- a 

little irrelevant rump in the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan; a bit of a scar on the political history of the 

province that got them where they are now. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, what these fellows have not yet learned, 

and I'm afraid have adopted from their old style colleagues, 

ones who survived the siege on October 21, Mr. Speaker, is 

that politics is some form of balancing act of paying those who 

have the vested interest -- paying the piper.  Politics is paying 

the piper.  That's the old style politics, paying the piper.  You 

pay the piper; that's your job. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a job much more honourable than 

that, that is the intention of the new Government of 

Saskatchewan.  That job is to serve the interests of all the 

people of Saskatchewan -- those who voted for the government 

and those who didn't.  Because when you're democratically 

elected, you come here to serve the interests of the province 

and all the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And that's 

what's going on today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- It's called democracy.  It's called democracy and 

it means you come here to serve all that sent you, including 

those who didn't vote for you.  It's called democracy. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make some reference to labour 

legislation and what's happening by way of consultation in the 

interest of democracy, in the interest of our economy, and the 

interest of employers and working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there is 

consultation going on in Saskatchewan today in regards to 

labour legislation that has never gone on before -- never.  Not 

even by the previous New Democratic Party government of the 

'70s.  Consultation, Mr. Speaker, that 

would make your head spin.  In fact, as I listen to the utterings 

opposite, I think it is making their heads spin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, now I could understand the criticism if the 

members opposite were saying, we're getting sick and tired of 

this new government consulting on labour legislation; all you 

ever do is consult. You seem to be asking everybody what they 

think. Why don't you get on with bringing in legislation to 

bring about changes for a new era of fairness in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

There would be some valid criticism in that, Mr. Speaker.  

Because since the government changed on November 1 with 

the appointment of the Minister of Labour, this government has 

been engaged in consultation like you've never seen before.  

And I could understand if they were saying, will you quit 

consulting; everybody's having their say; make up your mind 

and get on with it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is some making up of minds and some 

getting on.  But the consultation that's going on, Mr. Speaker, I 

think represents very accurately the new priorities and the new 

style of the new government of the New Democratic Party in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And let me describe that, Mr. Speaker.  Now as I listened 

carefully to the words of the members opposite, the hon. 

member from Maple Creek . . . By the way, when I look past 

his desk, I have another clear view of the door. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the words of the member from 

Maple Creek and the member for Kindersley, you know, I 

listened to their words and they say, well we believe in people's 

. . . workers' rights to organize themselves, just as long as they 

don't have any rights.  That's what they say.  That's the reality. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have legislation.  Why do you have 

legislation in a province?  You have legislation in a province to 

empower those who are less powerful to provide an equal 

balance.  In fact a measure of good legislation is that it 

provides equity and equitable balance of rights in the work 

place between the employer and the employee.  That's what it's 

all about.  That's why you have legislation.  If you didn't have 

legislation -- the members opposite know that; they're 

hidebound to this ideology -- if you had no legislation at all, 

what you have, all the power rests in the employer in unfettered 

free enterprise.  That's what it's all about. 

 

Small business that they seem to say is a friend of theirs, Mr. 

Speaker, in unfettered free enterprise, small business 

disappears.  Because all you have is a growing, cumulative, 

corporate interest.  That's what happens in unfettered free 

enterprise.  And I can understand why the members opposite 

are attracted to that notion, because it reflects their priorities. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the priorities of the new government, of the 

new style, of new co-operation, a New Democratic Party 

government are to bring together a balance of interests in the 

interest of our economy, and stability of employment for 

employers and employees together. 

 

And let me describe how that's been going on, Mr. 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Speaker.  It may take a bit of time, and I'll try and be as brief as 

I can.  But it's going on on so many fronts, it's going to take 

more than a minute or two to describe it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's start with their favourite subject, The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act.  What is one of the first things 

that the minister did, Mr. Speaker?  He appointed a committee.  

To do what?  To review and consult. And it has. 

 

(1100) 

 

Now who was on the committee?  Let's just stop and think for a 

moment.  What's this legislation about?  There is in Canada 

today one province and one province only that does not have 

legislation which lays out the mechanisms for cross-trade 

bargaining throughout the province.  One province only, in all 

of the nation, Mr. Speaker.  You know what it is; it's 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Why do we have the unique status of being the only province 

without this kind of legislation?  It's because the forerunners, 

the old style, old PCs back in 1984, removed that legislation 

from the books of Saskatchewan.  They said never mind 

fairness; we've got to pay the piper. We're old style politicians; 

we believe in the piper being paid.  And it was the large 

corporations what sent us, and so we've got to kneel and bow to 

what they tell us what to do. 

 

And so out went the legislation; out with the stroke of a pen 

went the rights of thousands of construction workers, qualified 

tradespeople, Mr. Speaker, a large number of whom have since 

left the province to go to other provinces -- any of the other 

nine provinces who do have that kind of legislation, I point out, 

Mr. Speaker:  Alberta; Manitoba; Maritimes -- every province 

in the Maritimes; even B.C. (British Columbia) where their 

So-Cred cousins were; even Quebec, Mr. Speaker, throughout 

the country. 

 

So what did the minister bring together to consider and to 

consult?  A group of people who are affected by the legislation.  

This is not an odd notion, Mr. Speaker, not an odd notion.  

Brought together representatives of trade unions and unionized 

construction firms, asked them to consider laying out the 

mechanism by which they deal with each other on a 

province-wide basis. 

 

So this strikes me as being a tad sound, Mr. Speaker, and 

strangely different from the old style previous PC government.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they filed their report, they did their 

deliberations, they did their consultations, they filed their 

report.  And then what did the Minister of Labour do?  He took 

that report, he asked the Department of Justice to translate that 

report into a piece of legislation, what it would look like if it 

was to become law.  And what did he do?  Did he hide it in his 

drawer?  No, Mr. Speaker.  He took the thing and he sent it out 

for more consultation. 

 

In fact the member from Maple Creek I remember about a 

month ago coming to this Assembly and accusing the Minister 

of Labour of introducing this sneaky legislation somehow 

without bringing it before the Legislative Assembly, and at the 

same time accusing him of not 

consulting.  How did they get the copies?  Because the Minister 

of Labour sent it out.  It's called consultation. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, tomorrow the Minister of 

Labour will be personally meeting with the representative of 

the construction association, who they say, who they say is so 

highly offended by this legislation and has not been consulted.  

They're meeting with the Minister of Labour tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well my colleagues say, can you believe anything they say, 

Mr. Speaker?  What I say to you is this.  They're trying -- 

sometimes they're very trying, Mr. Speaker -- but they're 

trying; they're doing their best.  They're doing their best.  I 

think they're doing the best they can.  They truly are. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so we've got The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act, consultation in the development of a 

proposal, translated into legislation, sent back out, consult 

some more, meeting with the affected parties.  Mr. Speaker, 

you know, it's just sometimes that I shake my head when I 

listen to the members opposite and their explanation of how the 

world unfolds. 

 

I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of an article in the 

Leader-Post, July 25, 1992.  "Trade unionists rally for change," 

it says.  Now, Mr. Speaker, it refers to an incident some couple 

of weeks ago when about a thousand skilled tradesmen in the 

province of Saskatchewan came to the Legislative Assembly to 

express their point of view to their government. 

 

And they were welcomed.  They were welcomed here, Mr. 

Speaker, the same way that when on the opening day of the 

Legislative Assembly a couple of hundred farmers came here 

and said that they had a concern about proposed legislation.  

And they were welcomed.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

government invited them in for coffee and sandwiches.  That's 

the new style of new, open, consultative government, New 

Democratic government in the province of Saskatchewan 

today.  That's the way it works. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this article refers . . . it covers the events 

when the skilled tradespersons of Saskatchewan, a thousand of 

them, came to the Legislative Assembly.  And the Minister of 

Labour went out to meet them and to tell them what his 

thoughts were about the legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if it is as the members opposite say, that he 

who pays the piper calls the tune, I guess the Minister of 

Labour should have been out there picking up campaign 

contributions.  Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

wasn't out there doing anything of the sort.  Many of my 

colleagues, when a thousand people came to the Legislative 

Assembly, many of my colleagues were out there meeting with 

with these skilled tradespeople from Saskatchewan.  Not one 

member of the Tory caucus could be seen -- not one. 

 

No, because they've still got their minds locked into the old 

style politics -- he who pays the piper calls the tune.  And they 

don't believe that a single tradesperson voted for them in the 

last election, therefore there's no reason to 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

go out and meet these people when they come to speak to their 

government, they say. 

 

Well the Minister of Labour went out.  And, Mr. Speaker, let 

me report to the Assembly with not my words, not the words of 

the Minister of Labour, what did the Leader-Post have to say?  

Their labour reporter, Anne Kyle, in her article . . . Let me read 

the second and third paragraphs of the article, Mr. Speaker, and 

I quote: 

 

 Mitchell told the 600 . . . (I think she was a tad low in her 

Estimates) . . . Mitchell told the 600 unionized construction 

workers, who rallied on the steps of the Legislative Building 

Friday, he intends to put an end to the creation of spinoff 

non-unionized construction companies by unionized 

contractors. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, he was saying he intends to bring 

to this province legislation that exists in nine of the ten 

provinces -- in the other nine provinces -- legislation that says 

when you're a unionized company, if you've got unionized 

workers, it's against the law to start another little company over 

here, get a contract there, don't honour your collective 

agreement.  This is not an odd notion in a democratic nation, 

Mr. Speaker.  Not an odd notion at all. 

 

And then what was said, Mr. Speaker, is this: 

 

 However before the Construction Industry Labor Relations 

Act is introduced in the legislature, he said . . . 

 

This is the Minister of Labour talking to those thousand 

tradespeople, those who are supposed to be those who paid the 

piper; they're here to call the tune.  What did he say when it 

would have been easy to say exactly everything that they 

wanted him to say?  What did the Minister of Labour say on 

the steps of the Legislative Assembly to the people of 

Saskatchewan?  He said: 

 

 . . .there must be further consultation with all the interested 

parties affected by the proposed labor law." 

 

There it is.  So even when these so-called . . . You know and I 

point out, Mr. Speaker, not a single one of those thousand 

skilled tradespeople from the province of Saskatchewan had 

horns or tails with forks -- not one of them -- contrary to the 

view of the members opposite who hid in the back rooms of 

their caucus, afraid, afraid that they might catch something if 

they went out and talked to some of the skilled tradespeople in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well there it is.  The Minister of Labour meets at the 

Legislative Assembly and what does he say to them?  He 

intends to proceed with good legislation to bring Saskatchewan 

in line with the rest of the nation, but even then says that there 

must be consultation because it is the wish of this government, 

if it is at all possible in a province which has been besieged by 

political wedges driven between people by their PC 

government for a decade, if it's possible to bring together the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan, that will be done. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it applies not only, not only to The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act.  The Trade Union 

Act, what's happening to The Trade Union Act?  Another piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour has 

appointed yet another committee of review, to do what?  To 

consult. To consult, to receive input from those with vested 

interests who want to see good legislation which is fair and 

equitable and balanced in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On the minimum wage, what has the minister done, the 

Minister of Labour done, Mr. Speaker?  The Minister of 

Labour has appointed a minimum wage committee to do what?  

To review the issue and to consult and to bring, and to bring 

recommendations for dealing with the minimum wage now, but 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, in the long run, a solid, sound, 

equitable way of addressing the minimum wage in an ongoing 

basis in a way that meets the needs for those who are working 

at the lowest of wages in our province, the minimum wage, but 

at the same time, to meet the needs of those who are paying the 

minimum wage -- employers.  And to take the politics out of 

the minimum wage. 

 

Because under the old style PC government where you paid the 

piper, that was the way you ran the province.  When did 

minimum wage change?  Mr. Speaker, it changed only twice in 

10 years.  And when did it change?  It changed the year before 

the election.  The minimum wage in this province was dealt 

with pure politics by the government of the day kowtowing to 

what they saw as paying the piper. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the election even the piper deserted these 

guys.  Because the piper came to be the view that what's best 

for the province of Saskatchewan is a stable economy.  Even 

the piper deserted them. 

 

Well the old style members are having a hard time 

understanding this.  And I understand that, Mr. Speaker.  You 

can't be a novice member coming in from Maple Creek or 

Kindersley or Souris-Cannington and you sit down with seven 

dinosaurs around a table.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You'll turn into one. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- That's right.  If it walks like a dinosaur and it 

talks like a dinosaur and it looks like a dinosaur, Mr. Speaker, 

it might be a dinosaur. 

 

Now you can have any kind of an animal come in, sit down 

with seven dinosaurs and eventually, Mr. Speaker, if it lives 

with a dinosaur and it breathes with the dinosaurs and it eats 

with the dinosaurs, it too, eventually, Mr. Speaker, begins to 

walk and talk and look and think like a dinosaur. 

 

So now we've got seven big dinosaurs and three little dinosaurs 

-- three little dinosaurs, Mr. Speaker, but there is still hope.  

There is still hope.  They can stand . . . they can take 

anti-dinosaur kind of stance, Mr. Speaker.  They can take an 

anti-dinosaur kind of stance and say, no more of that dinosaur 

stuff for the PC caucus.  We'd like to be around come the next 

election.  We don't want the people 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

of Saskatchewan to completely finish the job of extinction that 

got started in 1991. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that the new members . . . the 

member from Souris-Cannington, he's a fine fellow; he's a fine 

fellow.  Now I can understand he's been influenced by seven 

dinosaurs for a period of time.  He's been locked up with them 

every day here for a long time.  And when the session is over 

he'll go back and he'll meet some real people, Mr. Speaker.  

Yes.  And his ability to resist the dinosaur mode, Mr. Speaker, 

that urge to think and walk and talk like a dinosaur, his ability 

to resist that, Mr. Speaker, will be enhanced considerably when 

he gets home and has a chance to spend some time with his 

constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, occupational health and safety -- what's happened 

here?  The Minister of Labour, what's he done?  He's appointed 

yet another review committee to do what?  To consult.  And 

they have. 

 

In fact from that consultation there's been a report made.  Mr. 

Speaker, from that report there has been draft legislation which 

has been written up.  What's happened to the draft legislation, 

Mr. Speaker?  It's been sent out. 

 

In fact you know, Mr. Speaker, I was talking to the Minister of 

Labour just this very morning and he tells me that he's gotten a 

complaint.  He's gotten a complaint from a business 

organization which has said to him, you're sending out so 

doggone many drafts of the draft legislation, would you hold 

back here?  We're getting confused with all of this consultation.  

Just hang on and go a little easy on the consultation.  We like 

what you're doing, but maybe you're over-consulting. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we may very well see that legislation 

introduced in this session.  I hope we will.  And I think we will.  

Probably introduced, Mr. Speaker, with a chance to consult yet 

even further before passage in the legislature. 

 

And while, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, workers' 

compensation.  Mr. Speaker, prior to the election there was the 

appointment by the previous government of a Workers' 

Compensation Review Committee. 

 

And when the new government was elected on October 21, did 

it do away with this committee simply because it was created 

by the Tory government?  Not on your life, Mr. Speaker, not on 

your life.  That Workers' Compensation Review Committee 

was retained and was told to finish the job, and they have.  And 

they have since filed an interim report and will very shortly, 

Mr. Speaker, be filing their final report after having 

deliberated, and, Mr. Speaker, dare I say it yet one more time, 

after having been consulting for the last several months. 

 

(1115) 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, if there is a criticism of this government, 

surely it is not, except for those who are dinosaur-like in their 

political views, Mr. Speaker, surely it is not that we failed to 

consult, Mr. Speaker.  If the Minister of Labour can be accused 

of anything, I don't share this criticism.  But I could understand 

criticism which said, please don't consult so much.  Please get 

on 

with the legislative changes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to support the approach of the 

Minister of Labour because I think he's chosen the wiser 

course.  He has chosen to consult, to allow input from the 

vested interests of the people of the province.  And I think in 

the long run, Mr. Speaker, that will serve us all well.  There 

will be some who would like to see the legislation through the 

Assembly and passed already, and I understand that and I 

sympathize. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is my view that if you truly believe in 

functioning democratically in the best interests of all the people 

what sent you -- not just those who voted for you but all the 

people, because that's who sent you -- then you owe it to them 

to deliver on the kind of politics and operations of government 

that have become the trademark of this New Democrat 

Government of Saskatchewan today, a new government with a 

new attitude and a new approach to consultation by their New 

Democrat government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Minister of Labour on taking that 

approach, on being part of a government that has made as its 

objective to remove wedges where wedges exist and to replace 

wedges with bridges, Mr. Speaker -- to replace wedges with 

bridges. 

 

And I know my good friend and colleague, the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote, Mr. Speaker, who will second this 

amendment that I will introduce in just a moment, will want to 

expand on that, on that very theme, Mr. Speaker, because he's 

been around for an entire term.  He saw the last five long, lean, 

devastating years of Tory government in which wedges were 

driven with sledge-hammers between people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that the member from Prince Albert Northcote is 

taking just as much interest as I have in seeing the benefits, the 

pay-off, sometimes the frustrations.  But in the long run, the 

long-term best interests of the people of Saskatchewan will be 

served by a government which is dedicated to consulting and to 

bring together to find that balance of interest in good equitable 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move, seconded 

by the member for Prince Albert Northcote: 

 

 That all the words following "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 recognizes the need for the government to engage in genuine 

public consultations before introducing labour legislation to 

bring Saskatchewan in line with other provinces; and that this 

Assembly commends the government for building bridges 

between workers and farmers, management and labour, and 

the rural and urban people of this province. 

 

I thank you for the opportunity to enter into debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to say in the outset of my remarks 

that I am today going to be very brief.  And the reason I will be 

brief is very simple -- because this government wants to get on 

with the running of this province.  We want to get on with the 

debate of some very important legislation which members of 

the opposition today, by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, refuse 

to agree to debate. 

 

And I'm talking about the GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker.  And when I 

talk about the actions of the opposition and their refusal to 

allow this government to function, I find it very interesting that 

we're debating here a resolution and an amendment to the 

resolution that talks about government consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've sat in here week after week and we've 

watched and listened to the monotonous droning of the 

members opposite.  We've listened to the member from Wilkie 

rant and rave and display bitterness and anger and upset over 

the defeat of his premier, the former premier of this province, 

the member from Estevan, never admitting that they were part 

and parcel of their own demise -- never admitting that. 

 

And then they have, Mr. Speaker, the audacity to walk into this 

legislature and lead the new members of this Assembly in their 

caucus into speaking to this kind of a resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser talked about the little dinosaurs and the big dinosaurs.  

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, many members on this side of 

the House watched over a period of years as the old dinosaurs 

destroyed this province, the economy of this province.  And I 

want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what they've displayed 

since they've sat in opposition doesn't give us any kind of an 

indication that they're willing to change. 

 

And I say to the members on the opposition side of the House, 

to the old dinosaurs, forget about your massive electoral defeat 

and understand that this government is consulting and 

understand that there is a new direction for politics.  

Understand that the reason the people rejected you, members in 

the opposition, the old dinosaurs, is partly because you refused 

to consult and partly because of your incompetence. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that members on this side 

of the House want to get on with running government.  The 

people of this province want a new direction and yes, they want 

consultation, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And as my colleague, the 

member from Moose Jaw Palliser so eloquently described, 

there is consultation ongoing.  And I say to the member from 

Wilkie, forget your old ways and lead these new members in a 

new direction so that your party isn't totally destroyed as it 

appears it may be. 

To the new members, I say, where were you when these 

members were leading this province in a direction of demise, 

and when they were destroying the collective bargaining 

process?  And when they were destroying families, who at that 

time, in the early 1980s, had the ability to generate a reasonable 

standard of living for their families?  Where were you?  I say to 

the member from Maple Creek and to the member from 

Kindersley, why weren't you assisting the old dinosaurs in 

changing their course and their direction so that the number of 

members that you lost in the last election may not have 

happened? 

 

I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no difference between a 

new dinosaur and an old dinosaur.  They're painted with the 

same ideological brush and they're not willing to move on to a 

new kind of politics . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member 

from Souris-Cannington says, blue ones.  And he may be right; 

it may be blue.  And I tell you, there is a blue shadow around 

this province.  People are blue and they're disgusted with what 

you've done to the economy, and they are looking for 

consultation and a new direction.  And I say to you, Mr. 

Member from Souris-Cannington, that's the kind of direction 

they're going to get from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, 

this government is looking for a working relationship between 

business people and between labour and between rural and 

urban people.  The days of division and splitting a wedge, 

putting a wedge between different sectors of our society are 

gone. 

 

And I say to the members opposite and I say to the member 

from Wilkie, that he's been around this House long enough that 

he should understand quite clearly that there are new things 

happening and that there are consultations going on with 

business people and with working people in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser indicated 

that we're trying to build bridges, not wedges.  And I want to 

say that that's exactly where this government is headed. 

 

And I feel sad when I hear new members of this legislature talk 

about an Act that will restore some sanity to collective 

bargaining in this province as being a pay-back to unions.  I say 

to those members that when I look around my riding, which is 

home to a lot of construction people -- people who worked in 

the construction industry -- and who in the 1970s and the early 

'80s were making in the neighbourhood of 16, some of them 

15, some of them $18 an hour; and when I see those people, 

how they've been shifted to unemployment insurance and some 

of them then to welfare, and now those that can find work, 

working on construction on 6- and 7- and $8-an-hour jobs, 

many of them forced to move to Alberta and other 

jurisdictions, it makes me sad that you haven't changed your 

attitude and that you haven't had a look at the possibility of a 

new way of doing things, and that you haven't got the 

understanding that the PC government of the 1980s didn't 

work, and that the divisiveness can't work, and, Mr. Speaker, 

that it won't be allowed to work in this province.  Because 

we're going to bring the people 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

of this province together to work as a unit for the betterment of 

all of us. 

 

And I say to the new members, before you sign your name to 

these kinds of motions, try to understand what's happening in 

this province.  And try to understand that there is a new way of 

doing things and that you don't have to follow the member 

from Wilkie and the member from Estevan on the same path 

that they were embarked on in the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke about the working of this government and 

the bitterness that the members of the opposition have 

displayed -- the member from Estevan and the member from 

Wilkie -- and the need for us to get on with legislation, the 

need for us to scrutinize the Estimates, the need for a budget in 

this province that we haven't had for almost two years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the member from Wilkie can chirp.  And he's, I'm 

assuming, telling one of the young dinosaurs not to listen 

because we're right and I'm right and we were right in the 

1980s.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that they weren't right in 

1980s and the direction of the 1990s isn't correct either. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the consultation and the 

co-operation of the people of this province, we would hope 

would be reflected by the members of the opposition.  But what 

do we see?  Monotonous droning.  This morning I listened to 

an hour and three-quarters of speeches on this resolution in this 

House when we could have been debating GRIP legislation . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I see, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Wilkie says, we'll be there.  Well why weren't 

you there today?  Why weren't you willing to debate the GRIP 

legislation today? 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are asking for consultation, but as well 

what they're asking for is this government to get on with the 

business of government and they're sick and tired of the Tory 

antics and the Tory games.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that it will 

be soon that we'll be able to get out of this legislature and back 

to our ridings so that we can as individual members consult 

with the people of our areas. 

 

But I know why they don't want to go back and I know why 

they're filibustering and keeping themselves in here.  Because 

they don't want to go back to their ridings. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, that members on this side of 

the House want to go back to their ridings and consult so that 

we can reflect their ideas and their concerns in the budget, in 

the upcoming budget this spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk in this resolution about the government 

infringing on individual rights.  Well I say, Mr. Speaker, 

nothing could be farther from the truth because this party and 

this government believes in individual rights. 

 

But we also believe in the collective right of the people of this 

province to have a decent government, to have a fair 

government, a government that will govern for all and not just 

a select few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask them to forget the pain of their massive 

electoral defeat.  Allow this government to continue with its 

agenda, the agenda that the people of Saskatchewan asked 

them to embark on in the election.  And we'll do that with 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1130) 

 

We're attempting to put the economic house of this province in 

order, something that hasn't been even attempted in the last 10 

years in the province.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we're 

going to do that.  We're going to do that by consulting with the 

different interest groups in this province. 

 

And I say to the member from Wilkie, just watch, just watch as 

the people support the new direction of this government in this 

province.  I say to you, it started in the election and it's going to 

continue through this term of government.  I say to the member 

from Wilkie and to the rest of the old . . . (inaudible) . . . of 

dinosaurs -- the member from Thunder Creek and from Arm 

River and Estevan and from Moosomin -- people want a new 

direction.  And this government will help them to achieve a 

new direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the process in this legislature 

sometimes seems slow and sometimes it seems cumbersome.  

And it even seems that way when the members of the 

opposition and members of the government are working in a 

spirit of co 

_operation to move the House business through.  But I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the actions of this opposition have enhanced the 

feeling of the people in Saskatchewan that they don't want the 

old style, the Tory style.  They want an end to the patronage 

and the corruption of the 1980s.  They want fairness.  And yes, 

they want consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a new direction.  I'm asking this morning, 

Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition turn their minds 

to allowing this government to move out into the province and 

speak with the different sectors that are expecting so much in 

the 1990s. 

 

I'm asking for a spirit of co-operation and an end to the old 

ways.  Because, Mr. Speaker, the consultation that I've had 

with members of my riding, or with constituents of mine, and 

in other areas, are that they want to see some co-operation from 

the opposition.  They want to see us build a working 

relationship, Mr. Speaker.  But I'm afraid the old dinosaurs who 

are leading the new dinosaurs on that side of the House are not 

willing to let that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people want an end to the old style of Tory 

politics.  And I want to refer to a headline in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix on August 10, 1992.  And the headline . . . just 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the headline says:  "Many in Tory 

hierarchy corrupt to the rotten core".  Well, Mr. Speaker, those 

are the dinosaurs that I refer to.  Those are the ones, those are 

the members of this caucus who aren't willing to stand up and 

admit for their past mistakes.  Those are the ones, Mr. Speaker, 

that are referred to in this headline as being rotten to the core.  

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that's what the people of this 

province feel about the members of the opposition. 

 

So I say to them, allow this 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

government to work, allow this government to consult, allow 

the Estimates to go on, allow us to pass legislation that will 

help us turn the economy of this province around. 

 

Look to the future, I say to the dinosaurs opposite, to the Tory 

hierarchy that sit in the opposition benches.  People have read 

you; people have seen through you; they understand what 

you're about.  They understand that you're bitter, but they're 

asking you to understand that you were rejected.  And they're 

asking you to understand why you're sitting on that side of the 

House.  And I tell you, my consultations with people around 

this province tell me that they're asking you to say you're sorry 

for what you've done. 

 

And my consultations, Mr. Speaker, tell me that they're asking 

the new members of that caucus not to follow the old hierarchy 

that are referred to in this column as being corrupt to the rotten 

core. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are harsh words that the writer of this 

column put in this paper -- those are harsh words.  But I want 

to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I believe this journalist was 

consulting with the people of the province because that's 

exactly what I'm hearing when I'm consulting. 

 

And I say, the audacity, in a resolution, to speak of individual 

rights, to speak of individual rights from the hierarchy of the 

Tory Party sitting in the other side of this House -- Mr. 

Speaker, enough is enough. 

 

We could go on and we could speak about the make-up of the 

opposition at length.  That would be easy because there's so 

much to speak of.  We could speak of the contract -- Mr. Hill, a 

half a million dollar contract and the severance -- but we're not 

going to do that because our consultations, Mr. Speaker, tell us 

that people want us to get on with the working of the 

government. 

 

And so I ask them to co-operate and I ask them to look to the 

future and I ask them to work with this government.  Enough of 

the dinosaurism from the old members and enough of the 

following of that path by the new members. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second this amendment, 

because I believe it's more reflective of what the people of this 

province want. 

 

And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, and quoting from this 

article from the Star-Phoenix of yesterday.  The people are 

asking for a change.  And I say to the member from Wilkie that 

this is why . . . and from Arm River.  And I quote, what 

consultations by government members are reflecting and what 

people are saying in this province.  And I just conclude: 

 

 But to conclude, Grant Devine himself is one of the most 

honest men in Canadian politics (to quote). 

 

And Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Sadly, he was surrounded by some of the most dishonest men 

and women who ever wore a party button or unfurled a 

political banner. 

 Let's hope they will finally be brought to justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what consultation tells us.  And I'm asking 

the new members to stop this filibuster.  And I'm asking them 

to stop their foolishness and embark on a new direction, and to 

consult and to rebuild their party, because following their old 

dinosaurs will surely mean electoral defeat even for them in the 

next election. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's nice to hear the 

chorus.  I always like to sing with the chorus. 

 

And I also would like to congratulate the last speaker, the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote, I think in supporting 

exactly what we've been saying all day, and that is that you will 

be consulting. 

 

As I look at the letter that was written to the Premier, the 

business people were saying that they're frustrated with the lack 

of consultation.  And so I take it from the remarks made by the 

member, that he is in agreeance with those people that there 

should be consultation.  If you look at the amendment, it says 

here: 

 

 recognizes the need for the government to engage in genuine 

public consultations before introducing labour legislation that 

brings Saskatchewan in line with other provinces; 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what we've been saying in 

terms of talking to the motion, that the business sector are 

concerned with.  So I certainly thank the member for agreeing 

with us, and I certainly welcome his presentation rather than 

the previous where we heard a whole bunch of noise and not 

much in the way of constructive criticism or ideas.  So in that 

respect I think it's more in line with what we are trying to do 

here. 

 

In respect, Mr. Speaker, to the absence or not absence of 

members here, Mr. Speaker, I am quite pleased and proud to be 

part of a group.  And I think if you look at the percentage of 

attendance on this side of the House and compare it to the 

percentage of attendance on the other side, you'll find that we 

compare very, very favourably. 

 

I think in terms of attendance, there's about a third of them 

missing all the time.  Probably at this time if you look around 

it's probably 50 per cent.  So I have no problem with that, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think that if you look at some of the comments 

made by some of the learned reporting, they have said that the 

opposition has done a credible job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our job I believe, and it's our duty to bring to 

the attention of this Assembly the concerns of people.  And this 

letter that was written to the Premier, who in all fairness hastily 

organized a meeting with these people . . . And he also said he 

would listen to their concerns and indeed maybe pull some of 

the offensive legislation that's before this House, which is 

exactly what we've been asking for many, many days. 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

We are saying, listen before you do it; consult with people and 

get some kind of a consensus.  And that's what we've been 

saying.  And I see that some of the members over there agree 

with us.  And that's reassuring, that maybe there will be a 

change in attitude over there and we will get on to the business 

of the House. 

 

Speaking of the business of the House, Mr. Speaker, as to why 

we didn't talk about GRIP today.  Mr. Speaker, we will be 

talking about GRIP.  But I want to just try and show you that 

the labour Bill is in itself as important as GRIP. 

 

Now GRIP has got a certain predominance of attention in the 

last little while because of the time frame and because of the 

urgency of getting some kind of a . . . of some concessions 

from those people opposite, trying to explain to them in the 

most reasonable and in some cases the most dramatic ways that 

we know that there's something wrong with that Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, sir, there's something wrong with 

this Bill.  The business community have suggested . . . and, Mr. 

Speaker, this is not what we are saying; this is what the 

business community is saying.  And in the GRIP Bill it's not 

what we're saying; it's what the people are saying.  And so 

there is a connection. 

 

And I would like to say to the members opposite, the fact that 

we didn't want to take private members' day away from the 

opposition and talk about GRIP is because we fully intend to 

develop GRIP in its entirety.  Now this Bill, we have a chance 

to talk about it today because it's private members' day.  And 

we felt in our wisdom -- now you don't have to agree with that 

-- but we felt that today is the day we should bring this up and 

let the folks over on the other side of the House understand that 

there are people that don't agree totally with this Bill. 

 

I would like to say to you, this Bill, this labour Bill, is 

becoming I think increasingly important for the same reason 

that the GRIP Bill is important in that contractors are uneasy.  

They don't know how to bid a contract because they don't know 

what the rules are going to be.  Labour must be getting very 

uneasy because there's no work for their workers.  How can 

you bid a job when you don't know what the rules are going to 

be?  So this is why this Bill is just as important as other Bills. 

 

The headlines . . . and the member quoted headlines.  And I 

don't know what the relationship that he quoted about some of 

the bureaucrats has to do with myself as a member in the report 

that he read, but I can talk about headlines.  It says: Tougher 

measures included.  And this is a special from the Star-

Phoenix.  This was on August 11, '92.  Another headline: 

Relations more pro-union. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there's a feeling -- and I don't think it's 

right -- out among the union people, that free enterprisers by 

definition are against labour.  That is, in my opinion, a myth 

that has been long overdue for a correction.  Free enterprisers, 

who are the wealth creators of the province, the job creators, 

are not anti-union.  They may to a certain degree be anti-union 

leaders who in my 

opinion, sir, are not looking for the fairness that's needed in 

labour relations, but are looking for more power for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can relate that to some of the members opposite 

who have got new-found power and they're abusing that power. 

 

In labour relations I can say to you, sir, that I have been in . . . 

not involved but certainly in contact with labour relations that 

are not unionized, but they are organized.  And they're called 

associations.  An association is another name for an organized 

union, but they don't go into the confrontation process. 

 

They go into a negotiation process where they sit down and 

talk to the employers and they may take many, many meetings, 

and it may take several months to do so.  But instead of the 

process that seems to be accepted now in labour relations, 

where the union leaders will put their highest expectations on 

the table and the employer will put his lowest expectations on 

the table, and they somehow hope to achieve somewhere in the 

middle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to me, I've always felt that was a little bit 

ridiculous.  It takes away what I would say is the trust, the trust 

in each other.  If in fact we laid our expectations and our 

wishes and indeed our needs from the labour side on the table, 

if the employer would lay on the table exactly where they 

stood, and said, all right, we'll share.  And the reason I say that, 

I used to do that, Mr. Speaker. I used to do that. 

 

I run a small business, five to seven people, which is, you 

know, not very big.  And we would sit down and what I said to 

them was, you can share, you can share with whatever extra 

earnings that we get here.  And I'll be fair.  I said, I expect a 

little bigger piece of the pie than you get because I am 

responsible to make sure that there's money in the bank at the 

end of the month or on the 15th, for you.  But we will share. 

 

And that's what I say about organization rather than 

unionization.  And I'm sure the day is not here for a name 

change, but certainly an attitude change I think is here.  And I 

understand from the letter that I think has been read into the 

record -- I'm not sure it has.  And this is to the Hon. R.J. 

Romanow, Premier.  It says: 

 

 The following Saskatchewan business organizations have 

recently met to share and discuss our serious concerns about 

the economic future of our province.  All of us share 

concerns about the need for a co-ordinated vision of the 

economy of Saskatchewan.  We need a positive climate to 

maintain existing jobs and help create new employment and 

investment.  We have all been frustrated by your 

government's 'consultation'. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I know the member wasn't in the 

House but that letter has been read twice in the same debate 

already.  Okay?  Order.  . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I'm 

not criticizing the member.  I'm just simply drawing it to your 

attention that it's been read twice this morning and I'm just 

making the member aware of it. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

That's all. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I accept your ruling 

and I think you'll notice I said I wasn't sure.  I do want to refer, 

with your permission, to the letter, if I may, once more. 

 

And in this letter it says we are: 

 

 . . . increasingly overwhelmed and frustrated by your 

government's legislative agenda and we must discuss this 

(and this is the part) privately and immediately. 

 

And this is going back to the point, Mr. Speaker, I said that we 

have to get away from this kind of thing. 

 

And the proposed legislation, the proposed legislation is 

causing labour a concern.  And it's a concern to the majority of 

the people in Saskatchewan.  And the concern in this is the lack 

of consultation.  And this is why the amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

addresses that very concern, and why I'm prepared to stand in 

my place and congratulate the member from Moose Jaw 

Northcote in supporting us in bringing this concern to the 

House, to the floor of the Assembly.  We in no way at all, Mr. 

Speaker, are trying to suggest that it's our opposition totally to 

the legislation.  It's the concern of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said to you, I've mentioned the fact that it's 

tough for a contractor to bid with confidence when he doesn't 

know what the rules are going to finally be.  And that's why I'm 

suggesting to you and to the House that this Bill does have 

some degree of urgency.  And while we may have passed up a 

chance, as the members opposite suggested, to talk about 

GRIP, I say again, we are prepared.  If the members . . . if the 

government are not prepared to take some of our suggestions as 

to how to alleviate that problem by giving the Supreme Court a 

chance to look at it, we are prepared to talk about it, and we are 

prepared to talk about it at length. 

 

But this Bill, this Bill -- and I'm going to ask your indulgence 

for a second, sir -- and in fairness to the people opposite it says 

"draft" on the top, but it is a Bill that concerns the construction 

. . . One of the things that I noticed in this Bill that I think also 

has the construction and all these people concerned, is board, 

under the heading "board" -- powers of the board.  And I don't 

know, Mr. Speaker, if this has been read into record.  If it has, 

you can stop me. 

 

And it says in here: in addition to any other order that it may 

make pursuant to this Act, the board may make orders 

determining whether an organization is an employer's 

organization, that's up to them to decide; determining whether 

an employer is a unionized employer, that's up to them to 

decide; determining whether an employer is a unionized 

employee, that's up to the board; determining whether this Act 

is being or has been contravened -- they are the judge, the jury, 

and the whole thing -- requiring compliance with this Act, the 

regulations or any decision of the board with respect to a matter 

before the board. 

 

These kind of things, Mr. Speaker . . . and you may and 

they may say to us, but we will never use that power.  Then 

that begs the question:  then why is it in there?  Now you may 

come back or somebody may come back and say, because of a 

circumstance may arise.  Well my reply would be then, let us 

wait and see whether a circumstance does arise because we 

could go on for 20 years with harmony without that in there.  

And it would be, to me, it would take an irritant out of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to comment a little bit on a couple of 

other things.  And first of all, I would like to suggest to the 

members opposite, those at least that were here in the last . . . 

before the last election, they have a bit of a short memory.  As 

my colleague says, it's good, but short.  And I think the reason 

it's good is because they never use it.  It's brand-new. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remind the members of the year 1987, when 

they talk about obstruction and delaying tactics and the 

frustration that the government had trying to get their 

legislation through this House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not one of those who are committed to 

revenge.  I am prepared, Mr. Speaker, and I mentioned to one 

of the members on the other side just a day or so ago when they 

mentioned  -- and I'll say this in fairness, not in a mean manner 

but in a bit of a chiding manner -- about the long hours that 

they seem to blame us for.  My response, Mr. Speaker, at the 

time was that I am not against long hours.  I've always had long 

hours.  I've worked long hours all my life.  And there's nothing 

here to keep me in Regina.  My home is not in Regina.  It's not 

our fault.  We didn't do this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we're saying is, particularly in the Bill 

before the House, or the motion before the House, Mr. Speaker, 

all we're saying, all we're saying is, be fair.  Be fair to all, not 

only to the unions.  I don't like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that all 

the union members feel the same as the leadership of the 

unions. 

 

The unions themselves have a self-perpetuating motive behind 

some of their demands.  Mr. Speaker, whether the socialists on 

the other side like it or not, the wealth creators have to be 

recognized and treated fairly.  Mr. Speaker, I know, I know that 

when you say the word wealth it makes the socialists cringe.  

It's much like the P-word -- profit, progress, and prosperity -- 

they hate that.  Anyone that wants to create prosperity or . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . There you go.  There you go.  

There's a sore spot.  There's a sore spot.  I hit a nerve.  I hit a 

nerve. 

 

What you won't understand -- most of you over there -- that 

someone, someone has to create something before you can give 

it away.  Russia found out that you can't keep on giving wealth 

away; it broke a country.  That's right.  That's right. 

 

But what you didn't find out, sir, was that there was no wealth 

created.  Once our farm economy went, there was nothing built 

by you people.  Nothing built by you people. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I know we just have a few minutes left 

but I would ask the members not to interrupt to the extent that 

they are right now.  The member has the floor. 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Let him have his time at this time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, we understand, on this side of the 

House, the way the process works.  The union leadership, I 

think more so than the members, had expectations because of 

the support that was given to the members opposite.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we expect that.  But what we're saying is: remember, 

remember the other people, and be fair. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, the time is now to disrupt business 

and labour.  In the business community, Mr. Speaker, they're 

suffering the same as the farm community.  We have to survive 

this recession.  And I suggest to you, sir, and others, we're in 

the survival mode and we have been for the last six, seven 

years. 

 

And why we are criticized for some of the money that we put 

out to try and alleviate some of the problems out there . . . I 

don't think . . . I think that in time even those on the other side 

will realize that it had to be done. 

 

We are trying to work our way through, and I believe that in all 

fairness the working people are willing to help.  They're willing 

to do that.  But it must be seen to be fair.  Mr. Speaker, we've 

already lost 18,000 jobs. 

 

And let me say to you and to those that are interested, of a little 

incident that I happened to be involved in in a small way where 

this person was saying: wow, goody-goody, they're going to 

raise the minimum wage.  The employer said, that won't help 

you.  And the worker said, oh yes, you'll have to give me the 

extra money.  And the employer said, but you won't have a job; 

I can't afford to keep you if the minimum wage goes to 7 or $8. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what we're saying.  Labour has . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 12 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 2 p.m. this afternoon. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


