




















































Hansard: June 02, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 821 

 June 2, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petitions pursuant to rule 11(7), and they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society Limited 

and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Limited, 

both of the City of Regina, praying for an Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited. 

 

And the petition: 

 

 Of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend An Act to 

incorporate the Briercrest Bible College. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Nominating Committee 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Lingenfelter, from the special committee 

appointed to prepare lists of members to compose the standing 

committees of the Assembly, presents the second report of the 

said committee, which is as follows: 

 

 Your committee recommends that the size and composition 

of the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

established by the Legislative Assembly May 21, 1992 under 

rule 89, be as follows: 

 

 Members Goulet, Cline, Crofford, Flavel, Goohsen, 

Haverstock, Lorje, Roy, Stanger and Toth, with a 

membership of 10. 

 

 Your committee further recommends that membership on the 

Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs be transferable 

by written notice signed by the original member and filed 

with the chair of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the second report of the special committee appointed to 

prepare lists of members to compose the standing committees 

of the Assembly, be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a few 

comments regarding the committee, as it has been proposed 

and in light of the debate that took place some . . . I believe, it's 

about a month ago now or a few weeks 

ago in this Assembly, regarding the committee and regarding 

the make-up of the committee. 

 

We all, certainly in this House and in this province and across 

Canada, are quite well aware of the ongoing debate we are 

facing regarding the constitution and regarding the make-up of 

our great nation.  And I believe the Premier in his comments, 

when we were in debate, talked about the fact that we must 

certainly work together and put aside political differences to 

deal with matters before us that are very serious and very 

important to each and every one of us. 

 

And I believe the Justice minister has been involved quite, I 

guess, very forthrightly in discussions that have been taking 

place over the last two weeks.  And I believe, beginning June 9, 

the committees that the Premier . . . or Prime Minister has 

called -- or Mr. Clark, I believe -- has called members again to 

come and sit down and address the constitution. 

 

We did have a couple of concerns with regards to the make-up.  

And certainly maybe there is, at times, disagreements arise and 

maybe everyone will admit that we may not have understood 

what each individuals were saying, but it was our 

understanding -- at least the impression that our House Leader 

had been left with -- that our caucus would allowed three 

members on the constitution.  We certainly are quite well in 

favour of being involved in this debate although we, as has 

been indicated, maybe question some of the reasonings behind 

the special standing committee at the time. 

 

But as I have indicated earlier, we are quite well aware of the 

ongoing discussion and we . . . In light of the fact of the 

openness the Premier had even talked about and putting aside 

differences, I guess we all want to hear what the public are 

saying regarding the constitution.  There's no doubt in my mind 

that as this committee speaks to people across this province, 

that they're going to find that there are many differences, even 

in our own province, regarding Canada, regarding the 

constitution, regarding the debate that is taking place right now.  

And so we will go along. 

 

We accept the fact that this committee has been put in place.  

We have raised our differences and our major concern was, at 

this time, was we felt that it would be appropriate to have had 

at least three members from our caucus involved on the 

committee.  And no doubt it would have put an extra load but 

we were prepared, Mr. Speaker, to give ourselves to the 

discussion of the matters regarding the constitution so that 

indeed when the committee reports to this House later this year 

or at whatever time it reports, Mr. Speaker, we will all have had 

a fair opportunity to hear and to listen to people and to be part 

of the process.  And so I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Amendment to Rule 89(4) of the Rules and Procedures of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Saskatoon River Heights, that rule 89(4) of 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan be amended by adding the Standing Committee 

on the Constitutional Affairs to the list of those committees 

with transferable memberships so that the said rule is as 

follows: 

 

 89(4) The membership on the Standing Committees on 

Non-controversial Bills, on Crown Corporations and on 

Constitutional Affairs, other than that of the Chair, shall be 

transferable by written notice signed by the original member 

and filed with the Chair of the committee; and 

 

 That the said rule, as amended, shall come into effect this 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this change is being put forward 

by the committee on the recommendation of the members of 

the official opposition.  They felt it would be better for them to 

be able to transfer membership, being a smaller caucus.  And in 

the spirit of co-operation that recommendation was accepted by 

the committee. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 

and through you to the Assembly, a group of grade 5 and 6 

students from Pangman who are sitting in your gallery today.  

They're accompanied by their teacher, Judy Schwindt, and 

chaperons, Faye Heath and Laurie Claffey. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this group after question period 

for pictures, refreshments, and questions.  And I ask all 

members here today to join with me in a warm welcome to the 

students here visiting us. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to at this 

time make a short report on a meeting that I had with the 

energy and mines people yesterday. 

 

They kicked off Energy and Mines Week in Saskatoon 

yesterday, and I was able to talk to people in the industry.  Mr. 

Speaker, they were very concerned about Bills 9 and 10 that the 

House is now considering.  The industry had no chance to have 

any input at all on these Bills, and they were . . . before they 

were presented to the House.  And that definitely sends the 

wrong signal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apparently the Bill has been pulled.  And one 

meeting with the minister has been had already, and another is 

planned for I think Wednesday -- being tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, energy and mines is the second largest industry in 

Saskatchewan after agriculture, and the dollar numbers and job 

numbers are very impressive, Mr. Speaker.  But the fact 

remains that the government should 

be consulting with the people, no matter how big or how small. 

 

The opposition takes as his major victory that the government 

has delayed this Bill to consult with the industry, and we 

commend the minister for admitting his mistakes and acting to 

correct the flaws.  We hope, Mr. Speaker, that he will bring 

forward some of the amendments to this Bill that address the 

most serious mistakes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, as you know, this week is also Tourism Awareness 

Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for this tourism season our government cancelled 

the Maxwell Smart ad campaign of a year ago, Mr. Speaker, 

and replaced it with a locally designed and produced ad 

campaign at a fraction of the cost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I am very happy to announce that as a result 

of this year's promotional campaign, during the month of April 

the number of inquiries to the Department of Tourism as 

compared to April a year ago from Canadians outside of 

Saskatchewan, the number has doubled. 

 

Inquiries, Mr. Speaker, from the United States have tripled, and 

inquiries from local Saskatchewan residents have quadrupled, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, that is the result of a truly smart 

campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities and constituencies across the 

province are recognizing the potential of the hospitality 

industry, and nowhere is this more true than in Moose Jaw.  In 

addition to our existing parks and museums, we in Moose Jaw 

are now the home of the largest selection of outdoor murals on 

the Prairies. 

 

We are proud as well to be the home of the renowned Canadian 

Armed Forces-based Snowbirds, and on July 10 we look 

forward to opening a gallery in Moose Jaw in the Western 

Development Museum to celebrate and to display the 

Snowbirds.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in this place today to 

comment on the importance of tourism in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan.  I farm in the north-east part of the agriculture 

part, at least, of the province.  And the towns and the villages 

up there have been very adversely affected by the downturn in 

agriculture over the past 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

years. 

 

But there have been a few positive things happening and 

probably the brightest one of them is the tourism industry.  We 

have two hydroelectric dams on the Saskatchewan in my 

constituency that have really enhanced the natural beauty of the 

area and have become the focal point of an industry that's very 

important and growing in my area.  With very good catches of 

record-size pike and wall-eye are being caught every day and 

fishing has been very good so far this year. 

 

The tourism industry has been growing every year in my area 

and the economic spin-off that it had is very good for that part 

of the province.  But the money that it brings into the area isn't 

the only benefit, Mr. Speaker; it's the people we meet, the new 

people from other parts of Canada and the United States that 

return year and year. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, it has made many of us that are local 

people there realize what we have and how much we appreciate 

where we live and the area that we grew up in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

want to congratulate the government for some more good news.  

The Minister of Education has just announced about $8.8 

million in emergency funding for school repairs in this 

province.  I'm particularly pleased to see that some of these 

repairs are going to be done in the city of Saskatoon, the city of 

Regina, Prince Albert, North Battleford, as well as other areas 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, this is National Access Awareness 

Week and many of the projects that we've become aware of 

that are required had to do with accessibility for disabled 

students.  As we all know, more and more disabled students are 

attending our schools.  And in order to do that, in order to be 

part of an integrated setting, they must have access to those 

schools.  I want to congratulate the Minister of Education and 

the Government of Saskatchewan for forwarding about $6.6 

million to various school divisions across Saskatchewan.  It 

certainly will enhance accessibility for disabled students in our 

province. 

 

(1345) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

bring forward to the attention of the Assembly and to the 

people of Saskatchewan that the Zone 1 55-plus senior games 

will be taking place in Carlyle on June 8 and 9.  Zone 1 

represents the area from Ogema to the Manitoba border, from 

the Qu'Appelle River to the U.S. (United States) border.  Since 

we're all politicians in here, it encompasses the constituencies 

of Souris-Cannington, Estevan, Bengough 

_Milestone, Weyburn, Indian Head-Wolseley, and Moosomin. 

 

Participants in these senior games are involved in not only 

physical activities but also in mental and spiritually beneficial 

programs.  Some of the programs that they're 

involved in, Mr. Speaker, include tennis, performing arts, 

old-time dancing, golf, bridge, horseshoes, poetry, and track 

and field. 

 

The participation in these type of games helps the participants 

in their physical well-being and in their mental well-being, 

which in one sense is a wellness model for the Minister of 

Health in that any of these activities will help us live longer, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I encourage those that are qualified in age and are able to, to 

participate in the senior games in their areas.  Mr. Speaker, the 

winners will go on to Moose Jaw to the provincial games on 

July 13, 14, and 15.  I would like to congratulate the Carlyle 

committee for the work they have done in putting these games 

on, and I encourage everybody to participate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to 

congratulate the Minister of Education today for her 

announcement of approximately $8.8 million for emergency 

repairs to schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of those schools are in rural Saskatchewan, and the Last 

Mountain school division in my constituency is receiving repair 

funding for three schools at Semans and at Quinton and at 

Strasbourg for a total government cost of $182,895.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is just a part of our commitment not only to 

education, but also to rural Saskatchewan in general. 

 

One of the main objectives is providing safe, modern learning 

environment for our students and for their teachers.  Repairs 

become very important, Mr. Speaker, because of the dismal 

financial state that we find this province in.  There will not be 

much money for new schools. 

 

We will meet the objective of providing a safe, modern 

learning environment in 1992-93 and in years to come, despite 

the constraints that we face in terms of controlling the 

government's spending. 

 

I want to thank the minister again for her commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan and to the education system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer my 

congratulations to the Minister of Health and the Government 

of Saskatchewan for their initiatives in the health field in 

northern Saskatchewan -- the special $700,000 placed in 

northern Saskatchewan.  We'll be looking at not only the 

school-based dental plan in northern Saskatchewan, but also the 

home care program in the north. 

 

We're also looking at the issue of dealing with suicides and are 

planning to look at the whole area of substance abuse, family 

violence, and mental health.  We are trying to concentrate on 

the issue of disease prevention and health education. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with this holistic approach which 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

combines not only the personal level of development but the 

social and cultural development of the Dene and Cree people in 

northern Saskatchewan . . . will be a great plus in the history of 

northern Saskatchewan.  And with this community-based 

approach combined with the wellness model, I think we're 

looking for a better future for health in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Publication Costs 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

minister responsible for patronage and political rhetoric, which 

I realize each and every . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have a form here.  There's no 

minister by that portfolio, and I wish the member would -- 

order, order -- I wish the member would direct his question to 

anybody on the other side in the government benches. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll direct my question 

to the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, yesterday your news 

release and media conference on the credit rating was a 

cowardly partisan act, yet another example of your 

government's inability to govern without spewing liberal 

amounts of political mud at anybody who gets in the way. 

 

Mr. Minister all of your documents are highly partisan.  In fact 

your budget address is so full of NDP (New Democratic Party) 

political dirt that one has to read seven full pages to get any 

detail on what you're going to do to the people of this province 

-- seven pages.  Mr. Minister, how much did it cost the 

taxpayers of this province for this unprecedented political 

attack in the budget speech.  How much did it cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I can . . . I don't know 

what the cost of the budget documents are.  That information is 

available. I'll undertake to provide it to the member opposite.  

But I want to remind the member opposite that the budget 

speech reflected the direction of the government in this time 

that we are governing. And the direction is a result of the kind 

of waste and mismanagement that his colleagues perpetrated on 

Saskatchewan in the last 10 years which has brought us to the 

situation which we face a huge deficit, a huge accumulated debt 

which requires that now we begin to get that under control so 

we can stop getting the kind of downgrades that Standard and 

Poor's brought down for Saskatchewan yesterday, and indicated 

clearly that it was a result of the last 10 years of government by 

the Progressive Conservatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, in fact the budget paid tribute to the 

past NDP governments.  In fact your budget says, and I quote: 

 

 Working together with the Saskatchewan community, 

previous (NDP) . . . governments 

succeeded in establishing and enhancing the Province's 

financial integrity and building for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Proof positive, Mr. Speaker.  There we have it.  

Proof positive by the level of rhetoric in here right now, that 

that's exactly what they're engaging in, political rhetoric in 

these types of addresses. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you again, how much did the NDP Party 

pay for . . . or indeed did the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay for 

those seven full pages in the budget address? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the member is very 

correct that that statement is made in the budget speech because 

the statement is correct.  NDP governments have had to clean 

up a mess after Conservative and Liberal governments in 1944, 

in 1971, and again in 1992.  We're elected with a mandate to do 

that. 

 

There is costs associated with printing budget documents, 

informing the public what the budget is about.  I do not have it 

at hand with me, Mr. Speaker, but I will undertake to provide, 

take it as notice and provide to the member the next time I'm in 

the House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your taking 

the time to give us that information.  I was wondering also if 

you can tell the Assembly if any other government departments 

are using tax dollars to spread NDP propaganda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- None are.  The answer is no, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I have another document 

prepared by the Department of Finance with the Associate 

Minister of Finance's name on the front.  It is dated April 14, 

1992 and it is called: the accounting initiatives briefing 

package.  The very first paragraph says, and I quote: the New 

Democratic Party came to office committed to opening the 

books and restoring open, honest, accountable government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Once again, Mr. Speaker, proof positive of the 

political nature of it.  The only thing missing from this is in 

fact, is a disclaimer saying that the NDP Party ad was paid for 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, can you tell 

us how much this thing cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this sounds like 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

estimates in the Committee of Finance, with very detailed 

questions.  I will undertake and take notice and provide the 

answer . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the minister knows that you 

don't make a statement and take notice.  You either take notice 

or you answer the question.  That's the rule. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, not only are you using government 

documents to propagate your political agenda, you are using 

government distribution systems to distribute your New 

Democratic Party caucus office news releases to the media.  I 

have a news release dated April 22 put out by the member from 

The Battlefords which bitterly criticizes the former 

administration.  Even you cannot deny that this is propaganda, 

Mr. Minister.  Yet what's interesting to note is that the release 

has been sent by the cabinet press office, not your NDP caucus 

office, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, clearly you've been using government money, 

taxpayers' money, to distribute your political message.  Mr. 

Minister, how much did this one cost the taxpayers of the 

province?  And is this just another example of your political 

waste and mismanagement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, for 10 years, for 10 

years the people of Saskatchewan were denied information of 

the activities of their government when the former members 

were on this side of the House.  I want to say to the member for 

Kindersley so that he clearly understands -- that has changed.  

The public of Saskatchewan will know about the activities of 

the government and the public of Saskatchewan will know 

about the misguided activities of the members opposite because 

they are the voters and they have a right to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well we have more 

examples, if you like.  On May 29, just last Friday, another 

NDP news release was sent by the government's cabinet press 

secretary office.  This NDP news release politically attacks the 

federal government -- another NDP campaign which is being 

paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayers.  Mr. Minister, this 

appears to be common practice for your government.  You won 

the election on the promise that you were going to be honest 

and non-partisan.  You failed miserably on both accounts. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit that you've been dishonest 

with the public and most certainly have been partisan at the 

expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayers?  Will you admit that 

dishonesty? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say to the member from Kindersley that 

although for the last 10 years under the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government, the premier who was then the 

premier, the member from Thunder Creek, and all of their 

colleagues were in the hip pocket of the Prime Minister of 

Canada, Mr. Brian Mulroney . . . And because they kowtowed 

to the federal government and agreed to everything the federal 

government demanded, it has cost 

this province $550 million of off-loading, which would have 

balanced the budget had we had that money which was 

rightfully in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite, this government will not 

act in that way.  This government will provide a voice for 

Saskatchewan and we will stand up for this province when we 

feel there's a need to stand up for this province, and tell the 

federal government where they're going wrong and where they 

ought to be doing something.  And we ask the members 

opposite to speak up on behalf of Saskatchewan and join us in 

doing that on behalf of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the point is, when you're sending 

out political rhetoric the NDP Party should be paying for it, not 

the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have one more that I would like to present 

here today.  And it's dated April 27 and it comes from your 

department, the Minister of Finance himself's department. 

 

The Deputy Premier wrote a letter with respect to the budget -- 

a letter, I presume, which was widely distributed.  In this letter 

he says, and I hesitate, I hesitate to quote from it because of its 

exaggeration and inaccuracy, but it says:  When our 

government assumed power six months ago we knew that 10 

years of Devine's PC government had seriously undermined the 

provincial . . . the province's financial position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Once again, sir, once again, Mr. Speaker, proof 

positive by the level of noise from the government exactly what 

it is -- political rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's shameful to note that even the Deputy 

Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Do you believe that this kind of pure political 

garbage should be paid for by the NDP Party?  Or do you 

believe that you should continue to force the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan to pay, as you've been doing ever since you 

became in power? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, on October 21, in the 

election in this province, the people of Saskatchewan said they 

wanted the new government to open the books.  That's what we 

have done.  We have opened the books.  The people of 

Saskatchewan know where we stand financially, as bad as that 

news is. 

 

And I want to tell the members opposite that I intend to 

continue to tell the people of Saskatchewan how that situation 

was created.  They know it.  They will continue to hear it.  And 

each and every day, Mr. Member from Kindersley, they will 

think of the damage and the harm that your members, when 

they were on this side of the House, did to the present 

generation in Saskatchewan 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

 and to our children and our grandchildren -- something which 

we are going to turn around so that they can have the future that 

they deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer deserves from this government is for 

their NDP ads to be paid for by the NDP Party, and not the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has shown that it's prepared to 

take and use personal MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) files and documents.  Your government has no 

problem engaging in massive political patronage.  You cancel 

energy deals because of party pressure.  You close parks down 

because they're not in NDP ridings.  You cancel pension plans 

for single women because it was a Tory idea. 

 

Mr. Minister, at the very least, when you launch one of your 

own political inquiries . . . will you launch one of your own 

political inquiries into this dishonest, immoral, and costly 

conduct of your own government?  Will you take this initiative, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this is getting to be an 

old, worn-out record verging on the verge of being silly.  For 

days now the members opposite have spent all of their time 

defending the record of the former Conservative government. 

 

Well I want to tell the member for Kindersley, who is new to 

this House, get off of that and start looking to the future.  

Because the record that you're defending, which you had no 

part of, is a very dismal one.  And you don't do yourself any 

favours by making yourself a part of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Impact of Budget on Livestock Industry 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to direct my question to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, because your budget takes out the 

feed grain assistance and livestock cash advance program, what 

do you anticipate the reduction of the cattle numbers on feed 

will be for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member 

opposite yesterday, we've engaged in discussions with the 

livestock industry.  And the livestock industry continues to be 

committed to this province and we will continue to work with 

them to make sure that the opportunities continue to be strong 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, we understand that your ag 

caucus met today with the livestock feeder association and they 

told you that they estimate that each animal will lose $42 in the 

market-place because of your program.  Are you prepared to 

change this disastrous part of your 

budget and will you tell us what impact it has on the cattle 

industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have invited the livestock 

industry to meet with us in a broad consultation to examine the 

kinds of questions the member opposite is raising.  The 

numbers are highly variable; clearly the numbers the member 

opposite picks are not average at any rate.  And the fact is that 

the livestock industry has committed themselves to sitting 

down with us and looking at the programs we have that 

continue to support the industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Dr. Hartley Furtan, a chief economist at the 

University of Saskatchewan, has estimated that this will cause a 

reduction in an already struggling feeding sector in the 

livestock side of 117,000 livestock reduced in the feeding 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan.  Will you confirm 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, no I won't confirm that.  I 

don't know where the member opposite gets his numbers but 

both of the numbers he's been quoting this afternoon are highly 

inaccurate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to inform him that that is 

what he thinks of the livestock feeders association comments 

that they made to his ag caucus, because that's what they told 

him this morning, because we have exactly the same 

information that you got.  Will you disclose to this House that 

that is a 50 per cent reduction in the livestock feeding industry 

on the cattle side alone in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry is a 

complex group of industries in Saskatchewan.  They include 

farmers who are mixed farmers in their cow-calf operations.  

They include ranchers, they include feeders and backgrounders.  

And every change in government program impacts each piece 

of the industry differently. 

 

As I said yesterday, Saskatchewan is not in a position to engage 

in a bidding war with Alberta for our feeder cattle; however, 

I've invited the livestock industries to sit down with us and to 

look at the impact of the feeder industry as an economic 

development initiative in Saskatchewan compared to other 

industries here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, they also told you that this loss 

would be a $500 million loss in direct contributions in the 

industry.  They told you that it was going to be $160 million 

loss in labour and $220 million gross domestic product loss.  

Which of these statistics are wrong?  From your analysis in 

your Department of Agriculture, which of these statistics are 

wrong? 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, all of them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then, Mr. Minister, that is exactly the content 

that was given to you by the livestock feeders association.  Mr. 

Brian Perkins and Mr. Alexander were to see your ag caucus.  

They told you all about it and yet you say it's absolutely wrong.  

Will you table from your Department of Agriculture, the exact 

Estimates of what they were? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, we have met with the cattle 

feeding industry on more than one occasion.  We've had good 

discussions about impact.  The numbers they give us are 

believable when we have those discussions.  I don't know 

where the member opposite is . . . how he's interpreting the 

numbers they give us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when Mr. Furtan believes 

that you are right, you quote him and do everything you can so 

that he substantiates your point of view.  When you disagree 

with it, then he has no value, and that's where they come from, 

Mr. Minister. 
 

Has the minister done an analysis to in fact ensure that there 

isn't going to be 117,000 head loss in the province of 

Saskatchewan to the feeding industry? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

different documents from different sources that talk about 

different impacts of investment in the feeding industry.  The 

invitation I've given to the industry is to sit down with us and 

examine those impacts and to demonstrate that the best place 

for us to spend our marginal economic development dollars in 

Saskatchewan is in the feeding industry, and they're prepared to 

do that with us. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister confirm that they also told 

him this morning that they're going to lose 1,500 jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan with this reduction? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the delegation met with ag 

caucus.  I don't know if that's part of their analysis, but clearly 

that's an overestimate of impact in the industry. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I would like to have you do 

some analysis from your department, put it on the Table here, 

to show that the accuracy of Mr. Hartley Furtan is being 

questioned in this case.  And I want to point out that . . . ask 

you the question: on 1,500 people, how many people in the 

livestock packing industry are we going to lose in the job 

market? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that when I 

spoke with the stock growers association yesterday at their 

meeting, one of the last comments at the meeting as I was 

leaving was from their president who committed 

himself to an open discussion, free of bias, relative to the issues 

that the member opposite is raising and that discussion is going 

to be held and those issues will be reflected back to 

government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the study that the livestock 

feeders association from Dr. Hartley Furtan also said that you 

are going to lose one packing plant in the province of 

Saskatchewan because of that.  Which one is it going to be?  

The one in Moose Jaw or the one in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

continues to make judgements about things that have been 

cursorily examined by him.  And I want to say that the broad 

discussion that we intend to have with the livestock industry 

will reflect the real facts about the questions the member 

opposite is raising. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you 

how could you justify putting money into the Moose Jaw 

packers if you knew in your budget that you were going to cut 

the program to devastate the livestock industry, feeding 

industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker the livestock industry in 

Saskatchewan continues to be a resilient and aggressive 

industry and I know that the people in Saskatchewan will 

continue to engage in it and they will engage in it because they 

are good producers, they are efficient producers, and they can 

compete with producers anywhere in the world and they will 

continue to be a healthy industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, that is exactly what you 

understand about the livestock feeding industry.  That's exactly 

what you understand about the packing industry.  One packer in 

Alberta will pack 100,000-plus cattle a year.  You're going to 

take and leave in the province of Saskatchewan, for two 

packing plants you're going to leave two packing plants to kill 

100,000 head of cattle?  And that is what you're saying to this 

Assembly.  Tell me which one is going to shut down? Intercon 

or Moose Jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the pretend concern by the 

member opposite for the packing industry and the livestock 

industry needs to be put into perspective.  Under the previous 

administration the number of cattle on feed in this province 

reduced from 400,000 head to just around 200,000 head.  I 

challenge the member opposite to start being a little bit honest 

about his real concern other than politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I want to talk about the aspect 

of giving an opportunity for the livestock industry to recover.  

Most of those cattle went to the United States because they 

took a whole lot of land off of their programs and so that is 

why that went south rather than staying here.  In fact the 

livestock industry will tell you that too.  Why weren't you with 

the meeting with the people here in your ag caucus this 

morning discussing this with your livestock feeders 

association? 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has a 

poor memory about what happened to the feeder industry.  

Certainly more of it went to Alberta because of the policies of 

the neighbouring province, and went to the States in this period 

of time.  And I was involved in a cabinet meeting this morning 

while the caucus was meeting with the cattle industry. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, how much money did you give 

to Intercon to buy the Moose Jaw packing plant through 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the arrangement between the 

packing plant and the government was not made by my 

department.  But the reality is that the health of the industry 

here in Saskatchewan continues to be based on the willingness 

of the livestock industry to deal with reality.  And the member 

opposite ought to be ashamed of trying to point fingers at this 

point, when he was in government during the time when the 

livestock industry was cut in half from 400,000 to 200,000 

head. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now let's talk about the pork industry.  How 

much are you going to slice out of the packing plants in the 

province of Saskatchewan with your reduction in your feed 

grain assistance program on the pork industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the questions of the member 

opposite leave me at a loss with respect to what they really 

want an industry to do.  I know that farmers and cattle feeders 

and hog producers and business people in Saskatchewan 

believe in doing business because they do it better than other 

people across the country and in the rest of the world.  I know 

that the hog industry operates the lowest cost production 

system in Canada here because we're good producers and we 

have access to feed grains and we have space and we have 

good people and we have equipment. 

 

The member opposite seems to be quite unfamiliar with the 

energy in the agricultural sector and their willingness to attack 

the issues where they really lie, which is doing business 

because you're willing to work hard and because you're willing 

to do it at the least possible cost. 

 

The interest of the member opposite in this issue beyond 

politics simply does not exist.  The fact is that we have a 

healthy agricultural industry and they will continue to work. 

And it will be based on a policy that says we will pay our bills 

here in Saskatchewan, we'll get our debt under control, and we 

will not follow the folly of the government of the province 

nearby who's . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Could I ask the member from Arm 

River to please come to order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you table the analysis from 

your Department of Agriculture that shows the benefits that 

have accrued since you cut the FeedGAP 

(feed grain adjustment program) program and the livestock 

cash advance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will table with people who 

really care about the industry all of the discussions that we can 

have . . . all the papers that we can have a good discussion 

about the impact and a good discussion about the future of the 

industry in Saskatchewan, based on real facts and not the 

pretend kind of economics practised by the members opposite 

and their friends in Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Mining Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

announce that in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Mining 

Association, I proclaim the week of June 1 as Mining Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mining is Saskatchewan's second largest industry and is a very 

important contributor to the economy.  It accounts for $1.3 

billion of the gross domestic product each year.  The mining 

industry spends more than $1.5 billion annually in the province 

on goods, services, and wages. 

 

In addition to the mainstays of potash and uranium, the 

province's mining industry also produces coal, copper, zinc, 

gold, silver, cadium, sodium  sulphate, and clay products. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Could I ask the member 

from Saskatoon Broadway, please come to order.  We have a 

ministerial statement and I can't even hear the minister from 

here.  When I call "order" I expect members to come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As well, there 

have been recent activities evaluating the potential of diamond 

mining in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mining industry in Saskatchewan was one of 

the first to adopt an environmental protection policy.  It now 

spends more than $20 million each year to protect and work in 

harmony with the environment. 

 

Mining is one of the safest industries in Saskatchewan, with an 

enviable lost-time record and more than 500 trained emergency 

response personnel on alert at various mining operations 

throughout the province at all times.  These people will be 

demonstrating their safety skills at the annual mine rescue 

competitions in Yorkton this weekend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to join with me in 

recognizing this week as Mining Week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that we on 

this side will join with the minister in proclaiming the 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

week as mining and energy week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think most of the public realize the impact 

of the mining and energy industry on Saskatchewan's economy.  

I had the privilege of being in the industry in a small way for 

about 32 years.  And a lot of the numbers are high, a lot of the 

numbers are big, but in a lot of times the return on investment 

is quite low. 

 

And the people in the mining have persevered, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think have done a great job in our province.  They are 

indeed, as the minister mentioned I believe yesterday -- I was 

there when he made his address . . . it is the second largest 

industry in Saskatchewan.  The dollar numbers are very 

impressive and the numbers of jobs are very impressive. 

 

And we on this side of the House recognize that, Mr. Speaker, 

and we're looking forward to any amendments or adjustments 

the minister will make to Bill 10 which has the industry quite 

concerned. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reassessment -- SAMA 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I rise in 

the House to clarify the status of the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency's reassessment proposals and the 

supporting legislative amendments. 

 

The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, SAMA, 

has proposed several changes to the property assessment 

system in Saskatchewan.  The changes include the elimination 

of the business assessment with the introduction of a separate 

mill rate to be set by municipal governments.  SAMA has 

recommended that this change, along with a number of others 

designed to modernize the assessment system by moving to a 

market evaluation, enhance its fairness and equality.  They 

expect that those proposals should be implemented by 

legislation this year. 

 

Today I want to make it clear that legislative amendments 

necessary to authorize property reassessment and assessment 

reform, will be introduced when consultations on the proposed 

changes are complete and support for the change is clear. 

 

SAMA is meeting extensively with communities to review the 

foreseeable impacts of reassessment.  These meetings are not 

complete and the reaction to SAMA's modified proposals is not 

yet in.  I am hesitant to introduce legislation when full public 

reaction is not clear. 

 

The provincial government supports SAMA's work.  We all 

have an interest in being sure that the reassessment proposals 

are endorsed by municipal governments.  To this end, and so 

the government can more accurately gauge local government 

and public support, I have asked municipalities to pass a 

resolution in their community stating either their support or 

rejection of these assessment proposals. 

If a majority of local government support these changes, I ask 

that they communicate this to me and to the SAMA Board. 

 

I have made this situation known to SAMA board of directors, 

and I have stressed the importance of clear local government 

support for reassessment changes before implementation 

through new legislation proceeds.  Because of the time needed 

to complete the consultation process, legislation will not be 

passed in this legislative session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think any time that 

there are plans to change the property taxation system within 

the province of Saskatchewan, there's always a great deal of 

concern.  And we have seen with the SAMA report that kind of 

concern throughout the province.  And we've heard from 

people in various sectors of the economy that are concerned 

about the SAMA recommendations, and we have a number of 

questions and concerns about it as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We would certainly appreciate a copy of the . . . a courtesy that 

we would appreciate, and I thank the minister for sending over 

the statement. 

 

I think it's important that the consultation does indeed take 

place with the municipalities and affected groups, and we 

would whole-heartedly hope that the minister does move 

forward with that consultation process. 

 

We understand that you're not planning on proceeding with the 

Bill for this sitting, and so I think that will give adequate time 

for all parties to be consulted, and we appreciate that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a Day of Appreciation for 

Scottish Clans in Canada 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move 

first reading of a Bill to declare a Day of Appreciation for the 

Scottish Clans in Canada. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Consumer Products Warranties Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act to repeal The Hospitals Tax Act and 

respecting certain consequential amendments resulting 

from the repeal of that Act 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to repeal The Hospitals Tax Act and 

respecting certain consequential amendments resulting from the 

repeal of that Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Table Officer 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to introduce 

to the hon. members of the Assembly, Mr. Charles Robert, a 

committee Clerk who is on attachment from the Senate in 

Ottawa.  He will be assisting our Clerks at the Table for the 

remainder of the session.  I think as most of you . . . Charles 

Robert is certainly no stranger to this Assembly, and I ask all 

members to welcome Mr. Robert to our Assembly.  Will you 

do so now. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a Day of Appreciation for 

Scottish Clans in Canada 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure to move 

second reading of this Bill to declare a day of appreciation for 

the Scottish clans in Canada.  As you are aware this is the first 

private members' Bill to be introduced under the new rules of 

this Assembly.  Those rules are hoped to represent a spirit of 

co-operation among all members of the Assembly, and so you 

will understand how I see this Bill as a bit of a test of that 

spirit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Bill itself is not controversial.  It simply acts on a request 

of our citizens of Scottish decent to acknowledge their heritage 

and the role it played in building our province and our country.  

I, along with the member from Wilkie, have Scottish blood in 

our veins and we are proud of that part of our heritage. And I'm 

proud of my heritage. 

 

We believe that all people of Saskatchewan recognize the 

contribution of the Scottish clans from the great explorer 

Mackenzie to the first prime minister of our nation John A. 

Macdonald. 

 

And so this Bill proposes a day of appreciation of the Scottish 

clans in Canada.  It does not, Mr. Speaker, entail any days off 

or statutory holidays, but simply confers recognition.  And it is 

appropriate that this Bill is being introduced just before Mosaic 

takes place in Regina.  I am sure that many of you will take in 

this event and enjoy many of the pavilions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to passage of this Bill and 

anticipate all members' support.  Thank you. 
 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- . . . in this debate and others may want to 

speak on it.  I'm going to move to adjourn the debate on this. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 5 -- Health Care Fees 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment thereto by Mr. 

Draper. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to rise to address the motion which is 

before us.  And for the information of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, and those who are following the proceedings, I remind 

the . . . regarding the amendment that was brought forth by the 

good doctor, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. 

Speaker, which would be worded as follows: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the government for standing 

firm in its commitment to universal health care by keeping 

Saskatchewan one of the few provinces not to charge annual 

health premiums, and for showing leadership by expanding 

medicare into a wellness model, in spite of the staggering 

financial obstacles now facing this administration. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is with pride in the history of my province 

and pride in the history of my political party, Mr. Speaker, and 

the close relationship between those two, that I stand in support 

of this resolution before us today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in 28 days, a week . . . sorry, 4 weeks from 

tomorrow, on July 1, we will be celebrating a very significant 

anniversary in our province because, Mr. Speaker, on July 1, 

1992 we will be marking the 30th anniversary of the 

introduction of medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I can first of all begin by expressing my 

support for the actions of the government in defence of 

universal health care and in defence of, and in support of, the 

government's promotion of wellness.  Mr. Speaker, to do that 

I'd like to first of all begin with a very brief review of the 

history of medicare in our province. 

 

The people of the province will remember, Mr. Speaker, that in 

1944 when the first CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation), the first social democratic government in North 

America came to power, it came to power with, as part of its 

pledge, to improve the quality of health care with the principles 

of universality and accessibility, Mr. Speaker, as part of its 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan.  People will 

remember as well, Mr. Speaker, that in about 1947, I believe, 

that hospitalization was introduced in this province. 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

But, Mr. Speaker, if I can speak in a little more detail around 

the series of events that occurred since April 25, 1959, to put 

our circumstances today into an historical perspective. 

 

On April 25 of 1959 premier Tommy Douglas made a 

by-election promise in Birch Hills to proceed with a universal 

medical care insurance plan.  And, Mr. Speaker, on April 25, 

1959, in a very formal kind of way, a commitment was made, a 

pact was made, a political pact was made between the 

government of the day, the CCF government of Tommy 

Douglas, and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 8 of 1960, Tommy Douglas won his fifth 

consecutive mandate as premier of our province, campaigning 

on a medical care plan funded in part through premiums.  On 

November 17 of 1961, Saskatchewan, now under the 

premiership of the hon. Woodrow Lloyd, passed The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act with an 

implementation date of April 1 which later was delayed to July 

1 of 1962. 

 

On May 3 of 1962 bitter negotiations took place between 

doctors and the government, and they came to a head when 

premier Lloyd addressed a special emergency meeting of 

Saskatchewan doctors in Regina.  Doctors voted to oppose the 

plan, setting the stage for withdrawal of services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is there anything -- anything -- that supports 

the wisdom of the people of Saskatchewan, through their CCF 

government at that day, to introduce the medicare plan here in 

our province than reflecting back at that particular meeting on 

May 3 of 1962 when doctors bitterly opposed -- bitterly 

opposed -- assisted by the organization of the Conservative 

Party of the day, Mr. Speaker, and also fully supported by the 

premier, the former . . . later premier -- he was at that time the 

leader of the opposition, Ross Thatcher, leader of the Liberal 

Party -- Mr. Speaker, bitterly opposed the Tories and the Libs 

and the doctors; bitterly opposed the introduction of medicare. 

 

Well isn't it interesting, Mr. Speaker, now this day in 1992 

when because of the financial circumstances of the day facing 

the New Democrat government, having come to office and 

inherited a deficit with interest payments, Mr. Speaker, of 

approximately $760 million a year, $2 million a day . . . Two 

million dollars a day just to pay interest on the debt. 

 

As changes are made to the health care provided to the people 

of Saskatchewan in order to try to preserve the future of health 

care, some of the strongest opponents of changes, Mr. Speaker, 

become practitioners in the health care system, those very same 

people who 30 years ago opposed the introduction of medicare.  

So I think that the point is cryptically made, Mr. Speaker, that 

medicare has become not only for the people of Saskatchewan 

but also for the health care professionals of Saskatchewan, a 

program which is implicit to the quality of health care for the 

province in its most universal terms. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, July 1, 1962, a day that goes down in the 

history of Saskatchewan and of Canada, born on July 

1, 1962, what I think has become Saskatchewan's greatest gift 

to the people of Canada, on July 1, 1962, introduced, 

completely paid for by the taxes and the premiums of the 

people of Saskatchewan, North America's first medicare 

program here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as history would have it, the CCF 

government of the day was removed from office in 1964, and 

Ross Thatcher leading the Liberals came to office.  And in 

March 1968, premier Ross Thatcher introduced utilization fees; 

utilization fees he called them, Mr. Speaker.  The rest of the 

province called them deterrent fees.  Well, Mr. Speaker, as 

history would have it, the government changed again.  The 

government changed again, Mr. Speaker, and in 1971, Allan 

Blakeney led the New Democratic Party back into office and in 

1971 the New Democratic Party government abolished 

deterrent fees from medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as a result of prudent 

management of the resources of our province and as a result of 

a social conscience, by 1975 the New Democratic Party 

government was able to take another step.  Thirteen years after 

the introduction of medicare, Mr. Speaker, on November 1975, 

the NDP government abolished medical and hospital premiums 

and therefore providing health care to all people of 

Saskatchewan without direct fee, Mr. Speaker, a program paid 

as history has evolved, partially funded by provincial as well as 

federal revenues. 

 

That begins to become a growing issue, the federal share of 

funding for medicare these days, Mr. Speaker.  But it was at 

that time . . . the decision was made that it will be publicly 

funded health care for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as history would have it, governments 

change, and the history had it again.  Another change took 

place.  And then in June 1987, Mr. Speaker, another significant 

event in the history of health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan, one that many of us in this province will long 

remember.  In fact I would go so far as to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that for a good number of the people of Saskatchewan, one that 

people will never forget. 

 

The premier at that time, the minister from Estevan, the 

member from Estevan and the PC government, ended the 

school-based dental program, firing 294 dental therapists and 

turning dental care for elementary school children over to 

dentists, thus beginning, Mr. Speaker, in a very cryptic and a 

very significant kind of way the move towards the privatization 

of health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand in this Assembly today, as I said, 

proud of the history of our province and proud of the history of 

my party's association with the people of Saskatchewan in 

regards to health care in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we find that is a system which is under 

attack these days in a number of ways -- some ways directly 

and by conscious decision by the Conservative 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

government in Ottawa, with the conscious decision to be 

continuing a practice of cutting back the funding for health care 

from the . . . in terms of the federal share for the province of 

Saskatchewan and other provinces. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as we go through this new consciousness of 

health care, leading I think to what many would describe as 

dramatic new steps being taken -- some would say with 

controversy; others would say at long last, Mr. Speaker -- that 

does not to say that everyone among us is progressive.  And 

that is not to say that everyone among us supports those sacred 

principles of medicare, of universality and accessibility, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have before me an article from the April 7 Saskatoon Star-

Phoenix with the title, Mr. Speaker, "Universal health care 

impossible: Manning."  It's clearly, Mr. Speaker, the view of 

the Leader of the Reform Party of Canada that universal health 

care does not have a future for the people of Saskatchewan or 

the people of Canada.  In fact he attempted to make the point 

when he was visiting here in our province at that time, that here 

in the home of medicare would be the place to begin to reduce 

the universal accessibility to health care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say as I stand in my place 

that Preston Manning's proposal for health care is not 

acceptable to the New Democratic Party Government of 

Saskatchewan.  It is a proposal which this government has 

considered, has rejected, and has, Mr. Speaker, made a firm 

decision this year that we will continue with universal 

accessibility to health care as it has been the tradition since the 

Allan Blakeney government removed the premiums in 1975. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not to say that we're out of the woods 

by no stretch of the imagination.  In fact as I look through the 

clippings, Mr. Speaker, of the news of the day, I see that there 

is a group which continues to be concerned, and a number of 

groups across the nation which continue to be concerned about 

the accessibility to quality health care in our nation.  In fact 

there has been some advertising which many of us have seen 

and many have supported, for a television program which will 

be aired on June 18, Mr. Speaker, in defence of the universally 

accessible health care system. 

 

And so, as Tommy Douglas was prone to tell us, Mr. Speaker, 

when he walked through Saskatchewan in his days as premier 

and then after going on to the federal level and coming back to 

our province, I remember hearing Tommy Douglas say many 

times that the fight for medicare will never end as long as there 

are right-wing parties that are roaming our province and our 

society -- and so the fight does go on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the future of health care, 

I'm not suggesting for a moment that nothing can or should 

change.  In fact I think as we go through the review of health 

care these days, there is a very valid debate about the best way 

of providing universally accessible health care. 

 

Now I refer, Mr. Speaker, to a Leader-Post article by political 

columnist Dale Eisler -- entitled: Doctors abuse 

medicare -- which suggests, Mr. Speaker, that there may have 

to be some changes to the system. 

 

Now I'm not saying that every physician in the province of 

Saskatchewan is prone to abuse the medicare system.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there is not one of us, not a single one of us in 

this Assembly, who has not had several conversations with 

several health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, who have 

suggested that among their colleagues there are those who have 

taken to abuse the fee-for-service system that exists primarily 

in this province, and have put their well-being, their financial 

well-being, ahead of the personal well-being or the health 

well-being of their patients and the financial well-being of our 

health care system in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is clearly the view of the government of 

the day -- and I share that view, Mr. Speaker -- that the time for 

using our health care system for building empires, for bloating 

egos, and for bloating bank accounts is over.  It is time that the 

health care system of Saskatchewan must -- crystal clear -- see 

it as priority, the provision of health care services universally 

accessible -- quality health care services for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And that's where the priority must lie. 

 

(1445) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the notion that Mr. Eisler indicates in his 

article is one that the system has to change, that we have to 

look at different kinds of structures in the delivery of the health 

care system which will make it a little more difficult, or 

perhaps if there are deterrents, Mr. Speaker, in the system, the 

deterrents must be applied to abuse and not to use. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that's a notion that must be 

endorsed.  When I pick up a copy of the Star-Phoenix of March 

19 of this year, in a letter in the editorial section, an article 

entitled "Letting doctors keep gates not best idea." A personal 

opinion expressed by a resident of that city, Mr. Speaker.  I 

think it simply indicates that that is a notion that the people in 

the province are beginning to see a little more clearly and more 

commonly. 

 

In fact it seems to me , Mr. Speaker, if I remember correctly, 

that a poll taken about two years in this province had indicated 

that over 50 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan were in 

support of the notion of having structures where physicians, 

health care professionals, are being paid salary as opposed to 

fee for service.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is a notion 

that has to be given very, very serious consideration in these 

times when we find ourselves being concerned about the very 

future of quality, universally accessible health care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again as I look through the clippings in the 

recent fixation -- appropriately so by the media -- on our health 

system here in Saskatchewan, I find another article dated April 

21 of 1992 in the Star-Phoenix entitled "Health system's 

efficiency must improve: consultant."  And if I can read just in 

part, Mr. Speaker, from that article, I think it summarizes the 

directions that health care must be taking, and in fact is taking 

in the province of Saskatchewan these very days. 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

It begins out, it begins, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The health system has to make better use of its people and 

money to ensure its survival, says a health care consultant. 

 

 Speaking at a forum entitled Trends in Health Care Delivery 

at the Royal University Hospital on Wednesday, Susan Hyatt 

of Toronto said medicare has reached a pivotal point in 

history. 

 

And that is has, Mr. Speaker.  In the article it points out in her 

address that Ms. Hyatt refers to three things that she thinks 

need to be done.  One: 

 

 Evaluating the health care needs of the community; 

 

In other words the health care system should be there to 

respond to the needs of the people not to respond to the desires 

of the professionals - 

_ to the needs of the people. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, she suggests: 

 

 Developing a strategic plan that would substitute health care 

workers at different positions to provide the best care at the 

least cost; 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this becomes a significant factor for us. 

 

I was alarmed when I heard a speaker, on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, about a month ago, who was 

addressing the Saskatchewan home and school association, and 

was talking about the change in demographics going on in our 

province today.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it tells us something 

about the responsibility that we have to exercise in this 

Assembly on behalf of our constituents, when we take a look at 

what is happening in the demographics. 

 

Fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that back in 1921, the 

average life expectancy for people in Saskatchewan was 60 

years -- 60 years.  Here we are in 1992 -- the study was done in 

1991, Mr. Speaker.  By 1991 the life expectancy for the 

average Saskatchewan resident had risen to 77 years, an 

increase of 17 years to life expectancy, Mr. Speaker, in just a 

little over three generations. 

 

And so it's not surprising when we look at the use of health 

care that we find an increasing amount -- well over half -- of 

our health care system is dedicated to health care targeted for 

people who are the age 65 and older, the seniors of our 

province.  Mr. Speaker, there's nothing inappropriate about that 

at all.  In fact, I suppose one could say in a twisted kind of way, 

I suppose, that one of the problems with our health care system 

is that it's working so doggone good. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, as a result of our health care system 

serving the needs of people, they're living longer.  And as a 

result of that, Mr. Speaker, the exposure to requiring health 

care in different forms, Mr. Speaker, has increased. 

 

So it is as a result of a health care system which has served 

us well that we find ourselves struggling with a new challenge, 

a new challenge to our health care system and the ability to 

continue to afford to provide what we have come to expect in 

the past as worthy of being taken for granted. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the third point that Ms. Hyatt makes is that 

she suggests: 

 

 Shifting to community-based health services from acute care 

facilities. 

 

And I'll comment on that a little more just briefly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She goes on to say, and I'll just quote another couple 

paragraphs, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Governments are spending enough money on health care, she 

said. "What we need now is a reallocation of resources so 

there can be more effectiveness and (more) efficiency." 

 

 Citing the recent creation of the Saskatoon Health Board, she 

said linking organizations under a single authority provides 

better services, and more importantly for governments, means 

greater fiscal responsibility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to now refer to an article in the 

Leader-Post written April 30.  This is nine days after the article 

in which Ms. Hyatt's comments are reported.  And this one is 

entitled: "Health model explained."  And, Mr. Speaker, what it 

covers is the remarks of the Minister of Health -- the Minister 

of Health for the province of Saskatchewan on April 30 of this 

year, just a month ago. 

 

And if I can read . . . It's a brief article, Mr. Speaker, and I'd 

like to read it in its entirety into the record because I think, Mr. 

Speaker, in its coverage it touches on a number of points 

specifically and extremely succinctly and ties them together: 

 

 Saskatchewan's wellness model of health care will 

incorporate preventive health care, accident prevention and 

safety programs, changes to the Public Health Act, and 

integrated health facilities, says Health Minister Louise 

Simard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can I just repeat that, because what we're saying 

here is that preventive health care wellness is an approach to 

health care which involves movements on a number of fronts.  

Preventive health care, accident prevention, safety programs, 

public health, integrated health facilities -- Mr. Speaker, all of 

those. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 One of the cornerstones of the wellness model of health care 

is disease and accident prevention, she said, noting increased 

public awareness is the key to making the "wellness concept" 

work. 

 

 "For every dollar spent on treating sickness less than a nickel 

is spent on prevention," Simard told the Saskatchewan Safety 

Council annual meeting 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

on Wednesday. 

 

 Communities must work together to establish district health 

boards, which will oversee the delivery of health-care 

services to geographic areas encompassing one or two 

home-care districts, she said. 

 

 Simard also talked about communities establishing public 

health centres where a variety of health education and 

preventive services could be provided by a multi-disciplinary 

team that would include nurses, therapists, nutritionists and 

other health professionals. 

 

And I think we see, Mr. Speaker, as the Government of 

Saskatchewan is looking to the future in health care, more of an 

emphasis on holistic health care, bringing services, Mr. 

Speaker, together and finding professions working in 

co-operation as opposed in isolation from one another. 

 

And the article concludes, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 But, she warned, if communities aren't prepared to work 

together to integrate health-care facilities and do away with 

any duplication of services, the province may have to 

arbitrarily implement the necessary changes and set the 

boundaries for district health boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the province of 

Saskatchewan is saying very clearly, the days of empire 

building are over.  It's the quality of services to people which 

must reign supreme in terms of criteria to judge where we go 

and how we get there. 

 

And I just go back, Mr. Speaker, for a reminder.  As the 

Minister of Health said, for every dollar spent on treating 

sickness less than a nickel is spent on prevention.  And I think 

in that, Mr. Speaker, is forecast the need for a new priority here 

in the province of Saskatchewan in the long-term interest of the 

people of our province, an increasing, a growing emphasis, on 

the prevention of sickness as part of the wellness model for 

health care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what the Minister of Finance 

said when he presented his budget in this Assembly on May 7, 

what do I find?  Mr. Speaker, I think what I find is a tangible, 

concrete commitment to the wellness model of health care, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I find the same thing when I look in the Speech from the 

Throne.  And let me just review that, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government is interested not in rhetoric, as we've heard over 

the past number of years, but is interested in making the 

necessary changes and making the necessary commitments to 

ensure the future well-being, future wellness of health care in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance stood in his 

place on May 7, he told us that home care funding is increased 

in this budget by 20 per cent -- 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker -- in a 

budget in which the total spending of government is cut back 

by 3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the total spending cut back by 3 per 

cent, and in which, Mr. Speaker, the payment on interest, 

because of that rising 

mammoth debt inflicted on the people of Saskatchewan by the 

Tory government prior, rising to $760 million; still, Mr. 

Speaker, the New Democratic Party Government of 

Saskatchewan has committed itself to a 20 per cent increase in 

funding for home care for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's not only sensitive, it is also prudent, 

Mr. Speaker.  Because the fact of the matter is this, is that 

home care is not only the most desirable form of support for 

many of our senior citizens, it is also the least expensive.  And 

it is not often, Mr. Speaker, in the world of government that the 

best quality, most desired service is also the least expensive.  

But compared to nursing home services, Mr. Speaker, or even 

more expensively, health care beds, Mr. Speaker, which are 

now costing in the neighbourhood of about $500 per bed per 

day, Mr. Speaker, money dedicated to home care is money well 

spent, both in terms of quality of services to our seniors as well 

as in terms of fiscal prudence and service to the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the budget as well the Minister of 

Finance stood in his place and he said that there would be 

increased funding for northern water and sewage projects, Mr. 

Speaker, which again is a commitment, a tangible commitment 

to reduce the negative impacts of these matters on health for 

Northerners -- increased funding for child hunger, Mr. Speaker, 

by 35 per cent. 

 

And let me just stop for a moment and comment on that.  

Because it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that when a government 

commits itself to wellness that it's committing itself, Mr. 

Speaker, realistically to several things.  As I said before and as 

the Minister of Health has said: to incorporate preventive health 

care and accident prevention and safety programs and public 

health on integrated health facilities.  But also with that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the responsibility to attack the root causes of poor 

health for many in our society, which is poverty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the commitments, the ways, the 

tangible expressions of commitment to wellness in 

Saskatchewan, is through a 35 per cent funding increase for 

child food programs, Mr. Speaker, as a positive step to 

well-being and the long-term health of a high risk group. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as well, when I took a look at the Speech 

from the Throne, I noted as well that there we are expecting in 

this legislative session changes and improvements to The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act -- Health and Safety Act, I 

underline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again as part of a recognition that if you're 

interested in the wellness of people you have to look at the 

delivery of your health care programs directly.  But in addition 

to that, Mr. Speaker, work to reduce poverty in high risk groups 

and also work to reduce accidents on the job for people who are 

working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, we have been advised that this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, will be considering an environmental bill of rights 

as a part of this legislative session.  Mr. Speaker, again a 

tangible expression for wellness for the people of 

Saskatchewan by their New Democratic Party government as 

part of their health care 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I note in the budget, in which there were 

not many items that were capable of finding an increase in 

spending, an increase for mental health services, Mr. Speaker, 

and increased family support services to address areas of teen 

pregnancy, family planning, and family violence.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, throughout the Speech from the Throne and the 

budget, increased emphasis all along towards more 

community-based services. 

 

(1500) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I've outlined in some detail the 

commitment to wellness by the province of Saskatchewan.  

And I'd like to just very briefly take a look at the other side of 

the coin before I take my place. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, here we are on July 1 about to 

celebrate the 30th anniversary of medicare in Saskatchewan.  

Our neighbours to the south, the Americans, at long last, Mr. 

Speaker, have finally discovered that maybe Canadians have 

got something going for them and that the people of 

Saskatchewan knew back in 1962 what they were doing when 

they introduced Canada's first medicare program. 

 

For you see, Mr. Speaker, I suppose in the same way that we're 

finding here in Saskatchewan pressures related to the 

mechanisms of delivery of health care for financial reasons, 

they're finding for similar reasons that they need to move to a 

medicare system in the United States. 

 

When I look at an article back . . . this is 1990, so it's May 7, 

1990, two years old, entitled: "Call for radical surgery" -- this is 

an article in Time magazine, certainly not a magazine which 

has any political axe to grind -- it does a very quick and dirty 

comparison of the quality of health care services in the United 

States and Canada.  Mr. Speaker, if we ever need any 

convincing that we've been on to a good thing and that we need 

to preserve those principles that we instituted and have made as 

part of our commitment to preserve, we need only look to our 

neighbours to the south. 

 

In 1990, Mr. Speaker, the annual health cost per capita in the 

United States was $1,926, just about $2,000.  In fact I'm sure 

by 1992, by now, it would be in excess of that. 

 

Here in Canada, the annual health cost per capita is $1,370.  

And in this budget of this year, Mr. Speaker, that figure would 

be approximately $1,500 per Saskatchewan resident being 

dedicated in Department of Health budget for the health of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

As a percentage of gross national product in the United States, 

they were paying 11.1 per cent for health care; in Canada, only 

8.5 per cent of gross national product being dedicated to health 

care. 

 

But what about life expectancy?  Which one is better?  

Obviously it's more expensive in the United States than 

Canada.  But, Mr. Speaker, in fact here in Canada people are 

living longer, life expectancy of 77 years as opposed to 75 in 

the United States. 

And infant mortality, Mr. Speaker.  I've commented on the 

senior end of the age spectrum, let me refer to the baby end of 

the age spectrum.  What about that end of the health care 

system?  In the United States they average a loss of 11 babies 

per 1,000 births in their health care system; in Canada, that 

number is 7. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we need any convincing at all, one final 

figure.  In Canada . . . well first of all let's start in the United 

States.  In the United States the percentage of the population 

not covered by any form of health care insurance -- 14 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker.  In the United States one out of seven people is 

not covered by health care insurance.  In Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

the percentage of people not covered by health care insurance 

is zero -- zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Canada, at less cost and higher effectiveness, 

Mr. Speaker, we also have ensured that every Canadian will 

have access to quality health services.  And that's a 

commitment that was born in the province of Saskatchewan 

and continues today in this province and across the nation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just finally I make brief reference to a 

couple of articles, one from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of 

April 25, entitled: "Creative approach to health sought," which 

I think spells out the challenge that faces all of us concerned 

about health care in Saskatchewan today.  And if I can just read 

the introductory paragraphs to this article, Mr. Speaker, it says 

this: 

 

 Health care professionals care more about promoting a 

holistic approach to health than current funding shortages. 

 

 Mental and public health professionals sat down to discuss 

strengths, problems, and possible actions in their world 

during the Caring Community conference Friday. 

 

 The gathering energized a valuable partnership between the 

co-sponsors -- the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian 

Mental Health Association and the Saskatchewan Public 

Health Association. 

 

 Health workers are finding creative ways to work together 

instead of concentrating on the dollar crisis, says Judith 

Martin, administrator of the Saskatoon Community Clinic. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, therein lies the solution; therein lies the 

future.  In spite of the fact that our health care system is 

working so well that it increases the demands because people 

are living longer, it is possible, I believe, to maintain and to 

preserve for the people of Saskatchewan access, universal 

access, to quality health care. 

 

The key, Mr. Speaker, is co-operation.  It's the health care 

professionals working together.  It's people in communities 

working together, and it's communities working together, Mr. 

Speaker, which shall be the key -- which shall be the key to 

ensuring that this great accomplishment in the history of our 

province shall 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

continue to be something about which we feel proud for 

generations to come in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if I can conclude by making reference to an 

editorial, April 16, in the Leader-Post which comments on 

some of the tough decisions being faced by the province of 

Saskatchewan, by the Government of Saskatchewan today, and 

I quote in conclusion this editorial, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Whether action is taken through premiums or a combination 

of changes, it can only be one aspect of a package that would 

require federal co-operation by amending the Canada Health 

Act. 

 

Good point, Mr. Speaker, that the co-operation must also 

involve the federal government with the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Until the trial balloon turns out to have more helium than hot 

air, judgment must be suspended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it concludes with this sentence: 

 

 The NDP is showing considerable courage and vision 

(considerable courage and vision) in tackling a sacred, but 

quite ill, cow. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, health care may be a tad on the ill side now, 

but it is with the commitment to curing the system that exists to 

serve people, and a system which begins to emphasize more 

and more the importance of staying healthy while at the same 

time ensuring that the sick will be cured, Mr. Speaker, that we 

will continue with that dream -- those dreams of those pioneers 

who came before us, some of them 50 years ago, as part of that 

original dream that was there in 1944 with the first CCF 

government and premier Tommy Douglas, hospitalization, 

medicare in 1962, that beats so strongly, Mr. Speaker, in the 

breasts of so many Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with that in mind that I take my 

place, saying that I firmly support this resolution moved by the 

good doctor, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the government for standing 

firm in its commitment to universal health care by keeping 

Saskatchewan one of the few provinces not to charge annual 

health premiums, and for showing leadership by expanding 

medicare into a wellness model, in spite of the staggering 

financial obstacles now facing this administration. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to join my colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser in commending 

the Government of Saskatchewan for not having premiums in 

this province.  Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to take much time in 

addressing this resolution, but 

I did want to talk about 1992 as being the 30th year of 

medicare, universal medicare, in Saskatchewan. 

 

It was Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan citizens along with their 

government, that introduced the first medicare system in 

Canada, let alone North America, and our province has been 

looked to by citizens all across North America as a model for 

health care delivery in Canada and in the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was an eight-year-old child, I think, in 1962 

when the CCF government, under the leadership of premier 

Woodrow Lloyd, introduced medicare.  Mr. Speaker, Woodrow 

Lloyd was the MLA for the constituency of Biggar, an area that 

I grew up in.  My family was very supportive of Woodrow 

Lloyd and his government.  Woodrow Lloyd had been my 

mother's high school principal, and in fact that's how my family 

got involved in the political process in the 1940s and 1950s 

because of Woodrow Lloyd's leadership in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the CCF government decided in 1962 to 

introduce medicare, obviously the province of Saskatchewan 

underwent a great deal of turmoil.  In my community there 

were people who were called the KODs; they were the people 

that were the Keep Our Doctors.  And there was another group 

of people, Mr. Speaker, that were called the SOBs, and I won't 

tell you what that happened to mean.  My family happened to 

be in the SOB category because they were defending Woodrow 

Lloyd and his government's right to introduce medicare in this 

province. 

 

And I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan who opposed 

medicare in those days, the people who opposed the 

introduction of a universal health care system in this province 

where people did not have to have money to go to a doctor or 

go to a hospital were the people like Ross Thatcher, like some 

of the medical people in this province -- people like Staff 

Barootes who is now a Conservative senator from the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Conservatives and Liberals opposed the CCF 

government. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the John Birch 

Society which painted a red picture of the province of 

Saskatchewan, saying that the people of this province were 

communists.  Well the people of this province were not 

communists.  They simply wanted their citizens to have access 

to a health care system, not on how much money they had in 

their pocket, but on whether or not they had the genuine need to 

see a doctor or go to the hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Now as my colleague has described in his 

previous remarks, slowly over time CCF and NDP 

governments moved to expand our health care system to 

include more and more services that people didn't have to have 

money in order to access those services. 

 

Over time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has obviously become a 

model for other parts of the world.  And I was the Health critic 

for the NDP opposition in 1987, which 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

was the 25th anniversary of medicare, when the members 

opposite chose to do in the finest dental health program in all of 

North America and in fact all of the world -- the school-based 

children's dental program. 

 

It was a very inexpensive way of delivering primary health care 

to citizens and children living in rural Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan.  There was absolutely no consultation with the 

dental therapists and the dental health nurses.  There was 

absolutely no consultation with the parents, with school boards.  

They simply did in the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now obviously the province of Saskatchewan since 1982 has 

undergone a major fiscal transition.  The members opposite 

spent money like it was going out of style.  They had money 

for their business friends; they had money for out of province 

corporations; they sold off many public assets at fire-sale 

prices.  In fact, many of those public assets we received no 

money for. 

 

And so that leads us to the 30th year of medicare in this 

province: 1992, where this province faces a BBB rating, where 

this province faces a $15 billion deficit -- the largest deficit per 

capita of any province in Canada.  Ten years ago we had no 

deficit.  We had the finest credit rating in the country.  But here 

we are 10 years later and medicare -- not because of what's 

happened in the medicare system, Mr. Speaker, but what's 

happened with this province's fiscal situation -- is under a great 

deal of consternation. 

 

Now there are many citizens in this province that are concerned 

about what our government has done to deal with the deficit 

crisis we face.  We have implemented user fees for optometric 

services.  We have increased the deductible for the prescription 

drug plan.  We are probably going to go to a co-payment for 

chiropractic services. 

 

These are measures, Mr. Speaker, that not one person on this 

side of the House enjoys.  And I know, Mr. Speaker, from 

speaking to the Minister of Health, she does not enjoy this 

process at all; in fact she finds it gut-wrenching. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of trying to transform 

the health care system and move on to the second level of 

medicare in this province -- the wellness model.  And there are 

citizens who aren't quite clear what the wellness model means. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to use the creativity that we 

had in 1962 when we decided to have a universal medicare 

system in the province of Saskatchewan.  When the doctors of 

Saskatchewan went on strike in 1962, the citizens where I come 

from -- Biggar, Saskatchewan -- rallied together and built their 

own community health centre where they put doctors on 

salaries.  That's how they dealt with the health crisis in 1962. 

 

We have another health crisis in this province in 1992 in that 

we have a horrendous deficit.  And the citizens of this province 

are going to have to be creative and devise their own 

community-based solutions to deal with that crisis. 

And I see in the city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina and 

Prince Albert, various health people coming together to have an 

integrated approach to health care delivery. 

 

For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan we have the 

hospitals in Saskatoon, we have two nursing homes in 

Saskatoon, along with the home care board and mental health 

people, community health services, coming together under one 

super-board to try and devise a way of delivering health in the 

city of Saskatoon in such a way that it's integrated.  We don't 

have duplication of services and we're not spending money 

needlessly. 

 

I think those are the kinds of creative solutions that each 

community across Saskatchewan is going to have to partake in 

if we are going to deal with the fiscal crisis Saskatchewan 

faces. 

 

Wellness, Mr. Speaker, can mean all kinds of things.  It can 

mean whatever the community decides that it's going to mean.  

Wellness can mean a needle exchange program for 

drug-addicted street people who are engaged in something that 

I certainly am not supportive of, but there are drug-addicted 

people who use needles. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, once AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) gets in that population it's a very 

expensive process for the citizens of a province or a country to 

have to support an AIDS victim.  A needle exchange program 

could cost $10,000 in the city of Saskatoon or Regina, and it 

could prevent the spending of hundreds of thousands of dollars 

in medical treatment and it could also save lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wellness can mean whatever communities want it to mean.  

And I would urge the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to come 

together to devise their own solutions so we can go on to the 

second stage of medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to allow other colleagues to speak and so I will take my 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Langford: -- I'd like to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I have 19 grade 

8 students from Canwood.  Canwood is originated on the west 

side of my constituency.  I will be meeting with them for 

pictures at 3:30.  The teachers are Edith Larsen and Dennis 

Lehmann.  Chaperons are Barb Danberg and Glen Person, and 

the bus driver is Wayne Person. 

 

I wish you students an enjoyable trip and safe journey home.  

And I will be taking pictures and drinks with you later. 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I too am happy to greet the folks 

that are in to visit and it's nice to see them here this afternoon.  

I hope they enjoy their stay. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 5 -- Health Care Fees (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I want to talk for a minute or two about the 

adjourned debate on this health motion. 

 

I want to warn the members, Mr. Speaker, that when I complete 

my remarks I will be moving to adjourn the debate, unless 

someone hands me a note firmly requesting for some good 

reason that I do otherwise.  Some of the government members 

as well as some of my own colleagues have indicated that they 

might like to debate this issue a bit more on another day.  So 

unless I see that, I will proceed.  So you can be forewarned. 

 

Now I took some interest in the comments of a couple of the 

folks that were discussing this Bill.  And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that in all sincerity wish that we could pass a motion 

and an amendment sometimes because truly this motion has got 

some good points, and the amendment also has some good 

points.  And it's too bad that we can't sort of melt the two 

together and use them both. 

 

But I think we've served the purpose by seeing both of them 

here, of having the folks know that there are some good things 

in both of them.  And as we debate this, they will see that in 

general I think our two parties -- and I expect all three political 

parties in our province -- have got a goal in mind that would be 

very much similar.  And that goal I should hope would be to 

provide good health care to the people of our province. 

 

We can debate sometimes the methods that we go about it, the 

methods that we would pay for it, but I think the ultimate goal 

of having good health is truly one that everyone wants.  And if 

you don't believe in that, get sick for a while and see what you 

think about doctors then.  They're probably the first fellow 

you're going to run to.  And I know that there's at least one 

member in this House that probably would be willing to help us 

out. 

 

I noted that there was some discussion about the health care 

issue in dental care that had happened in the past as we 

discussed some of the things that happened in the past.  And I 

couldn't help but think at that point that yes, there were some 

good things about having a dental program in schools.  

Obviously every program has some good points. 

 

And also though, there are some bad points.  And I guess the 

reality is that in those days they had to weigh the good against 

the bad and see which could be the one that you could afford to 

do.  It was an extremely costly program.  And I have children 

myself, Mr. Speaker, that were involved in that program.  And 

it was certainly convenient for them to just go to school and 

come home with their teeth fixed.  But on the other hand, we 

found that the program was discouraging the growth of the 

dental industry for the rest of the population. 

The way it was explained to me is that an awful lot of dentists 

require the child work in order to supplement their incomes so 

that they can justify staying in a community.  And so when the 

plan was cancelled, it was difficult for a lot of people to 

readjust back to the old ideas of going to a dentist somewhere 

in place besides the school. 

 

But what did happen was a good spin-off.  And there were 

some good points to this program when it was cancelled.  We 

found that places . . . like my colleague from 

Souris-Cannington pointed out a minute ago here, they had one 

dentist in 1981 in Carlyle, and shortly after the dental program 

was cancelled three located there.  And they moved their 

activities into the Redvers and Oxbow communities as well. 

 

That same process happened in my community, and for that I 

think we can be grateful to the dental association and to the 

people who are dentists in this province.  It was a little more 

inconvenient for parents to have to take their children, but at 

the same time we were providing that service then for the adult 

community that had to travel sometimes 50 to 100 miles to find 

a dentist and make appointments three to six months ahead of 

time. 

 

And so the good and the bad have to be weighed.  And I'm not 

going to debate that issue any more except to point out that 

choices had to be made.  They weren't easy choices in those 

days either, I'm sure.  And a lot of people though can see that 

with those choices there has been some good. 

 

The health area is under attack, one of the members across the 

way said, by certain people in certain areas, politically.  And I 

would say that I have to, to some degree, agree with that 

statement.  Obviously, at the national front, which was 

mentioned, the Reform Party has attacked the way that we do 

our health care system, the way that we fund it.  And certainly 

they are making their point known throughout all of the country   

And their ideas, I guess, will have to be judged at the next 

election. 

 

But we also have, at the present time, an attack in our own 

province against the health care system by this very 

government.  The NDP have been the ones that brought in the 

elimination of assistance to people that need optometric 

services.  They're the ones that brought in a cancellation of 

assistance for people who need chiropractic services. 

 

And so who has really started to put fees onto health care?  It's 

this government, this government of today. 

 

The member opposite made the comment, and I won't say that I 

can repeat it exactly word for word the way he said it, but he 

said the health care system was working so doggone good, and 

that's the trouble.  Well maybe it is the trouble.  But if it's 

working so doggone good, how could it have been working so 

doggone good unless it was the PC administration over the last 

nine years that made it possible for that to happen.  It's a pure 

fact of life that this health care system didn't just grow out of 

the ground all of a sudden, it started back in 1962 by the 

member opposite's very comments of today. 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

And I'll have you know, just in passing, that I happen to live in 

the area where health region no. 1 originated.  And health 

region no. 1, of course, was the model example that was used to 

test the way that this type of a program could work.  And we 

were, in fact, the living guinea pigs of the original program and 

if we hadn't been able to, as a people, show that it would work, 

the rest of the province never would have had it.  And so we 

take a lot of credit for that co-operation, and we believe that the 

people of our area did a good job of showing that it could work 

and assisting the government of the day. 

 

So if the program is so doggone good . . . It has to have been, 

that what it costs, the kinds of billions of dollars that it costs for 

health costs, it has to have been a program that all of the 

governments that have come and gone have contributed to and 

done some good for.  And I think probably the reality is that 

health care is getting very expensive and we are going to have 

to look at some ways to support it. 

 

But we have to be careful in which direction we go.  We have 

in our province at the moment a super-centralization kind of a 

direction of future seeming to be developed   And that frightens 

me, because we've got some big areas in this province where 

you can travel and all you see, as they say, is miles and miles of 

miles and miles. 

 

But out in those areas there are some people.  And they have 

the need to have medical care and medical attention.  And the 

super-centralization of bringing all of your medical care into a 

concentration into the two or three big cities in the province 

simply does not lend to a wellness formula for the people who 

live 200 and 300 miles away from those centres. 

 

We have to have a rural network of hospitals and of special 

care homes in this province if we are going to fairly provide for 

all of the people.  And I think this government has gone on 

record as saying that they want to treat people equally and treat 

people well.  And I believe that they mean that, and I'm going 

to take them at their word and demand that they stick to that 

policy and provide health care equally for all of the people of 

our province and not just for those that can stagger into one of 

the big cities. 

 

I believe quite honestly that hospitals in places like Eastend 

should be completed.  I don't believe that they were built as 

monuments for anybody.  I never saw anybody ever try to put 

their name on a plaque and stick it on the front door of that 

hospital, saying, I caused this to happen.  I don't think it 

happened in Shaunavon.  I don't think it happened in Maple 

Creek.  Those people built those institutions and those facilities 

in order to help people provide the kind of medical services that 

are needed there, the kind of medical services that were proven 

to be needed by research and study that went into those 

programs. 

 

This was not political decisions made in health care.  The 

political ball games were played out on the other fields.  They 

weren't played with the lives of people who were sick.  There's 

nobody can convince me that that could 

happen in the province of Saskatchewan with any political 

party.  We just don't play politics with people's lives when 

they're sick. 

 

I've got to say, Mr. Speaker, that in a way I sort of like some of 

the amendment because it does say that we should go for a 

wellness program, and why not?  What fool would say that 

we're against wellness in our province.  It is a good idea to have 

wellness programs if we an afford them and put them into 

place.  And why not have them?  But let's not destroy rural 

hospitals and rural area health care for rural people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that I've pointed out those issues 

for today that I want to let the folks know about and to have our 

government think about, and basically that is to give some 

consideration to rural Saskatchewan in health care and don't 

just tear the whole system down by starting with them. 

 

And with that, I haven't received any notes to the contrary, so I 

move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Amendment to Television Guidelines in Rules Committee 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Van Mulligen. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1530) 

Federal Opposition to Leaseback Program 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. McPherson and the amendment thereto moved 

by Mr. Martens. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm just 

going to take a few moments today to add to some of the 

remarks that I made previously regarding the motion as 

presented by the member from Shaunavon. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we're quite well aware of the 

difficulties and the crisis that has been facing agricultural 

producers across the province of Saskatchewan for the past 

number of years, not only in Saskatchewan but as well the 

prairie provinces and indeed across Canada. 

 

As we've acknowledged earlier, Mr. Speaker, we brought to the 

attention of the Assembly that it is our feeling that as individual 

governments -- provincial governments, federal governments -- 

we must work together.  And it's not always appropriate to 

always look at putting the blame on someone else -- laying the 

blame at somebody else's feet and asking them to continually 

be divvying up or providing the funding that it is needed to 

maintain not just agriculture but many of the sectors of our 

province that we have come to appreciate and enjoy such as the 

health and educational fields, Mr. Speaker. 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that federal assistance is needed 

and continues to be needed in the agricultural field.  We are 

quite well aware of the fact that last summer was . . . and last 

year we had an exceptional growing season in the agricultural 

field.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I'm quite well aware, even in 

my own area, of the number of producers who still have 

sufficient quantities of grain in their bins. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, despite the abundance of grain and 

the availability of it, the facts are that the prices are still too low 

to support the industry.  And in light of that, we are supportive 

of the fact that the federal government certainly put some funds 

in to support and strengthen the agricultural sector here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We do have a problem as well, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that 

the federal government has decided to collect overpayments 

under the Western Grain Stabilization Act.  And as I indicated 

earlier in the House, Mr. Speaker, I've conferred with my 

federal MP (Member of Parliament) and related the concerns 

that have been coming into my office regarding repayment of 

the overpayment to the western grain stabilization payment. 

 

The motion that was presented did ask that the government take 

this overpayment out of the $500 million that the province is 

demanding of the federal government at this time, Mr. Speaker.  

And I'll give way to allow the member to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you -- and seated in your gallery -- and to the 

rest of the members of the Assembly here today, 12 grade 7 and 

8 students from the Waterhen Reserve, and their teacher, 

Phyllis Longobardi. 

 

I think that there are no other students in the province that 

would have travelled as far to get to the Assembly here today.  

I travel six and a half to seven hours to get here, and they are an 

additional hour beyond that.  So I would ask the rest of the 

members here to join with me in welcoming them, and I will be 

meeting them shortly for pictures and refreshments. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- I'm just replying to the introduction of the 

guests, welcoming the guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to stand to 

welcome the guests from Waterhen.  Waterhen of course is on 

the other side of the province from my constituency in 

Cumberland.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very important to 

introduce the guests in their own language which is Cree.  So I 

would like to say a couple of words of welcome. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Federal Opposition to Leaseback Program (continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would welcome 

the students who have come down from northern Saskatchewan 

to visit the Assembly and visit the provincial capital today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly there are many other comments that 

could be raised regarding the motion that is set before us and 

the amendment that was introduced in this Assembly, basically 

bringing to the forefront the fact that this government must 

accept some of the responsibility for the province.  And 

certainly it's time for the government to indeed exercise the 

responsibility as a government to support industry in this 

province and especially the agricultural sector as we all realize 

the important role it plays in this province in job creation and 

economic development and certainly the economic spin-off. 

 

In question period today a number of the economic spin-offs 

were raised in the fact of the problems that removing the 

FeedGAP program has brought to many producers across this 

province.  And I have a letter that was sent to me, a letter that 

was sent as well to the Finance minister.  And many of us on 

this side of the House have had many concerns raised 

especially in the elimination of the FeedGAP program and the 

fact that the increases in the tax on farm fuels and the fact that 

the amount that will be refunded has been capped and the 

livestock cash advance program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many areas that we certainly could stand 

in this House and address and bring to the attention of the 

House reasons why we feel the government as well must 

exercise its responsibility to agricultural producers in this 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without continuing the debate, I will allow 

time for other members to address questions that have been 

raised through the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I see before us we have an amendment on the main 

motion introduced by the member for Shaunavon which 

demands that the federal government deduct any overpayment 

from the outstanding $500 million that is due and owing, we 

believe, to the farmers of western Canada.  But instead of 

joining with us in this 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

motion, members opposite chose again, as they have in the 

past, not to support a straightforward motion calling upon the 

federal government to deliver a commitment, but to divert it by 

putting in an amendment. 

 

And I just want to talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, about a 

couple of the points put forward in the amendment.  They talk 

about the changes to GRIP (gross revenue insurance program).  

And we all know that the 10 opposition members opposite have 

been voicing their opinion about the changes to GRIP, but I 

want to make a few comments now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

those changes. 

 

You will recall last year under the old GRIP program there was 

no incentive for farmers to produce.  I'd like the members 

opposite to listen very carefully to this: there was no incentives 

for farmers to produce.  The best pay-out they could have 

received is if they produced no crop. 

 

In difficult economic times some chose to do that, others chose 

not to, and yet others chose to reduce their inputs dramatically 

because -- and I experienced it as a farmer, and I'm sure 

members opposite must have experienced it too, when you're 

riding around in the tractor pumping fertilizer and chemical 

into producing a crop, realizing that every dollar that you put 

into it is just a dollar you're throwing away -- because if you 

didn't produce any crop, you're economically much better off.  

A terrible position to put farmers in. 

 

And so what happened last year?  Fertilizer sales dropped 

dramatically.  Fertilizer sales in this province were very, very 

low.  I'm not sure exactly the numbers, but they were very low 

compared to other years. 

 

Now let's compare that to this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Any 

of the members opposite who actively farm as I do will know 

that there is quite a change this year.  In fact when I went to 

purchase my fertilizer this year . . . Normally I drive down to 

the . . . I use the Wheat Pool Farm Service Centre and I drive 

my truck down and get fertilizer that I want any time. 

 

Not so this year.  When asked why we can't get fertilizer, the 

response from the people working there was they just can't 

keep up.  There isn't enough around.  When you ask about 

sales, they say we can't believe it.  There's tremendous sales of 

fertilizer this year.  And you can go from the northern forest 

belt . . . I talked to people up the Shellbrook way right down 

around Regina.  And I'm sure it's that way for every part of the 

province.  They're looking for fertilizer in every nook and 

cranny that they can find it. 

 

And that is because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes to GRIP 

are positive.  Farmers can now farm like they want to farm, like 

they know how to farm.  They didn't have to farm the system. 

 

And the members opposite can chirp, but the fact remains.  The 

changes to the GRIP program were received by farmers who 

thought, well now I can farm again.  It's not a Tory program 

where I have to rip off the program.  I can farm, and I can 

produce.  I have some incentive to produce, and that's the job of 

every farmer in this 

province: to produce food for a hungry world.  The Tories took 

that incentive away. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the 10 tiny members 

opposite are griping about GRIP, the farmers of this province 

understand, and there is a new optimism.  There is a new 

optimism out there, and the changes to the GRIP program are a 

part of it. 

 

And we are the first ones on this side of the House to 

understand that it's not a perfect program and that the bottom 

end is weak.  But I'll tell you for the most part when you look 

around this province and see what's happening, farmers are 

producing again.  I talked to a seed grower the other day.  He 

told me he could have sold twice as much barley as he had 

cleaned and offered seed for sale, and in a normal year that 

would have been sufficient.  There is a new optimism, and the 

changes to the program are part of it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government now . . . In the 

second part of the amendment it says that this government fails 

to accept any responsibility to agriculture.  Well let me remind 

the members opposite of the programs that we've put forward.  

And the member from Moosomin listed off two or three topics 

that he was concerned about and said that there were many 

more.  Well I know if there were many more, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, he would have stood in his place and listed them off.  

But there are only a few areas of concern, and those areas are 

being addressed, and the members opposite know that. 

 

But let me put forward what we have done.  Immediately upon 

coming into office we negotiated a short-term moratorium -- 

the members opposite will remember that -- a short-term 

moratorium to give farmers some breathing space to stop any 

foreclosures. 

 

As I mentioned, there were the changes to the GRIP program, 

very positive changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And now we're 

bringing forward debt legislation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Well the member from -- I'm not sure where he's from over 

there -- said something about that's why the farmers and I 

couldn't pick up the rest. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite had, in their 10 

years, done any of the . . . made any of the changes that we're 

putting forward, they may have still been in government.  But 

the problem is they spoke out of one side of their mouth and 

their actions were totally different. 

 

The debt legislation that's coming forward, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, again I'm sure will be opposed by the members 

opposite, instead of co-operating.  In fact we've heard in this 

House . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How do you know? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- How do I know, the member from Kindersley 

says.  I know because we've already heard their statements 

condemning the debt legislation, and they haven't even seen the 

legislation yet.  This is why the people of this province 

de-elected the Tory government and put in a good government 

-- the one we have today. 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Besides the debt legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, legislation 

that will provide security of tenure.  The previous government 

not once in their mandate provided security of tenure for 

farmers, not once.  They oppose it. 

 

Another idea that came out of the debt legislation committee 

was the idea of a land trust, a community land trust, where 

farmers could transfer some of their land into a trust in return 

for cash to pay off some of their debts, and still have security of 

tenure on that land. 

 

Those are the kinds of positive ideas that this government and 

these members on this side of the House have put forward in 

order to help farmers in the farming industry, Mr. Speaker -- a 

land trust, debt legislation, short-term moratoriums, positive 

changes to GRIP.  And I recall one of the programs the 

members opposite put forward, that was equity financing -- a 

sorry, sorry tale of equity financing that was completely 

rejected by the members and by the farmers of the province.  

And we will see in the future how the programs put forward by 

our government are going to be received.  And to date they 

have been well received. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the life of me I cannot 

understand why the members opposite do not want to support a 

motion today, as they have in the past not supported motions, 

in order that farmers may . . . that this legislature can come 

together in one voice and ask the federal government to come 

forward with a $500 million payment that's owing to the 

farmers of the province.  For the life of me, I cannot understand 

why they do that.  The only conclusion I can draw, the only 

conclusion I can draw, is that they are supporting Brian 

Mulroney, their federal cousin in Ottawa, and ignoring the 

wishes of farmers. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you recall on 

April 28 there was an amendment to a motion put forward by 

our Minister of Agriculture.  And I just want to take a minute, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to read that amendment.  It's in three 

parts: 

 

 (1) to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for a third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the recent first 

ministers' conference; 

 

 (2) to extend with the federal government's consent the 

deadline to a date which is mutually agreeable for farmers, 

the provincial government, and the federal government; and 

 

 (3) to accept the request of the farmers to establish a review 

commission to design a long-term farm income stability 

program based on the needs of the farm families and the 

actual cost of production. 

 

That was the amendment to the motion as put forward by 

our Minister of Agriculture.  The main component here was the 

$500 million deficiency payment, the third line of defence that 

the Tories' federal cousins in Ottawa had been mouthing but 

not delivering on. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to give you the result from 

Hansard.  The Speaker called for the vote, and I quote: 

 

 The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:32 p.m. 

 

 Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

The yeas, there are two long lists of yeas, being members from 

our side of the House for the most part.  Nays to the $500 

million deficiency payment as put forward in the resolution, 

nays, and I quote from Hansard: 

 

 Muirhead, Neudorf, Swenson, Boyd, Martens, Britton, Toth, 

Goohsen, D'Autremont. 

 

Nays to $500 million, nay to . . . Let me read it again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, nays: 

 

 to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible . . . 

 

And it goes on.  Nays, those nine names, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

were nine Tories in opposition.  Their leader, I think, at that 

time was off in China somewhere, so wasn't around to vote. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't understand why the members 

opposite are opposed to this.  And again today, again today in 

this motion, where we're calling on the federal government to 

deduct anything outstanding in western grain stabilization from 

the $500 million, the same $500 million that we talked about 

on April 28, instead of standing up and agreeing with the 

motion, they put an amendment to try to change the focus. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Tory opposition had no credibility 

when they lost the election.  And a thinking person would 

wonder why they continue to act as though they were in 

government trying to run the show, trying to do whatever they 

want to do without any responsibility. 

 

In order for the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

become credible, they have to come forward with some 

co-operative voting to resolutions that will help the farmers of 

this province. 

 

We have seen time and time again when they were in 

government, we have seen them work hand in hand with the 

federal Tories.  Every time the former premier went down to 

Ottawa, he came back with a bill in his hand and the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer had to pay it.  And we're still paying for 

it, and we'll be paying for it for 15 or 20 years in the future, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you would think after the severe thrashing, the severe 

beating that the Tory government took at the polls last 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

October, that they might mend their ways.  But do they?  

Obviously not, because on two different occasions now they've 

had the opportunity to stand in their places, vote with the 

government and with the farmers of this province, to put 

pressure on the federal government to put $500 million into the 

pockets of western Canadian farmers.  And they refuse to do 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You would think, one would think that, as I said, a party that's 

taken such a defeat would have to ask themselves why.  And 

obviously they haven't asked themselves why because they 

haven't changed their ways.  And I ask the three new members 

from the Tory caucus why they would jump on a bandwagon or 

jump on a ship that has sunk to the bottom of the ocean.  They 

have the opportunity to lead a destroyed party back on their feet 

again by using their heads and voting with their minds instead 

of sitting in their chairs and being muzzled by Brian Mulroney 

in Ottawa, who is planning his election ploys, saying, you 

better do this and you better do that because I'm the boss. 

 

Now these new members over there ought to know better.  But 

obviously they've been brainwashed by the other members who 

have been around this institution, elected for a few years, but 

haven't learned their lesson. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the western grain stabilization 

program was a program that helped many farmers in 

cash-strapped situations.  But now when the Government of 

Canada has not delivered on a third line of defence, has not 

delivered on a third line of defence and has actually sent bills to 

farmers who they claim they've overpaid through western grain 

stabilization, what's the response from the federal government? 

What's the response from the members opposite? 

 

In time of severe crisis they don't stand up and say yes, this is 

wrong; we shouldn't be asking for that money back; we should 

be delivering on the commitment to deliver $500 million to 

western Canadian farmers.  They stick by their guns. 

 

Why do the Tories in Ottawa and the Tories in Saskatchewan 

ignore the needs and the wishes and the rights of survival for 

Saskatchewan farmers in particular and western Canada 

farmers in general, deny them the right to survival by worrying 

more about their hides and their political strategy than worrying 

about the farm families of this province?  That is a question, 

Mr. Speaker, that remains unanswered.  It remains unanswered 

even though the provincial government got a severe thrashing 

in the polls.  And I predict that the next . . . whenever the 

federal Prime Minister, whenever the Prime Minister gets up 

enough courage to call a federal election, he too will get a 

thrashing in the polls. 

 

You'd think the 10 Tory members in opposition in 

Saskatchewan would take the message to Ottawa saying, whoa, 

we've done it wrong; we've done it wrong in the past.  We have 

not been honest with the people and we've found out when 

you're not honest with the people, they throw you out of 

government; they throw you out of office.  Have the members 

opposite taken that message?  Obviously not.  Have they taken 

the opportunity to vote with the farmers of this province and 

the government, 

asking for delivery of $500 million?  No. 

 

All they do is stand up in their places and complain about a 

debt program that we're coming forward with when they don't 

know what it is, complain about the changes to the GRIP 

program, complaints that fly in the face of the fact that there is 

a renewed optimism out in rural Saskatchewan.  They sit idly in 

their places and don't vote in favour of monies that would 

compensate people in the drought areas, in the drought areas of 

this province who are . . . is an area in the south-west corner, 

who are very cash-strapped and again looking at no crop. 

 

Do you think that a portion of that $500 million would help 

those people out in the Morse constituency, in the west side 

where there is drought?  Would help those people in the 

Shaunavons and Leader south over across to Assiniboia?  Do 

you think $500 million, a portion of that would help those 

farmers?  Absolutely it would. 

 

But listen, what do the members do?  They vote against it.  And 

listen to this logic.  They say the GRIP program is no good.  

That's what they say, because it doesn't give enough support.  

The majority of the people in this province I believe now 

disagree with that. 

 

At the first there was some concerns until the farmers figured 

out the program and what it did for them and what the potential 

was.  But they're saying the GRIP program is no good.  So 

you'd think if the GRIP program was no good, then they'd be 

voting to try to get some money in the hands of farmers.  But 

what kind of logic is that when they say the GRIP is no good 

and then they vote against financial support? 

 

I think it shows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the confusion, the 

misguided logic, the inner turmoil over leadership, that they're 

again more concerned about themselves and who's going to 

lead the party than actually standing up and co-operating with 

the farmers of this province as we are doing in order to meet an 

end.  And that is to get some financial stability. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I would ask the opposition 

members this:  you have an opportunity.  You have an 

opportunity to start rebuilding your credibility.  You have an 

opportunity to help cash strapped financial farmers in 

Saskatchewan.  You have the opportunity to show some 

conscience instead of political manipulativeness.  I ask: join 

with the government and the farmers of this province.  Call 

upon the federal government to deliver the $500 million that 

they had promised. 

 

With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 21 -- Established Programs Financing 

Freeze 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Ms. Bradley. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I am pleased to rise to speak to the motion that 

encourages the federal government to end its three-year freeze 

on established program financing. 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm really concerned about this issue 

because the off-loading of the federal government on the 

provincial Government of Saskatchewan has resulted in a loss 

of $668.8 million since 1986.  This puts a severe strain on 

Saskatchewan to meet the needs of a health care system and the 

educational system. 

 

The most recent freezes combined with reductions means that 

the federal government has only paying 39 per cent of the 

province's expenditures on health and post-secondary 

education.  And as early as 1976, it was paying 50 per cent.  

This decline is of significance. 

 

So to secure proper training and education for our future needs, 

we must spend more on our educational system, not less.  For 

obvious reasons, post-secondary education funding should be 

financed by both the provincial and federal governments.  It 

makes me sad to see the province of Saskatchewan losing out 

due to the insensitive Tory federal government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have provided well-trained, educated 

people to many provinces in Canada.  Saskatchewan people are 

recognized all over North America as excellent workers -- 

versatile, well trained and tenacious.  And we are sad to see our 

taxpayers loaded down with taxes to pay for something that the 

whole country benefits from.  It is unfair for the federal 

government to off-load on Saskatchewan. 

 

Health costs are increasing by leaps and bounds.  The 

Conservatives, both provincially and federally, pretend to be 

guardians of the health care system, yet they don't put their 

money where their mouths are.  The federal government 

continues to decrease funding and the provincial PCs put us in 

a such a financial mess that we must struggle to meet the health 

care needs of our people. 

 

Folks in my constituency are trying to consolidate and make 

the health system more efficient and effective.  The 

Lloydminster health care boards are working with both the 

Saskatchewan and Alberta governments to amalgamate under 

one board.  The rural health care boards of my constituency are 

meeting to come up with plans that reflect their needs.  Twin 

Rivers Home Care is innovative and it has been implementing 

wellness clinics that are unique in the health care field.  

Everyone is co-operating and doing their best to make ends 

meet in these hard economic times. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe the federal government should get 

their priorities straight.  There are ways of coping with the 

economic downturn.  We can do better as a society.  Too much 

real human damage is taking place in the short run and too 

much destruction of natural economic opportunities in the long 

run.  The government must show strong leadership to renew 

our economy.  The provinces must be treated more fairly, given 

the heavy financial crunch that they are facing.  And these past 

rounds of the constitutional talks -- I think really this is also a 

unity factor.  With the federal government off-loading on the 

provincial governments, I think it is really causing them a lot of 

stress. 

So I plead with our federal government to consider the impact 

of their decisions on a province like Saskatchewan.  It is time 

for us to begin to rebuild and renew our economy.  Let's work 

together to get Canada working again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, there may be other 

colleagues that may want to make a few remarks on this motion 

at a later date, so I therefore move that we adjourn debate on 

this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 6 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, just a few remarks prior to moving the motion that's 

been presented -- pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason for the motion as it's been 

presented to the House today is to -- or has been presented to 

the House previously and we're raising today -- is to ask of the . 

. . inquire of the government for information on government 

hiring policy and the number of people that the government is 

employing for their services; and indeed raising the question of 

the openness and honesty that was spoken about in the throne 

speech presented by the government earlier in this session. 

 

The reason for the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to bring the 

government to account and certainly give us, the opposition, 

the opportunity to follow up on the hirings and the jobs that 

have been opened up and who is filling the jobs -- certainly 

keeping tabs on the government and the responses the way they 

are handling their job hirings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The concern we do have and the reason we raise the motion is 

the fact . . . we wonder has the government indeed responded in 

a consultative way the way they indicated that they would be 

consulting with people?  And we can remind the House and 

remind people around the province that one of the reasons that 

we are also bringing up the questions is because of the fact that 

we have seen in a number of occasions that the government 

hasn't indeed followed the consultative process that they've 

been speaking about so strenuously over the past month and a 

half. 

 

We just have to look at the agricultural sector and the GRIP 

program '92 and we see the concern raised in the agricultural 

field by farmers, by lenders, by people all across the province 

regarding the lack of opportunity to speak and to voice their 

concerns and offer ideas and alternatives, rather than just 

having the government disband and bring in a new program 

without taking the time to really consult. 

 

We have seen also in the Atomic Energy of Canada agreement, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the government has again failed to 

really consult with the industry and 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

consult with people of Saskatchewan, the fact that this was an 

industry and could have become a very important industry in 

this province in the area of economic development and job 

creation. 

 

We have to ask ourselves what consultative process was taken 

by the government in addressing the Pension Plan, just 

destroying or taking away a pension plan that was addressing 

the needs of individuals around the province who didn't have 

the access to another form of a pension plan.  And certainly it's 

been raised in the House the last few days -- the fact that there 

has been various concerns regarding the process, Mr. Speaker, 

of the consultation, and many other examples that we could 

bring forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could certainly go into a number of other areas 

of concern.  And as we continue to raise the questions that will 

be brought forward by the motions, we will certainly be 

bringing to the attention of the House that the motions that we 

are introducing, Mr. Speaker, are being brought forward to 

address the concerns of some of the election promises, the fact 

that the government of the day hasn't taken the time to maybe 

not only consult but has broken some of the promises they 

made to people prior to the election of October 23, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another reason for raising these questions is to 

follow up on the question of patronage.  And over the past few 

days we have been raising questions in the House regarding 

interim supply and appointments within the government sector. 

 

And we have on occasion . . . certainly recently the minister, I 

believe, did set a precedent and we trust that the government 

will continue to be as forthright and open, when a question was 

posed and after much debate and continuously raising the 

question the minister did provide the information regarding 

employees within his department, not only of the job that they 

now hold but also the fact that he released information on their 

previous employment records, Mr. Speaker, previously the 

employment history.  And we appreciated the forthrightness of 

the minister, and certainly the questions that we're raising 

through the motions are going to be addressing the same type 

of format and questions. 

 

The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is to bring to our attention, 

the taxpayers of the province, were the type of people that are 

being hired, addressing the question of the fact that the 

government has spoken of eliminating jobs, of cutting back in 

the public service, to address the problems of debt and the 

financing and the waste and mismanagement. 

 

And so under the new rules of the House and the freedom of 

information, we are going to be raising questions, not just as we 

will be today, Mr. Speaker, but in days to come, questions 

regarding hiring practice and the people who have been hired to 

fill positions. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, there have been times when we haven't 

received all the information that we would be requiring.  And 

we'll be certainly watching with interest the government, 

regarding their response to the motions that we are presenting. 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, when we were asking for employee 

information on . . . especially regarding previous employment, 

some would argue that, well, is it necessary for people to know 

where individuals have been previously employed?  I believe 

when you apply for a job, regardless of where you apply, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the job requirements is that you give a list of 

previous employment you have had, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And 

that is a strong indication of your qualifications, and that's 

taken into account.  When you are asked or even hired for your 

position, your previous employment record certainly comes to 

bear.  So we want to follow that up to see whether indeed the 

government has received the type of individuals to fill the roles 

that they are asking of them. 

 

I can imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that certainly there are 

individuals would be concerned about the release of 

information on previously employment records.  But I think, 

Mr. Speaker, most people would agree and would tend to feel 

that they have nothing to hide.  And if indeed they have nothing 

to hide, there is no reason why this information shouldn't be 

available, not only to the opposition but to the taxpayers of this 

province.  Unless, Mr. Speaker, employees may be ashamed of 

the fact that releasing previous information might tie them to 

the government and certainly would then discredit the 

government on the fact that they had indicated to the province, 

to the people of this province, that they would be doing away 

with political patronage. 

 

And no doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we'll probably find that 

there are people employed by this government who were 

involved in different areas of political activity, working for the 

party.  And we all acknowledge that it's politics and a number 

of these hirings do take place. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I'm not necessarily running down 

all the hirings on the basis of political patronage but we want to 

bring the government to accountability on the fact that the 

people they did hire really do have the qualifications to meet 

the roles that they are asking of them, and not just the fact of 

whether they worked for the previous government, whether 

they were a campaign manager, or what capacity they worked 

in or whether they maybe worked for another government 

outside of this province, say the government of Ontario, 

whatever.  And our purpose in presenting the motions is to 

bring this information forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very well aware of a number of the 

appointments that have already taken place, and most people 

will acknowledge that, yes, they were political patronage like 

the Messers and like the Bryants and like the Chings.  Mr. 

Speaker, but if they can do the job and do it well and do it 

effectively, then that's fine; we've got no problem with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore, on the basis of leading up to this 

motion, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 6 showing: 

 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company:  (1) The names of all persons 

currently employed by or accountable to the minister directly 

or indirectly, excluding only members of the Amalgamated 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

Transit Union, Local 1374 who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991.  (2) For each person listed in (1), the (a) 

details of employment including compensation (b) job 

description (c) qualifications, including employment history 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a 

few words to the comments from the member from Moosomin.  

And I guess I find it interesting that the first motion moved by 

the members deal with STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company).  The public know that STC was one of the worst 

examples in a long litany of examples of waste and 

mismanagement of the previous government.  People will know 

that in Crown Corporations and in the press there's been a story 

carried that two of the people that were hired by STC actually 

worked in the Legislative Building under the previous 

government and never worked for STC at all but yet were paid 

out of STC to do political work for those members opposite. 

 

And yet today they stand here sanctimoniously and talk about 

giving out lists as if they had a corner on honesty and integrity 

when it came to hiring practices in their government.  I find it 

almost laughable if it weren't so sad, for the fact that this 

corporation was an example right across Canada and North 

America: kickbacks, examples of their employees having to . . . 

in fact I believe one of them has now been in conflict with the 

law to the extent that the members opposite realize full well 

that they made a terrible mistake in their hiring practices in 

STC. 

 

And so I wonder why it would be that they would choose this 

corporation as the first one to question the new government on 

their hiring practices.  The company was in terrible condition 

when we took it over a few months ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the solution that the members had come up 

with to the problems in STC and the fact that it had a $6 

million debt was not to make the company leaner or make it 

more efficient, but they had planned to build a new head office 

for STC.  And when we came to power, one of the first things 

we did is cancel that contract because the employees 

themselves said they didn't need a new head office, that what 

they needed was better management. 

 

And also they had a contract signed for a new computer for 

$1.6 million.  Now the member from Arm River will know that 

in running a bus company with about 50 buses, spending $1.6 

million on a computer simply is irresponsible and a large 

amount of waste.  So I want to say to the members opposite 

clearly, what the corporation needed was new management, 

new direction, and that is what we have set about to do. 

 

And the members opposite should know and should appreciate 

the fact that the new management there have reduced the 

turnaround time for customer accounts from 110 days, which it 

was when we took over, to a mere 20 

days; that is, from the time that a billing is received, the time 

that the expenses incurred, till the time that the billing is sent 

out has been reduced from 110 days down to 20.  And what 

that will mean for the corporation, that the massive debts that 

we've seen over there in previous years, in recent previous 

years, will be reduced considerably. 

 

(1615) 

 

So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I intend to give the information 

as required.  I want to say, first of all, that we will be amending 

the motion slightly to exclude, for sure, section (c) which talks 

about including in the information employment history of the 

individuals.  I don't understand why the members opposite 

would want or need that.  But I want to say that we will be 

amending the motion as follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister, directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the Amalgamated 

Transit Union, Local 1374 who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991" be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

 "In the Minister's office." 

 

 And also that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want 

to react a little bit to what the Government House Leader has 

just said in response to the motion as my colleague has brought 

it forward. 

 

In our attempt as an opposition to hold the government 

opposite responsible for their actions . . . and that is precisely 

what all of these motions for return debatable are going to be 

doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we are attempting to get 

answers. 

 

Now we have gone through a debacle here over the last three 

days with the just-adjourned Committee of Finance on the 

Appropriation Bill and interim supply, where we have spent 

that period of time asking the Minister of Finance a whole 

series of questions in order to get some answers.  And we were 

stonewalled throughout the entire process. 

 

Now when we come up for a motion for return debatable like 

this, we've just witnessed a discussion by the Government 

House Leader on issues that I would question very much the 

relevance of his comments to the debate in hand.  But having 

said that, I will then branch off and piggyback on some of his 

comments in responding to them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want answers -- we want answers.  

That's precisely what these questions are doing.  And by 

coming forth with the amendment as the Government House 

Leader has just done, it's going to effectively subterfuge our 

attempt to get those answers because it's basically another 

attempt at stonewalling by this open and honest government 

and preventing us from getting the answers to the questions that 

we are posing. 
 

He makes the comment, why would we come up with STC?  

Well I think it's just a continuation of the process 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

that we've always had while we were in government of being 

open, honest, forthright, with the people of Saskatchewan.  We 

have nothing to hide.  He seemed kind of surprised that we 

would come forth with STC as if it was some kind of an 

albatross around our neck. 

 

Now of course we were not perfect.  There were mistakes.  And 

some of the individuals and the people that were working for us 

-- as in all governments, I would suggest to you -- not all the 

employees were perfect.  But we have nothing to hide.  In fact 

we want to get more answers yet out of the current 

administration in terms of how they are addressing the 

problems and so on within STC. 

 

Now the amendment as proposed by the Government House 

Leader says that he is going to exclude employment history.  

And he asked the question, he couldn't understand why 

members opposite would need, would want to know the 

answers to those questions.  Well I would suggest to him, first 

of all, that it is our prerogative to ask the questions that we 

want answers to and we intend to get them.  However if the 

motions here for returns debatable are going to be handled in 

this fashion, then obviously the taxpayers of this province are 

not going to get the answers to the questions that we are posing. 

 

Now precisely the employment history, I don't understand.  

There was no reason given why the employment history would 

not be included.  I don't understand that.  I heard my colleague 

talking about patronage, for an example, and we just want to 

delve into that a little bit because the Minister of Justice has 

assured the people of this province that there is absolutely no 

patronage going on in the current government, that any and 

everybody that is hired by this government is bona fide, highly 

qualified, and in position to do good work for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And if that's the case, we commend you for it.  

But we want to find out. 

 

We suspect, we just suspect that there may not be every 

individual there that's really qualified.  We suspect, we just 

suspect that maybe a few blood tests were done.  And simply 

by giving the employment history and the qualifications, then if 

there's nothing to hide, it can be done.  It should not be that 

time-consuming.  Anyone who has a job with anyone has 

already given forth a resume.  The information is all there.  It's 

easily accessible, and it could easily be brought into a format 

where the people of Saskatchewan could get that kind of 

information. 

 

And I give you a case in point, Mr. Chairman.  During the 

Estimates . . . or during the Appropriation Bill and the interim 

supply, I asked the Minister of Finance to give me a run-down 

of his officials: who they were, how long they'd been 

employed, their qualifications, what the work history was, and 

what they were being paid.  The next day, Mr. Chairman, I got 

that information.  I appreciated that very much.  It gave me an 

opportunity to assess the people that had been hired and why 

they had been hired and should they have been hired. 

 

And this is what we're asking.  Why would the government, in 

its openness, in its attempt to convince the people of 

Saskatchewan that they are forthright, that they are honest, that 

there is no patronage, why would 

you not prove that by coming forth and giving us the 

information that we request? 

 

This amendment does not allow us to do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that is the opposition that we have to that 

amendment.  And certainly we will be voting against it. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 7 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

couple of concerns that I'd like to bring to the attention of the 

House, in light of comments made by the minister on the 

preceding motion. 

 

Certainly the government of the day have indicated to people 

right across this province that patronage would not be an issue 

any more, that they would be very open, that they would be 

honest, that there would be open public tenders, and that people 

regardless of politics would have the opportunity of applying 

for and indeed receiving employment within this government. 

 

The problem I have regarding the amendment as it has been 

presented, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that the minister has 

indeed agreed that he is willing to release the names and 

employment information of individuals within the individual 

minister's office.  But the other fact is that I believe it also 

indicates that the minister is not willing to release names of 

individuals that are employed within the department. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that does is goes totally 

against what the minister was just relating in this House -- the 

fact that over the past number of years, if you will, and as the 

minister indicated in the corporation that was just raised, that 

many people were hired within the department that the 

government today is questioning and certainly when they were 

in opposition they would be questioning. 

 

I guess the motion that we presented and the reason for 

bringing the motion forward to it was to address that concern.  

And it bothers me that the minister has now decided that at one 

moment he wanted to have, and suggested we should have, 

openness and that this information should be available to the 

House and to members of the House, now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we find that this information indeed is not going to be 

available.   So we are asking you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how are 

we going to hold the government accountable on their hiring 

practices in who is hired and who isn't hired? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is of major concern to us. That is a 

major concern not only to this opposition caucus but to people 

across the province of Saskatchewan regarding government 

hiring practices, not only because of the promises that were 

made prior to and up to the provincial election and indeed 

following the last election and over the past number of months, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker -- the openness; but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the reason for the motions is to address that openness and 

address the ability of opposition members and the taxpayers of 

this 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

province to know who is hired in departments so that indeed we 

eliminate that process that the minister indicates took place 

over the past number of years.  And certainly anyone across the 

province of Saskatchewan is aware that probably has been a 

practice for eons of time within the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move to return no. 7 and move that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 

 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation: (1) The names of all persons currently 

employed by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the International 

Woodworkers of America who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in (1), (a) the 

details of employment including compensation, (b) job 

description, (c) qualifications including employment history, 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior, (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired, and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for all the same 

reasons that I commented on in the previous motion, I would 

move that: 

 

 The words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly excluding only members of the International 

Woodworkers of America who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991" be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

 in the minister's office. 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this simply isn't good 

enough.  We have a newly elected government here.  They 

went around this province day after day in the last election 

campaign promising, promising the voters of Saskatchewan 

that they were going to be totally open and above-board in all 

things that they did in government. 

 

And now we have the Government House Leader coming in, 

amending these motions for return, that simply ask some very 

simple questions. 

 

I mean it must be, it must be evident to everyone in the 

province of Saskatchewan that a person's employment history 

can't be that onerous.  That people should be proud of their 

employment history and that you would be proud to employ 

people because of their employment history. 

 

(1630) 

 

And now the minister says that the opposition and the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan shouldn't have access to the people 

that are unemployed. 

 

I mean we have the member from Regina that is the resident 

expert on STC, standing up in private members' statements, 

boasting about that particular Crown 

corporation and what wonderful turnarounds it's made for the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Well if those wonderful turnarounds have been made and they 

commended the employees, then why wouldn't they want the 

people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayer, to know all about those 

employees?  It just doesn't make any reason, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that you wouldn't want to advertise those things.  If, as 

the member from Regina North -- whatever now -- claims that 

it's doing such a wonderful job, then I would think you would 

want to let everyone know about the people you have there 

doing this wonderful job.  And instead we have the minister in 

each and every situation saying no, we're not going to give you 

that; we're going to give you the folks in the minister's office 

and that's it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm wondering what they're trying 

to hide, because obviously there must be some hidden agenda 

here.  And my suspicion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when we 

place questions to the Minister of Justice in question period 

about all the various lay-offs through the government services, 

he gave his personal commitment to this House that not one of 

those positions would be back-filled, back-filled with friends of 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that particular question occurred on May 

6, 1992.  And my question to the minister at the time was: 

 

 Mr. Minister, will you give this House the assurance today 

that the hundreds of pink slips being issued by your Minister 

of Finance, not one single one will be back-filled with NDP 

partisans in the months to come.  Will you give that 

assurance today? 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Fairview stood up and said: 

"Yes, I give member that assurance." 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only conclusion we can draw 

from the Government House Leader is that they have already 

put the Minister of Justice at jeopardy, that they have put the 

Minister of Justice in a position where he would have to tender 

his resignation in this House because of the commitment that 

he made. 

 

Obviously if the minister is so frightened, is so frightened of 

these orders for return that he must amend them all to take 

away the right of Saskatchewan taxpayers to know who is 

employed, what their employment history is like, what their 

compensation is, their superior, and the person that they were 

hired by, then they are afraid that the Minister of Justice will 

have to tender his resignation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this from people who stood in this 

Assembly for month after month, year after year, condemning 

the practices of the past government.  It is the absolute height 

of hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the absolute height of 

hypocrisy that when they have the opportunity to practise what 

they preach, instead we have the Government House Leader 

come in here and subvert -- subvert -- the real questions of the 

official opposition and the taxpayers of this province.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we can draw no other conclusion from this 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

debate if that is not so. 

 

So I'm saying to the members opposite, if you're hiring folks 

that you're ashamed of, then don't hire them.  If you're hiring 

folks that carry New Democratic Party cards but are doing a 

good job, then I would think you would want to boast about it 

to the Saskatchewan taxpayer, not hide behind amendments to 

motions for return. 

 

If the folks that you hired can stand the test, can stand the test 

that they aren't patronage appointments, that they're doing good 

work, then I would think you would want to tell the world 

about it.  But that's not the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It seems 

that the minister . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 
 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask for leave to introduce 

some guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for 

Regina Hillsdale and the Minister of Health, I want to welcome 

to the legislature 15 senior citizens who are part of the 

Mackenzie Art Gallery seniors group.  They have been visiting 

the legislature this afternoon looking at our various galleries 

and the art that has been assembled here in the Legislative 

Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they are going to be on their way to Moose Jaw.  

So the members from Moose Jaw will be delighted to learn that 

they're off to Moose Jaw next week to also see all of the 

various art sites in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 

They are part of what's called, I believe, "gallery gazing," and 

they've spent the past several weeks visiting various sites in 

Regina where art is assembled. And they are a very interesting 

group of senior citizens who are interested in the cultural life of 

our province and the city of Regina. 
 

So I want to welcome them here today and wish you good luck 

as you continue to see the various art that exists here in 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you very much. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 7 (continued) 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think I've made the point that you've got to practise 

what you preach. 
 

Sir, we have seen many examples where the members of the 

now government ask all sorts of questions about former 

employees of the past administration.  They take great delight 

in talking about the employment records of people who were 

formerly employed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

If they in all honesty don't feel that these motions for return are 

simply legitimate questions that any interested 

 taxpayer would like to know about, then I guess there is no 

point at all in the official opposition or anyone else in this 

province asking those kind of questions, and there's no point at 

all in debating any of these motions for return.  We might as 

well sit in our seat and let the government majority have its 

way. 

 

And obviously that is the pattern that we've set upon this 

afternoon.  And we might as well take our seats and simply let 

this House roll on.  The government majority can do whatever 

it wishes, and so much for the taxpayer. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:39 p.m. until 4:42 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Draper 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Atkinson Flavel 

Kowalsky Cline 

Cunningham Scott 

Hagel McPherson 

Bradley Crofford 

Koenker Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Pringle Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Murray  

-- 31 

Nays 

Muirhead Martens 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Toth 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

 

Return No. 8 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This 

motion is similar to the last two that we have been looking at.  

And what we're debating in this motion is open and honest 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  During the election 

campaign and ever since that time the government opposite has 

been preaching how they are an open and honest government. 

 

These questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speak directly to that 

openness, to that honesty.  We feel these questions are very 

pertinent to the operation of the government.  The people of 

Saskatchewan have the right to know the qualifications of the 

people it is paying tax money to for their employment.  They 

need to be able to judge the performance of their duties.  And 

to judge their capabilities the people need to know what their 

employment history has been and how they have 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1992 

performed in that employment, how successful they were in 

that employment. 

 

There's only two reasons why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

government is not interested in giving us that information.  

Either the government opposite did not ask their employees 

what their previous employment history was, therefore do not 

have the answers to the question.  But I would find that very 

surprising, but not totally impossible that they would not have 

asked.  Either that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the employees are 

ashamed of where they were last employed.  They don't want 

anyone to know what they were doing previous to being 

employed by the government opposite. 

 

Perhaps it's because those employees are ashamed because they 

were campaign workers for the NDP Party.  Perhaps they were 

even campaign managers, such as Jack Messer was.  Maybe 

they were ashamed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they were 

employed as personal assistants to the NDP in some other 

province. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are ashamed because to 

provide a history of their employment would show the people 

of Saskatchewan that they have indeed broken their promise to 

eliminate patronage and that they have not followed the 

directive put out by the Minister of Justice that there would be 

no patronage appointment. 

 

One of the reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we need to know 

who the people are, what they're being paid, and where they 

worked before is an example I'll give.  In question period I 

asked the minister for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) about a $22 million difference in an account.  At the 

end of October, in the SGI auto fund stabilization account for 

the year of 1991 there was an increase in that account of over 

$15 million.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, at the end of December, 

there is a loss of almost $7 million -- $22 million, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that has gone some place.  And yet when we ask the 

minister what happened to the money, he would not give us an 

answer. 

 

Perhaps the employees at SGI, those managers that have been 

put in place by the new government, are incapable of handling 

their portfolios that they have been given. 

 

Another SGI example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the government 

has built a new office at 1818 Victoria Avenue East, a new SGI 

claim centre.  This claim centre was almost finished, Mr. 

Speaker.  All the walls were in place.  The ceilings were in 

place, the lights, and yet new management came in and decided 

for some reason that the office was not appropriate.  So the 

walls were tore out.  Ceilings were tore down, and one of the 

things that were done was new windows put into this office. 

 

The new windows that had been put in previously were 36 

inches wide.  It was changed to put in windows that are 39 

inches or one meter wide, Mr. Speaker.  This does not show 

competence.  So what are these employees doing?  What was 

their background?  Did they know nothing about construction if 

they were in charge of new construction for SGI services for 

their claim centre?  Why can we not find that out, Mr. Speaker? 

That was just one example.  There could be many more out 

there.  And, Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to find out 

whether or not these people are actually qualified for the 

positions that they hold. 

 

The government has talked of down-sizing, of the cuts that they 

have been forced to make with their last budget.  And yet when 

you look at the budget, there is a hundred million dollar 

increase in the actual spending over the previous budget. 

 

If we could find out, Mr. Speaker, what these employees' 

qualifications were, what their past history was, what they're 

being paid, the people of Saskatchewan could judge whether or 

not they're actually qualified and should be employed. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following: 

 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance: (1) The names of all persons 

currently employed by or accountable to the minister directly 

or indirectly, excluding only members of the Office and 

Professional Employees International Union 937 who were 

employed prior to November 1, 1991.  (2) For each person 

listed in (1), the (a) details of employment including 

compensation (b) job description (c)qualifications, including 

employment history (d) the name of his or her immediate 

superior (e) the authority under which the person was hired, 

and (f) the actual date that the person started work. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to see a 

copy of the amendment that the member opposite . . . I didn't 

quite understand what his closing comments . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . .Pardon?  Okay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it's interesting the change in the 

members opposite.  How after many years of being absolutely 

tight-fisted when it came to any information being given . . . 

And if you look back on day 26 and see whether any motions 

for returns debatable have ever been dealt with by the 

Assembly on day 26, what you'll find is this is the earliest that 

motions for return debatable have ever been dealt with in this 

Assembly.  That's right -- the earliest it's ever been dealt with 

because the government, the members opposite when they were 

in government, did everything to avoid ever getting to motions 

for return debatable.  And they were amended out of existence.  

We didn't get any information from those members when they 

were in government, and everyone knows that. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing is a conversion on the 

road to Damascus here.  These members opposite have no 

belief in freedom of information.  They were in government 10 

years and never got around to putting in and proclaiming any 

freedom of information. 

 

We now have in place an agreement and a piece of legislation 

where all of the heads of Crown corporation have to file with 

the Legislative Assembly their contract 



June 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

with their employer, the government and the taxpayers of the 

province.  They have to make it public. 

 

We asked day after day in the House what the salary of Mr. 

George Hill was when we were in government, and in Crown 

Corporations.  And not once did we get an answer from those 

members opposite, the fact that George Hill, Mr. Hill, president 

of SaskPower, was making in excess of $400,000.  We didn't 

know it.  We didn't know it until we came to government and 

opened the books.  Well I'll tell you, every head of every 

Crown now has to file with the Legislative Assembly how 

much money they're earning.  And it's public and everyone 

knows.  So don't sit there and sanctimoniously say that this 

government doesn't give out information. 

 

But if you're asking us to compile thousands of documents of 

every employee who this government will hire during its 4 or 8 

or 12 years in government, it simply isn't acceptable.  If you're 

asking for the political people in our offices -- and I'll readily 

admit that the people who work for me in my office as a 

minister are political people.  They have to understand what the 

New Democratic philosophy is about when they work in a 

minister's office -- that's what we intend to give you. 

 

We'll give you their salary; we'll give you their qualifications; 

we'll give you when they were appointed, and that's accurate 

and it's correct that we should do that.  But if you're saying you 

want to go on a witch-hunt of every employee in this province, 

we're not going to allow that to happen because you did that for 

10 years.  And people are sick and tired of Conservatives doing 

witch-hunts in this province and it isn't going to happen. 

 

So when you talk to us about open and free government and 

access to information, I'll tell you very clearly that we're doing 

10 times more than you folks ever did in the 10 years that you 

were government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And I'll tell you one thing that the 

public dislikes more than the dishonest kind of government that 

you are running is the hypocrisy that they're seeing here today 

about how if you were in government you would now give out 

all this information.  What a joke.  What a joke. 

 

We watched you for 10 years hide the salary of the president of 

SaskPower, not workers in the Crown corporation the you're 

asking for now.  You wouldn't even give out the salary and the 

compensation for the president of the Crown corporation. 

 

You're now saying you want everybody's compensation.  When 

did you decide that?  When did you decide that not only should 

the president's salary and all the EAs (executive assistants), 

which we're giving to you freely that information, that not only 

should that be made available but every employee that you 

asked for. 

 

When did you decide that?  It certainly wasn't when you were 

in government.  You wouldn't give us anyone's salary not even 

the president's and you know that.  Not one employee, not two 

employees.  You would give us no 

employees' salaries in the Crown corporation.  And you made a 

virtue of that for 10 years. 

 

Now suddenly a few months after you were defeated and turfed 

out unceremoniously by the taxpayers of the province you say 

that we should come to you with thousands of documents of all 

the employees who we hire, whether it's through Public Service 

Commission or wherever.  And not only that, you want their 

work history. 

 

Well I'll tell you what you're after is a witch-hunt, and it isn't 

going to happen.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

return no. 8 be amended as follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the Office and 

Professional Employees International Union Local 397 who 

were employed prior to November 1, 1991" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 In the minister's office. 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it being 5 o'clock I 

move the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 p.m. 

 


