




















































Hansard: August 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2503 

 August 14, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Pursuant to other 

petitions that we have handed in, we have a couple of thousand 

more names added to the chiropractors.  And for the 

expediency of time I will only read the prayer itself, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first sheet is mostly from Saskatoon.  I notice 

that this one has another 40, 50 names at the back also mostly 

from Saskatoon, but certainly from Turtleford, Sonningdale, 

Prud'homme, Warman and other areas. 

 

And I could go through again the entire list, Mr. Speaker, but 

needless to say these do represent areas from all across the 

province.  And it pleases me now to table these for the 

Assembly. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition 

brought in and this is one that is a new one here, so I will read 

so that the other people can understand what this petition is 

about: 

 

 That Saskatchewan producers are undergoing extremely 

trying financial times due to drought, grain prices and 

international trade wars, and that they are being pressed 

further financially by the NDP government's decision to 

eliminate the Farm Fuel Rebate Program and its coloured fuel 

policy; and, that to implement the government's fuel policy 

will cost Co-op and small independent fuel service stations 

thousands of dollars, leading to the loss of jobs and 

businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm 

Fuel Rebate Program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from Hoosier, Loverna, 

Smiley, Marengo, Flaxcombe, Major, and so on.  So it pleases 

me, Mr. Speaker, to present this petition on behalf of these 

people at this time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have the 

same petition so I won't repeat and read it off now.  I'll just say 

where they're from -- this concerning of course the rebate.  

They're from the same towns as my colleague, pretty well, 

from Marengo, Hoosier, Loverna, Smiley, and 

both petitions are covering the same town. So I hereby have the 

pleasure to table these petitions. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole handful 

here of more pertaining to the chiropractor request . . . for 

chiropractor treatments, not to have to pay a fee.  So I won't 

read through it today.  I'll just read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

These are, Mr. Speaker, from Moose Jaw, Drinkwater, Chaplin, 

and that surrounding area.  The next one I have is from 

Yorkton, mostly Yorkton; Buchanan, Saskatchewan; Yorkton 

-- those are all Yorkton that page, pretty well. 

 

This next one, Mr. Speaker, is from Estevan, Lampman, 

Estevan, mostly Estevan, Carnduff, quite a few from Carnduff.  

The next one is Prince Albert, way up . . . These are all across 

the province, Mr. Speaker --  Prince Albert, Porcupine Plain, 

Kinistino. They're mostly a lot on there from Kinistino. 

 

And these from Regina: Grey Street in Regina.  I know that's 

Churchill Downs.  Discovery Road, Saskatoon.  This page is all 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, entirely, in its entirely.  And then the 

next one is all Regina.  Oh, there's one from Ogema.  There's 

Regina, Regina.  By the addresses, I don't think there's any on 

that page from Churchill Downs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then at last, this other page is all Regina, Regina, 

Briercrest, and Regina.  By the addresses, there's none from 

Churchill Downs on that one.  I must have about 15 here, Mr. 

Speaker.  The next one is all Regina, Lajord, Saskatchewan.  

The rest are all Regina.  And these are all Regina. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Churchill Downs. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, these are not Churchill Downs.  The last 

one here that I have is all Regina also, and there is addresses 

here, yes.  I thought we had them all from Churchill Downs, 

but there definitely is some more from Churchill Downs.  

Thank you.  It's a pleasure to . . . 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have got petitions to 

present this afternoon.  Mine are to do with chiropractic care.  

And I'll only read the last sentence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

to discriminate against chiropractic patients by charging them 

fees not assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from the communities of 

Lumsden, Earl Grey, Regina Beach, Silton, Findlater, Moose 

Jaw, Craven, Regina, Aylesbury, Earl Grey, Yellow Grass, 

Bethune, Disley, Prince Albert, Big River, St. Brieux, 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, Grayson, Springside, Saltcoats, Canora, 

Yorkton -- lots of Yorkton -- Willowbrook, Melville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions today that I present would be a 

road-map of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions.  

This is a different petition than my colleagues have been 

presenting, so I'd like to read the petition.  It's just a short last 

paragraph that I'll read: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the farm fuel 

rebate program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a different petition.  It comes from people 

in the Kindersley, Eatonia, Saskatoon, Macklin, Kindersley, 

Red Deer, Alberta - 

_ we even have one from Alberta that are protesting this move, 

Mr. Speaker -- and Kindersley area. 

 

One name of interest, Mr. Speaker, one name of interest is a 

Mr. Reg Halpenny from Kindersley.  I understand Mr. 

Halpenny . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member knows that he cannot 

comment on the petition.  I wish that he would get through with 

his petition and present it, please. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They all know who he is anyway. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes.  He sought the nomination, I think. 

 

And the other petition is the one on the, Mr. Speaker, on the 

chiropractic care in the province of Saskatchewan.  This 

petition comes from people primarily in the Saskatoon, 

Yorkton, Nipawin, Melfort, Porcupine Plain area, Mr. Speaker.  

I present those now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

here regarding chiropractic care, and I want to just say that they 

are from all across Saskatchewan; places like MacNutt, 

Goodeve, Alida, Yorkton, Calder, Moose Jaw, P.A. (Prince 

Albert), Swift Current, Waldeck, Hazlet, Herbert, Ponteix, 

Lancer, Tompkins, and other places from across the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I have some petitions here to present to the 

Assembly from across the province: Maidstone, Mayfair, North 

Battleford, Mr. Speaker; Meadow Lake, Regina, Whitewood, 

Wolseley, Kipling, Langbank, Yarbo, Moosomin, Stockholm, 

Dubuc; a number from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker.  And 

these petitioners are petitioning the government regarding 

chiropractic services. 

I would also like to present a few petitions, Mr. Speaker, with a 

number of petitioners signing them from Kindersley, Plenty, 

Dodsland, Mr. Speaker, speaking out regarding the GRIP 

question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am happy today 

to present petitions along the lines that my colleague from 

Kindersley has presented with regards to the farm fuel rebate 

program and that they cancel the coloured fuel program as 

well.  These petitions come from Kindersley area: Flaxcombe, 

Hoosier, Smiley, Loverna, and all along that west side of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also have other petitions with regard to the chiropractic issue 

that has been presented by many of my colleagues.  I won't 

read the prayer.  I'm sure you're all aware of what that is.  

These come from Springside, Yorkton, Maple Creek.  I see 

Langenburg.  We've got Saskatoon, Martensville, Warman, 

quite a few different locations up in that area. 

 

Most of these on this other page are from Dalmeny and 

Saskatoon and Langham, as well as some more from 

Martensville and Prince Albert I see here as well as Debden.  

And I think that pretty well covers most of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

petition, two petitions, to present concerning GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program).  And the prayer is: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

  1.) allow the 1991 Grip program to stand for this year, 

 

  2.) start working with the Federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "revenue 

insurance" program by the end of this calendar year, 

and 

 

  3.) ensure that the new . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that that is not part of 

the prayer.  The member is allowed to read the last part of the 

prayer but not the petition, only the prayer.  If that's part of the 

prayer, then the member may proceed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed 

part of the prayer. 

 

  3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return 

ratio instead of the risk area formula. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This comes from the Dodsland-Plenty area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also have a number of petitions concerning the chiropractic 

care.  This comes from the Hague, North 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

Battleford, Macklin, Yorkton area -- across the central part of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we go on to the next item, I want to . . 

. seems to be some misconception about the presenting of 

petitions.  I just want to remind members of the statement made 

by the former Speaker on April 15, 1991.  And let me quote: 

 

 Once more I bring to the hon. member's attention that she 

may read the prayer of the petition but not the entire petition 

because that is encouraging and engaging in debate. 

 

Secondly, on May 17, 1991, the former Speaker says: 

 

 Speculation on where people may live or not live is not a 

valid part of a presentation -- again to state only the essence 

of the petition, which means the prayer and then you present 

it. 

 

Those were statements made by the former Speaker of the 

legislature.  And I just want to draw members' attention to that. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very pleased to introduce to you and through you to other 

members of this Assembly, two students seated in your gallery, 

Lori Samco and Carol Bonard.  Lori is a resident of Regina and 

Carol is visiting from Marseille in France.  They've spent some 

time in the legislature this afternoon, and I've had the pleasure 

of meeting them personally.  And I would ask all members here 

to give them a warm welcome.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Legislative 

Assembly today four seniors from Bulyea who are in with us 

here today -- Mrs. Mae Gorrill, Mr. Phil Fink, Mrs. Irma Fink, 

and Mrs. Linda Johnson.  I want to welcome them to the 

Legislative Assembly and ask the members to also join in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the legislature one of my constituents who I notice sitting up 

in the gallery, Florence Lamont from Watrous, here to take in 

question period today.  And I would ask all members to 

cordially welcome her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

ACS Interest Rates 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is to the minister responsible for the Agricultural Credit 

Corporation. 

The minister knows that input costs are a constant burden to 

farmers' potential profits, that if any one of these input costs 

can be reduced, producers are better off and better able to 

continue farming.  As we all know, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 

Speaker, that in 1982 interest rates were as high as 18 to 22 per 

cent interest.  And under our government, we subsidized 

interest rates. 

 

My question to the minister is this: will the minister tell the 

farmers of the province of Saskatchewan what the Agricultural 

Credit Corporation's capital loan interest rates are today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I'll take notice 

of that question. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, my question then will be to 

any minister that can answer that question.  There has to be 

someone that can answer that question.  Could someone answer 

that question? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows the minister 

has taken notice.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that input 

costs are unreal in this province, and it's something that ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) can do is 

control . . . that's something they can do.  They could control 

the interest rates and set an example to this province. 

 

My question: it seems that no review of ACS policy's ever 

taken place, that you're charging clients and producers of 

province prime plus 2 per cent.  That's what I understand there.  

Unless they can correct me, that's what they're charging.  Will 

the minister . . . to commit to at least keeping one of his 

promises on behalf of that government.  Will you lower their 

interest rate charges for your customers which reflects the 

market-place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we are well aware 

that interest costs are one of the input cost to farmers, and 

farmers cannot afford any more costs than is absolutely 

necessary.  I think we're certainly always looking at our 

policies. 

 

But prime plus two, Mr. Speaker, is market response if it 

means that we are providing money at cost or less than cost to 

farmers.  And as the prime has dropped over the past number of 

months, so of course has the interest rate that ACS charges. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  A new question to the same 

minister.  It shows you that he doesn't understand what's going 

on in the lending world today.  I have a document here that 

says that the Bank of Montreal are lending money at one and a 

quarter per cent lower than the prime rate.  Now that's got to be 

disgraceful, Mr. Speaker, for ACS to be saying that they're in 

line lending to farmers 2 per cent above prime when the Bank 

of Montreal is 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

lending one and a quarter per cent lower than prime. 

 

Why doesn't the minister try doing something that actually 

might help farmers for a change?  Why don't you try to help?  

If he is not willing to take the lead in the interest rates, will you 

at least follow the Bank of Montreal's lending rate?  Will you at 

least do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

well knows that there are different interest rates for different 

customers and since the Government of Saskatchewan, given 

the precarious credit rating that members opposite left them 

with, we're lucky we're able to borrow money at even that low 

a cost.  And I think we are passing on the cost as much as we 

can to the farmers to keep their costs as low as we possibly can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  That's 

got to be no excuse at all.  When our government, in eight 

years or nine years in power, always subsidized the rates and 

kept them lower than what the prime was.  Now this 

government wants to keep the rates higher than prime.  Why 

don't they . . . what have they got against farmers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Since the 

government has already established 40 or 50 review 

committees, is it not time to act?  Will you at least establish 

another review committee and see what you can do about 

lowering rates at ACS for farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have a board of 

very capable people who are constantly reviewing ACS policy 

and will be able to make those decisions.  I'm surprised that the 

members opposite are again complaining because there's too 

many committees and then asking for another one. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the government is acting in a 

business-like manner.  We are trying to keep the cost to 

farmers down.  We also are trying to act in a responsible 

manner, and if the members opposite may have been able to 

operate in a non-business-like manner . . . But I think the net 

result of the 10 years of government and the $15 billion deficit 

speaks well for what happens when you don't operate 

government in a business-like manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows quite well 

that our problem . . . your problem is because we took over 

your three and a half billion dollar debt.  You know that quite 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister, if I may, I'll just read out a 

paragraph from the letter that came out from the Bank of 

Montreal . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order., order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I can 

understand when they hear the truth about the three and a half 

billion dollar debt, I can understand why. 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, just read one short paragraph for a 

prelude to my next question: 

 

 Combining the benefit of our Prime Rate reduction leadership 

and the enhancement as at July 1, 1992 the Bank of Montreal 

. . . Lending Rate is now set at 5.75 per cent (barring any 

changes of the prime rate in the interim). 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they can do this for the business people 

and farmers of Saskatchewan, will you not look at a 5 per cent 

interest rate at ACS for farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we now provide 

interest to farmers at our cost plus 1 per cent, which is probably 

better than any lending institution does in the province.  And so 

I think we are subsidizing farmers to some extent.  And I think 

we will do our best and hopefully the interest rates will stay 

down and farmers will be able to make their payments. 

 

But again I point out, Mr. Speaker, that we must operate in a 

somewhat business-like fashion.  We must recover at least our 

cost of funds to farmers.  And I think the interest rates, as the 

member opposite pointed down, have gone down considerably 

in the last few months.  And that will in itself be a big help to 

farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister stands to his feet 

and says let's hope that the interest rates stay low.  Well we all 

hope that for the sake of the people that are paying interest. 

 

What have you got against farmers?  You've gutted pretty near 

every program they have -- their  GRIP program, the feed 

program, and now you're gouging them in ACS and interest 

rates. 

 

Will you, Mr. Minister, recommend to your cabinet that you 

have a 5 per cent interest rate across the board for capital loans 

for Agricultural Credit Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, it's amazing that the 

members opposite brag about their record.  I don't believe they 

had 5 per cent loans for ACS.  And again I point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are lending funds to farmers at 1 per cent 

above our cost, which is a very efficient way of costing money.  

And I think it's beneficial to farmers.  And we will continue to 

act in a responsible manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, last question to the minister.  

When we were subsidizing rates at 8 and 9 per cent, interest 

rates in this province were 18 to 22.  Now you talk about when 

interest rates are prime, you're going to charge prime plus 2. 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

Now if the Bank of Montreal can go one and a quarter per cent 

prime, can you tell me that if you have any use for farmers and 

for the economy of this province, why can't you charge 5 per 

cent and be in the line with the lending institutions of this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be interested 

to know how many farmers are getting money from the Bank 

of Montreal at one and a half per cent below prime.  I suspect 

very few are, Mr. Speaker.  And as the members opposite well 

know, the banks in this province are being very tight with 

credit to farmers.  And, Mr. Speaker, farm credit rates to 

farmers right now for 10 years are 10 and one-eighth per cent.  

So I think ACS is doing very good, very well at lending to 

farmers, in relation to other lending institutions.  And we will 

continue to do . . . We will continue to provide funds to farmers 

at low cost and in a responsible manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to FeedGAP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question here to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  And I want to make an 

observation about the news release that we got today.  And it 

indicates that after we have talked to the livestock industry, and 

as we have discussed it in this question period time after time, 

today you are announcing that you're going to change the feed 

grain assistance program, and it's called the red meat PEP 

program -- production equalization program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can the minister now confirm that thousands 

of head of cattle were on the move to Alberta and that barley 

on the west side of the province was moving to Alberta and 

that this is the reason why you have flip-flopped on this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of 

Agriculture announced today was the interim red meat 

production equalization program.  It is an economic incentive 

program to keep cattle and livestock in the province.  Mr. 

Speaker, there was no new money in this.  This is agriculture 

development fund money which we felt was put into the best 

possible use upon consulting with the farmers. 

 

It's an interim program as we study the effect of these programs 

and the programs in neighbouring provinces; and we move 

towards an integrated and rational agricultural program in the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the feed grain assistance 

program could cost about $10 million.  Your budget in ag 

development fund is $14 million.  Can you explain to me 

where you're going to get the extra money from in order to do 

that? 

 

Because you didn't put it in the budget in the first place, 

now you're going to have to curtail some of the options in the 

ag development fund in order to deliver this program.  Can you 

tell us what you're doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm a little confused.  

I thought the members opposite were calling for this.  I think 

they were calling for this program and now they seem to be 

opposed to it, now that we're doing it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the reason that we're having to do these 

programs are caused by the fact that this former government 

did away with the beef stabilization program and went to a 

Tripartite program which was not as effective in keeping cattle 

in Saskatchewan.  We lost huge numbers of livestock.  This 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment measures) measure was a 

poorly thought out stopgap measure to stop the flow. 

 

We're into an interim measure of looking at some rational 

programs which will build a solid and viable livestock feeding 

industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can the minister tell me whether he is going 

to have a $100 or a $200 or a $300 limit on the appointments 

he's going to make to the committee that you're going to set up 

to review the study?  Are you going to have the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) contributions stack up to deliver the kind of 

committee that you're supposed to have?  Or are you going to 

allow the industry to have input in a reasonable fashion through 

the livestock feeders association, through the stock growers and 

the hog board?  Are you going to allow that to happen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, we will have 

input into this study from the various farm groups and the 

livestock feeders and the stock growers and others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we know, Mr. Minister, the Wheat Pool 

will have their influence because they already have a 

secondment on the staff. 

 

Will the minister tell us why he changed the hog levy?  Why 

the payment to the hog producers is less? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this same program 

was drawn up in consultation with the various farm groups, 

with economists, and with others, and the rates were set.  

Again, we're investing . . . This is the most economically viable 

place to put money.  The best place to put our economic 

development dollars is our ADF (administrative development 

fund) dollars which are for for agriculture development.  And 

that's the reason that the money was put where it was and the 

rates were set where they were because we believe that's the 

best bang for our dollar in terms of economic development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, did that study 

analysis show that the beef could stay the same and the hogs 

would be reduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I repeat, this 

program was an interim program while we study the livestock 

industry and make . . . try to develop a rational industry in the 

province.  Those rates were set as again where we thought we 

would get the best economic bang for our buck.  We want to 

get economic development in the province and this is the 

formulas that we determined were the best.  This was going to 

cost, not as the member opposite has said -- $10 million, but 

about 2.8 for the balance of this fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can the minister tell me why you didn't do 

what you should have done in the first place, and gone out and 

asked the hog board what impact you would have had by 

changing the process and the funding in the feed grains 

assistance program? 

 

Why didn't you go ask the hog board?  They'd easily have told 

you, I think, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we did consult with 

farmers and we did consult with groups.  And we had some 

tough decisions to make when we made the budget decisions 

and those were the decisions that we made.  This is an interim 

measure.  We haven't changed our budget figures.  This is a 

redirection of funds from the ADF fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I believe that what we 

have seen here today is just another gravel road, pavement 

program, reinstated by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Can you tell us what the intention of the study will be?  Can 

you tell us what the study is going to cost, too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the opposition 

is saying that we shouldn't be listening to people.  First they say 

we're not consulting enough.  And when we consult with 

people and come up with programs that people suggest and 

make changes that people suggest and we can make within out 

budget without spending more money, then they're criticizing 

us for making changes.  I think a little less negativity here 

would help considerably. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wildlife Habitat Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as other ministers are being forced to 

make changes in a desperate attempt at some kind of political 

damage control in this province as a result of public pressure 

and pressure from this opposition . . . now we've seen this 

happen, Mr. Minister, in the area of the pension plan programs, 

the highways to gravel program, and now the reintroduction of 

the FeedGAP program.  Will the minister now change his mind 

on the critical wildlife habitat protection program as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act is an ongoing program.  As I pointed out 

before in the House, it was introduced in 1984.  The land was 

all chosen as being critical by the previous administration in 

1984.  We are carrying through with the completion of this 

very helpful program that will be beneficial to the province in 

the future, in the near-term future and in the long-term future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My question is to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that many of your 

own back-benchers now have recognized that there is a need to 

support amendments to your proposed Act or to change The 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Bill, will you now go out 

and consult with the wildlife people, the cattle men of the 

province, the RMs (rural municipality) within the province, and 

department officials, all within the same meetings and within 

the same structure, and listen to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I have met with a 

good number of farmers and ranchers and people who are 

involved in critical wildlife.  The problems that they point out 

to me have little to do or nothing to do with the Act which is 

barely taking land that has been treated as critical wildlife Act 

land for the past eight years and putting it formally under the 

Act.  It's a formal designation.  That's all that the Act entails. 

 

The problems that they have pointed out to me have to do with 

the regulations and how we allow them to farm and how 

agriculture best dovetails with the critical wildlife that are 

there.  We are at this moment holding meetings across the 

province to talk about land use.  We're talking about 

community pastures and lease rates, and oil and gas revenue, 

and we're also talking about critical wildlife at those meetings. 

 

So we are in the very process right now of consulting with 

farmers and ranchers and lessees of this land to see how we can 

accommodate any changes that they would like to see in the 

way that we manage this land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, as you have indicated that you are now 

going to start to have some meetings around the province -- and 

we are happy to hear that you are going to do that -- and as it 

has been indicated that there is considerable disagreement with 

the amendments that 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

you are planning to put into the Act in this session, and as there 

has been a lot of correspondence with us to indicate that 

discontentment -- such things as the ability to roll land over to 

family members in the future and be able to hold ranch units 

together, those kinds of concerns are real, Mr. Minister -- will 

you commit that you will accept input from the cattle men, the 

wildlife people, and the RMs throughout this province? 

 

And will you commit to putting those things into amendments 

and bringing them into the Act?  And will you commit to 

pulling the Act off of the order paper and out of this session of 

the legislation until those concerns can be truly met? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again in this House 

before I have told the member that I have a legal opinion that 

says there is no problem with this Act in terms of the 

amendments that show that there is no problem with 

transferring of land, that there will be no influence and no 

effect whatsoever on the rancher's ability or the farmer's ability 

to transfer that land to the next generation or indeed to 

whomever he chooses to transfer it to. 

 

The Bill will be in the House in Committee of the Whole very 

shortly.  If the members opposite have amendments that they 

think will clarify the Act in any way or address concerns, we 

certainly would be prepared to look at it if the members 

opposite are prepared to help us and look at some legitimate 

concerns. If their view is only obstructionist, which it seems to 

be most times, then of course we can't accommodate them.  But 

if there are legitimate changes, we're always prepared to look at 

amendments to Bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we're 

happy to hear that you are willing to take a look at this situation 

because, as you know and I think the world around us now 

knows, the ranchers and cattle men throughout the province are 

joining forces with all of their friends and neighbours in a 

massive attempt to show this government that they will not be 

railroaded and run over.  They are going to bar hunting from all 

of the lands in south-west Saskatchewan that are critical to 

hunters. 

 

In view of that fact, would you consider the rewording of the 

Act in such a way as to comply with their needs, in the sense 

that you say that there is a different interpretation from your 

point of view than there is from other people's point of view on 

roll-overs?  Could you take those words out and word them 

with words that the cattle men can understand, that their 

lawyers believe in?  They don't agree with your lawyers.  If you 

have that, would you now . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I think the 

member knows that it's quite all right to talk in general terms 

about a Bill, but you can't get to clauses of the Bill in question 

period.  That's for . . . really not in keeping with question 

period.  Now if the member has a general question, certainly 

direct it to the minister. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Because this won't 

be a simple matter as it sounds perhaps, would the minister 

then pull this Bill and bring it back in the next session to allow 

the time necessary for these people to have their input seriously 

and realistically considered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat that in 

talking to the lessees, their concerns -- and they have some 

genuine concerns -- have little or nothing to do with the 

amendments to the Bill.  They have to do with the regulations.  

And we are right now out doing meetings, talking to them.  

And we will continue to look at those regulations.  And I see 

no need to delay the Bill which does not deal with the 

regulations, which is where the problem seems to be that 

ranchers have with the particular critical wildlife habitat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Board Appointments 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the minister in charge of controlling patronage, the 

Minister of Justice in the NDP government.  Mr. Minister, 

revelations in the last short while have revealed that a board 

appointment to the Liquor Board looks like about $100-plus; 

Crop Insurance board is in the $200 range.  Senior bureaucrats 

is running around 300.  And now the Minister of Energy has 

told us last night that the Oil and Gas Conservation Board 

comes in at 608. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we've seen a definite, more business-like 

approach to this because everybody's getting a little more for 

these board appointments.  But considering your election 

promises, Mr. Minister, would you assure this House now that 

that process is not going to happen any more, that any future 

board appointments won't have this sort of up-scale dollar list 

attached to it?  Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, what I want to 

indicate to the members opposite, that when we came into 

power in November of last year, there were literally thousands 

of board members on all sorts of boards that were appointed at 

the political level by the previous government.  We made a 

commitment . . . first of all, we made a commitment to reduce 

the number of board members on boards in Saskatchewan, and 

we've done that to the tune of about 25 per cent. 

 

Today there are 25 per cent, about, fewer people on boards than 

there were at this time a year ago.  That is very, very 

significant.  Secondly we have made a very, very sincere 

attempt to hire and to appoint high quality people in 

consultation with local groups.  I want to say as well that the 

bureaucrats at the highest level in our Crown corporations have 

had their salaries considerably reduced, i.e., Mr. Hill, who was 

earning over $400,000 per annum, had set aside 1.3 million for 

his early retirement or severance.  We have changed all that. 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

And I say to the members opposite they are hardly the ones to 

stand in their place sanctimoniously and tell us how to run the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 90 -- An Act respecting Security Interests in 

Personal Property and making Consequential and Related 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting security interests in personal property and 

making consequential and related amendments to certain other 

acts. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, yesterday the 

member of Rosthern raised a point of order to object to the 

ministerial statement made by the Associate Minister of 

Finance.  The member claimed that the minister's remarks 

contravened the long established guidelines for ministerial 

statements in that it did not properly relate to government 

policy or administration and was political rhetoric only. 

 

Following an intervention by the Government House Leader, I 

indicated that I would reserve my decision until I had an 

opportunity to review Hansard, as well as rulings made by 

previous Speakers.  Having done this, I have concluded that the 

statement related to new developments regarding a matter of 

government policy and was therefore in order. 

 

It was also brief, as ministerial statements should be.  I am 

concerned, however, that some of the language was 

unnecessarily provocative which led to debate in reply. 

 

I would urge members to review the guidelines provided in 

Beauchesne's 6th Edition, citation 348 and 350 on page 107 

where one will read that statements should constitute a 

statement or announcement of government policy.  The 

purpose of these statements is to convey information.  The 

statement must be short and factual.  It is not intended to incite 

debate, which would be clearly out of order, as there is no 

motion before the House. 

 

There are many rulings by Speakers of this Assembly that 

outline these principles.  I refer members to some of these 

precedents in the Journals of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, on March 22, 1967; November 28, 1975; April 

4, 1979; June 10, 1988; March 20, 1989; and May 17, 1990. 

 

I ask ministers in future when offering ministerial statements 

and members who reply to them, stay strictly to the information 

being announced and resist the temptation to add opinions that 

more properly constitute debate. 

(1445) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I have Ms. Andrea Seale, 

a Crown solicitor with the Department of Justice, assisting me 

today. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister could give us the reasons for this Bill that is presented 

before the House today, the reasons that we have the Act 

before us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

amendments to this Act will, generally speaking, bring our 

legislation in line with the legislation respecting this office in 

other jurisdictions. 

 

It will remove the requirement that the Ombudsman be a 

Canadian citizen.  It will remove the requirement that the 

Ombudsman receive Lieutenant Governor in Council approval 

before delegating authority.  It will remove the requirement 

that persons complaining to the Ombudsman be provincial 

residents.  It will remove the requirement that persons must 

complain within one year of the event giving rise to the 

complaint, the time limitation.  And it will remove some of the 

restrictions on the Ombudsman's jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when you mentioned that it 

removes the requirement that the Lieutenant Governor has to 

give approval, who gives the approval and makes the 

appointment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the member, under 

section 11 of the present Act, the Ombudsman has to have the 

prior approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, which is 

for practical purposes the . . . well it's the same people as are in 

cabinet.  In the practical sense it is the cabinet. 

 

The Ombudsman requires the prior approval before he can 

delegate to any members of his staff any of his powers under 

the staff . . . under the Act rather.  So that in here, wherever it 

says the Ombudsman may do so and so, the Ombudsman of 

course has a staff who do that work for him, go out and do the 

investigations, make the inquiries, and come back to him.  

That's a bit anachronistic.  The Ombudsman ought to be able to 

operate . . . the Ombudsman reports to this Chamber, and ought 

to be able to operate and perform his duties including the 

delegating of authority without having to get prior cabinet 

approval.  It just removes that requirement. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What you're saying: The appointment is 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

made by Executive Council or is the appointment made by the 

Legislative Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We may be talking about different 

things, Mr. Chairman.  I thought the member's question was 

addressed to the requirement that the Ombudsman receive 

advance approval from the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 

delegate certain authorities that he has. 

 

It may be that the member's question rather was addressed to 

the appointment of the Ombudsman as such.  And of course the 

appointment of the Ombudsman is something that is done by 

this Chamber, by this Assembly, and that's not being changed. 

 

It is rather the delegation of some of the Ombudsman's duties 

and responsibilities which I was referring to when I gave the 

long answer that I gave just previously. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman.  That 

is the question I guess we have.  And I believe my colleague, 

the member from Thunder Creek, raised a question the other 

day regarding the office of the Ombudsman -- who the 

Ombudsman reports to, where the funding comes from. 

 

I understand to date that the funding comes under Treasury 

Board.  And in light of the restrictions that maybe Treasury 

Board may be facing, Mr. Speaker, we're wondering if that's 

going to mean that the role and the reason and the purpose for 

the Ombudsman is going to be decreased, and if it wouldn't be 

more appropriate to place the role of the Ombudsman under or 

accountable to the Legislative Assembly, rather than just to 

Treasury Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I recall very clearly the 

suggestions made by the member from Thunder Creek.  And 

we had a very interesting discussion in this committee, I think 

it was some two or three weeks ago, about that very subject. 

 

And I say it was a good discussion because I was agreeing that 

there was a considerable amount of merit in the idea that he 

was putting forward.  That idea was the one that the hon. 

member has just put forward, namely that it may make sense to 

have the budget of the Ombudsman set by this Chamber rather 

than through the Treasury Board and budget approval 

processes of the government. 

 

After that debate . . . at the conclusion of that debate, I told the 

member from Thunder Creek that I would take the matter 

away, and indeed we adjourned the committee's consideration 

of this Bill on that point. 

 

I subsequently discussed the matter with my cabinet colleagues 

and with the full caucus, and we had quite a good discussion.  

We had before us the draft House amendment that had been 

provided to me by the member from Thunder Creek and I also 

had a longer version of the same point -- that is a draft prepared 

by the Department of Justice that was to the same effect but 

was a more complete picture of how the process might work. 

 

I told the member from Thunder Creek during our discussion 

here some two or three weeks ago, that we had 

in government been considering this very question in relation 

to the Ombudsman.  The Provincial Auditor's budget is already 

set here through the Board of Internal Economy and then 

through that board by this legislature. 

 

And we were reviewing that experience and thinking how the 

Ombudsman might fit in there and also thinking how, if we 

proceed with amendments to the Human Rights Code as we 

had indicated in the throne speech, how perhaps that budget 

could also be set by this legislature. 

 

And we simply arrived at the point where we are not 

comfortable making that decision at this point.  For the time 

being, I say to the hon. member that for the time being, we 

have decided to continue to set the budget of the Ombudsman 

as it has in the past. 

 

But I want to say to the hon. member and to his colleagues that 

we think the point is a good one.  We intend to continue to give 

it really careful study.  And I'm not just certain how to state this 

. . . There's quite a strong possibility -- let me put it that way -- 

quite a strong possibility that we will accept the member's 

suggestion in the future and come back to this House at a later 

point with amendments to that effect.  Now I'm not saying to 

the member that we will do it, but there is a lot of support for 

that idea and I would like to leave it on that basis today. 

 

So that if I can just summarize to the hon. member, our 

position is that we are not prepared to accept the House 

amendment suggested by the hon. member from Thunder 

Creek at this point.  But we will continue to actively study the 

question.  And if we decide to proceed -- and I indicated there 

is a strong possibility of that -- we will be back to the House 

with amendments to this Act in the future. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I did not anticipate entering this debate again on this particular 

issue because I thought after our discussion the other day that, 

and given your own party's sort of stand on this issue, that we 

wouldn't have to deal with this in any other way but accepting 

the amendment and moving on.  And I quite frankly am 

shocked at the Minister of Justice, on a reasonable, very 

reasonable, amendment that is probably backed by 90 per cent 

of his own political party and a good portion of everybody else 

in the province, would renege on this. 

 

And I can only surmise from the minister's comments that the 

Minister of Finance in his ultimate wisdom, with this minister 

as he has with other ministers, is allowing absolutely no 

deviation from sort of the set pattern.  And I can appreciate the 

pressure he's under, but I say to the Minister of Justice:  this is 

another one of those items that was talked about at length in 

this Assembly for a couple years. 

 

There were many statements made in here that I'm sure at some 

point or another influenced somebody watching the TV, that 

influenced those people to vote New Democrat rather than vote 

Tory in the last election.  And his own party is 100 per cent 

behind, or darn near -- 90 -- and so we've gone out . . . Here's 

another one of these sort of truth in advertising things.  I'm sure 

I can go back 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

and find quotes from '89 and '90 and '91 where the New 

Democrats said that the Ombudsman, as the other officers of 

this Assembly, should have their budget set in here by 

members, not by cabinet, not by Executive Council. 

 

(1500) 

 

And now we get the opportunity to put into action the words so 

eloquently spoken and we get a promise of some point in the 

future.  And, Mr. Chairman, that simply isn't good enough.  At 

some point you've got to live up to something.  And I think the 

minister could have set a precedent here -- because he is an 

honourable man -- that would have influenced this government 

down the road, that other issues dealing with the auditor, 

dealing with other officers of this Assembly, would, sort of, get 

us into the '90s and we would be on a pattern that no one would 

dare mess with in the future. 

 

And I'm just saddened to say, Mr. Chairman, that that isn't the 

case and I . . . Well I guess all we've got left over here is to take 

the minister at his word.  Not that the words of New Democrats 

appear to be worth a whole lot these days, but we'll take him at 

his word. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I thank the member for the 

statement that he would take me at my word.  I want to say that 

his surmise is quite wrong, that the situation is exactly as I 

described it to the House.  We did spend a good deal of time 

considering the suggestions of the hon. member.  There's a 

great deal of force and merit to his argument.  I've said that 

before and I say it again. 

 

We are just not quite clear as to the mechanisms that ought to 

be followed by this House in setting such a budget.  This House 

does not have long experience in setting these budgets.  And I 

think I said to the member in our previous discussion that we 

would be prepared to consult with his group with respect to this 

question with a view to seeing what progress could be made. 

 

But I thank the member for accepting that we will be 

approaching it in this spirit and that we will work towards a 

resolution of this problem. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the 

member from Moosomin . . . oh, by the member from Morse, 

sorry: 

 

 That section 3(2) be amended as following: 

 

 "Estimates for the sums required for the purposes of the 

administration of this Act shall be approved by, and are 

subject only to approval by, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan or any Board or Committee thereof as may be 

charged by the Assembly with the responsibility for their 

review." 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, as I have indicated in my 

previous two or three interventions this afternoon, the 

government has decided that at least for the time being we're 

not prepared to accept this amendment to the Act. 

 

The Chair: -- If I might make a statement here. I've received 

the amendment and I find that the amendment is out of order.  

It is beyond the scope of this Bill and the clause which it seeks 

to amend.  The amendment addresses clause 3, which deals 

with the appointment of the Ombudsman.  This amendment, 

however, deals with the administration of this Act and the 

review of Estimates, a subject that is quite distinct from the 

appointment of the Ombudsman and more properly relates to 

section 6 of the parent Act. 

 

In this regard I refer members to citation 698 on page 207 of 

Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th Edition, 

subsections (1) and (8)(b) as follows: 

 

 (1) An amendment is out of order if it is irrelevant to the bill, 

beyond its scope or governed by or dependent upon 

amendments already negatived. 

 

 (8)(b) An amendment may not amend sections from the 

original Act unless they are specifically being amended in a 

clause of the bill before the committee.  Debates.  December 

15, 1997. p. 1909. 

 

So therefore I find the amendment is not in order. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank Ms. 

Seale from the Department of Justice for coming and assisting 

the committee in its work today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I'd like to express my appreciation and thanks as 

well for the member. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act respecting Certain Services with 

respect to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Beside me is Mr. 

Ray Petrich who is the master of titles.  And behind Mr. Petrich 

is Brent Prenevost, a Crown solicitor with the Department of 

Justice. 

 

Clause 1 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I noticed on opening comments . . 

. and I believe the member from Regina Churchill Downs did 

introduce the Bill.  But he made a number of comments on 

behalf of his colleague and indicated that there are a number of 

changes.  And the changes specifically in this Bill have to do 

more with the legal profession and the banking community. 

 

And I'm wondering if the minister could give us a bit of a 

summary of the changes that were being made or are being 

made in the Bill?  Mr. Minister, I realize that there are a 

number of clauses to the Bill, but probably all of them may be 

dealing in one form or another with different aspects affecting 

the legal and the banking profession. 

 

And as well, Mr. Minister, if you can just give us an idea of the 

consultation that took place, and if indeed, where the pressure 

or the push is coming from for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I'll 

just summarize what some of the matters that are addressed in 

this amendment.  First of all, the Bill provides for a summary 

form of mortgage registration.  That is an idea that's been 

around for some time and is advanced by lawyers who are 

active in real estate, and has actually been the subject of 

resolutions from the Law Society. 

 

Secondly, it clarifies the legal priority of mortgages securing 

revolving lines of credit, a technical aspect of commercial law.  

That clarification has been requested often over the years from 

lawyers acting for banks and credit unions who are of course 

interested in finding effective ways to secure lines of credit. 

 

The third thing that the Bill does is to provide for easier 

removal of building restriction caveats from titles, again a 

technical matter.  And that again is requested by the legal 

community and is of particular interest, for example, to the 

railways who have a lot of old caveats lying around or clouding 

their titles.  And this will streamline the system for . . . that will 

lead to a removal of caveats that are no longer serving any 

purpose. 

 

(1515) 

 

Fourth, it . . . and the fourth item is budget driven.  It eliminates 

the idea of duplicate certificate of title from the land titles 

system.  And that is budget driven as I have mentioned. 

 

Finally the amendment substitutes the Consolidated Fund of 

the province for the assurance fund under The Land Titles Act.  

It does not affect the function of the fund, that is, standing 

behind the title that is granted pursuant to the Act and 

providing security to people who are involved in the system, 

that indeed the fund remains behind the documents of the Land 

Titles Office where the Act specifies that such is the case.  That 

idea is an administrative change in the interests of efficiency 

but does not affect the rights of any people. 

 

Generally with respect to this Act we have consulted broadly.  

We have sent copies of it to everyone who we think could have 

an interest in it.  We have met with the real estate section of the 

Canadian Bar Association, the 

Saskatchewan section, and we have generally tried to make 

everyone aware that these amendments are before the House 

and have consulted with anyone who has any comment to make 

with respect to any of these provisions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, if I 

heard you right . . . First of all, two things, Mr. Minister.  

Regarding the consultation, I understand the former minister 

had a practice of sending out copies of the Bills and 

information following third reading.  And as I was listening to 

you, did you indicate that you've already taken and informed or 

sent out copies so if there are any questions, say, to be brought 

forward by anyone in the legal community or business can 

maybe get back to you, Mr. Minister?  And . . . Well maybe I'd 

better let you respond to that first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 

member that the . . . we didn't send out copies of the Bill after it 

was introduced for first reading, and if I said that earlier, I 

shouldn't have put it that way.  We told everybody what we 

were doing as it would affect them, you know, and that . . . it 

was in effect we were sending out our drafting instructions.  

That was the basis for the communication, you know, how the 

drafting instructions that go from the government to the 

Department of Justice to prepare a Bill and setting out the 

policy. 

 

So it's a complete description of the policy and that was the 

information that was disseminated to the community and that 

was the basis on which the discussions took place.  The Bill 

itself has been shared with members of the legal community 

who have a special interest in these matters.  And I apologize to 

the member if I expressed it more broadly in my earlier answer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess the reason I 

raise the question was just to . . . as had been indicated that 

consultation had taken place, and possibly by laying out or 

putting the Bill out there, but having put the draft Bill out there, 

information would certainly give the community a chance to 

voice any concerns they may have with the Bill as it was being 

drafted.  And I appreciate that. 

 

You made a comment about summary form mortgages.  Do I 

take that, Mr. Minister, to mean or indicate that you're 

summarizing or actually making the forms a lot simpler to 

understand or cutting down on the forms?  Is that what the 

purpose is of that summary form mortgage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member is 

correct.  The summary form that will be registered in the Land 

Titles Office is just a simple one-page document . . . two-page 

document actually.  I have it in my hand here.  It's very, very 

simple. 

 

There will be a full mortgage backing this up, but it won't be 

registered as such.  There will be two ways in which you as a 

member of the public looking at that land title could get at the 

full terms of the mortgage, and one would be to contact the 

lender, the mortgagee, and you would have access to the 

document. 

 

And the alternative is, there will be in the Land Titles Office a 

copy of the standard mortgage document, of 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

which this is a summary, so that it will greatly simplify the file 

and with very little inconvenience still make the entire 

mortgage document available to interested members of the 

public. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One other question, 

Mr. Minister, before we just allow it to go clause by clause. 

 

A comment was made regarding duplicate certificates of title 

and the fact that certainly the farm community uses these, as 

indicated, more exclusive than any other area for the sake of 

financial institutions accepting duplicate certificates of title in 

order to give out mortgages.  And a comment was made, that 

the minister made the other day, that they wouldn't get into 

detail, that talked about alternate arrangements being made 

regarding . . . or being provided regarding certificate of title. 

 

And I'm just wondering what was meant by that comment 

about not getting into detail about these alternative 

arrangements, or what you mean by alternative arrangements to 

uses of certificate of title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a concern of 

course because there is such a widespread practice of 

hypothecation of the duplicate certificate of title.  Under the 

Act as it is before this amendment, it was effective because you 

couldn't deal with the title to land without the duplicate.  So if 

the duplicate was in the local credit union, it couldn't be sold or 

otherwise disposed of. 

 

The system will have to change in response to these 

amendments, but I'm suggesting to the Assembly that -- and to 

the member -- that the change is not dramatic.  Because as it is 

now, when the duplicate is hypothecated with the bank or 

credit union, a form is produced and blanks are filled in and 

signatures are taken in the form of a hypothecation. 

 

There now will not be duplicate as such to hypothecate.  There 

will be certified copies of the title so that all of the information 

will be there.  But rather than sign a hypothecation form, the 

customer will have to sign a mortgage, which the same blanks 

will be filled in in a similar manner, and that transaction can 

then be protected, either by the summary form of document 

that I've just waved in my hand a moment ago, or by a caveat 

which would protect the mortgage.  Either means of 

registration would be effective to give notice to the world that 

that title was security for the transaction that we're talking 

about. 

 

But it is a change, and it will require adjustment in the system, 

but it is a . . . as I mentioned to the member earlier, it is budget 

driven.  It's expensive to issue duplicate certificates of title.  It's 

expensive to replace them when they're lost and they're lost 

often. 

 

And the member will know under the Land Titles Office 

system if a title is lost, there has to be advertising in the 

newspapers and affidavits . . . it's lawyer work, if I can use such 

a term.  It is not insignificant and so it has features on both 

sides. 

 

But it is clearly time that we moved away from the 

duplicate certificate of title system into a more efficient way of 

dealing with it.  And I think we have done it.  We can do it in 

such a way that the lenders are secure with out any great cost to 

the borrowers. 

 

And the Bill is submitted against that background. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does that then . . . what 

you've just indicated and said to the House as far as speeding 

up the process of applying for and looking to, is the lender 

then, able to approach the Land Titles Office? 

 

Let's say a person, a farmer goes in and would like to purchase 

some land, would like to borrow against that land, doesn't have 

title.  The process you're talking of is that process then the 

original way.  What a person does now is searches for the title, 

goes to the Land Titles Office, usually gets a duplicate 

certificate, takes it with him to show that he's made the 

purchase to the lender so that the lender can indeed forward the 

money. 

 

What you're saying now with the simplified form, does that 

mean that the lender as well can just work directly through, 

versus the process we follow through right now?  Or can we 

still follow the same format?  Does it speed it up at all, I guess 

is what I'm trying to say. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think it will have 

much effect.  Things will have to be done a little differently, 

but I think at the end of the day, all things weighed up, it's 

probably going to consume about the same amount of time.  

And can be handled in a simple manner, a different manner but 

a simple one.  And I think it's workable. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 57 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to, on behalf of 

the Assembly, thank my officials, Mr. Petrich and Mr. 

Prenevost, for being here today, helping the committee. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also extend my 

thanks to the officials as well for being here. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I've already introduced 

Brent Prenevost, and he'll be with me on this Bill. 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of Rural Development 

please introduce his officials. 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I have with me today 

Mr. Ken Engel. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we 

discussed earlier in the first and second reading stages the fact 

that this Bill had generally been agreed to by the people 

involved with rural municipalities; more specifically, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and its 

directorship.  The indication from the minister at that time and 

throughout the process has been that there was consultation 

going back as far as a couple of years back through department 

people and the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities). 

 

I have contacted people within the SARM structure and am 

satisfied for the most part that this is true.  There are a couple 

of areas that we have some concern with, and we will be 

introducing amendments as we get to those proper clauses 

where they will take effect.  And I will make my arguments at 

that time as to why we feel the government might seriously 

consider these amendments, and pass them and put them into 

this Act.  It will not change very much of the Act.  Just a small 

part of it. 

 

And the rest of it that we feel that all parties concerned have 

had adequate consultation on and have agreed on, we will 

allow to continue without any further adieu. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Before I proceed any further, can I have the 

agreement of the members to proceed through the Bill, after a 

point, on a page-by-page basis?  I know that there are some 

amendments to, I believe, either 4 or 5 and we'll do clause by 

clause until then and then page by page after that point.  Is that 

agreed?  Okay. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will at this time 

read the amendment that we wish to propose, and give a small 

explanation just to bring the rest of the Assembly up to speed 

on what we are looking at here. 

 

It's called Bill No. 27 of 1992, An Act to amend The Rural 

Municipality Act, 1989 -- proposed House amendment by 

myself, clause 4 of the printed Bill: 

 

 amend clause 4(1)(c) of the printed Bill, by deleting clause 

10(1)(e) as being enacted therein and substituting therefore 

the following: 

 

 "(e) may, but only after a majority vote in favour thereof by 

the people affected, amalgamate municipalities by combining 

two or more municipalities into a single municipality." 

 

Dated August 14, 1992. 
 

Mr. Chairman, I think that it should be obvious to the minister 

in charge, if not to the whole Assembly, that what 

we are saying here is that having the blanket ability by a 

minister to be able to amalgamate municipalities in this Act has 

stirred a lot of fears throughout rural Saskatchewan that the 

government may in fact bring about a form of a county system, 

similar to that in either Ontario or Alberta. 

 

There's an awful lot of opposition in rural Saskatchewan to 

that.  And because the minister and some of his colleagues 

have suggested that in fact this wasn't their intention, we're 

saying quite simply here that if it wasn't your intention to take 

that kind of power and you have no intention of using it, then 

why are you taking it?  We might just as well word it so that 

we take the fears that the people have out of the Act. 

 

And this does in fact take those fears out because it says then 

that you will not arbitrarily change the boundaries of 

municipalities, but you would only do it upon request to do so 

after you've held a vote of the people concerned in those areas. 

 

And we think that it is eminently important that if people are 

going to amalgamate their municipalities that they themselves 

have a chance to vote on this and express their views as to 

whether or not they want to have a bigger municipality or stay 

in the size that they are. 

 

This amendment does not seem to be . . . to affect things like 

changing perhaps the boundary from one division to another 

division and those kinds of things.  This has to do with the 

greater issue of the whole municipality.  And I think it's 

important that the people of Saskatchewan have their fears laid 

aside and that we change the wording on this to suit not only 

your needs but their needs. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again I want to 

point out to the member opposite, there's no sinister plot to 

amalgamate the RMs.  I have here in my possession a letter 

from Mr. Bernard Kirwan from the SARM who was sent out to 

all of the rural municipalities.  I'd like to quote a little from that 

letter.  It says: 

 

 Amendments to The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 have been 

ongoing since the new Act came into effect January 1, 1990.  

The Minister of Rural Development at the time, Neal Hardy 

promised the S.A.R.M. and member municipalities, that the 

Department of Rural Development would make every effort 

to change the Act, as it became apparent that changes were 

needed.  The amendment to Section 10 was one of these 

changes. 

 

So that's the amendment that the member refers to. 

 

(1545) 

 

And another quote: 

 

 On December 6, 1990 Department of Rural Development met 

with S.A.R.M. Board of Directors to review proposed 

amendments to the Act.  The proposed amendment to Section 

10 was 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

 one of these amendments.  The amendments as explained to 

the Board, was to help overcome problems municipalities 

would face, if they chose to amalgamate.  The Board agreed 

that such a change should be made.  These proposed 

amendments were to be brought forward in the 1991 Spring 

Sitting of the Legislature.  However, due to the Legislature 

being prorogued early they did not go through at that time. 

 

And he goes on to say that he's met with the present Minister of 

Rural Development and made their views known, and they're 

satisfied with the amendment. 

 

So I think in view of the fact that these amendments are 

supported by SARM, were asked for by the councillors 

themselves, I think the amendment which we have just seen for 

the first time now would make this clause inconsistent with the 

other clause following it, where it says that the minister may 

disorganize a municipality or may annex a municipality. 

 

This clause was just one that the municipalities asked to be 

added, was that they may amalgamate two RMs who ask for it.  

So I think that in view of the fact that this clause would make it 

inconsistent with . . . or this amendment would make this 

clause inconsistent with the other clauses in the Bill, that I don't 

think we can accept this amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, it truly saddens me to hear a person who has had no 

municipal experience such as yourself make this kind of a 

sweeping statement.  It's disgusting actually, and it's ridiculous 

in absolute terms.  And I can't help but find myself feeling a bit 

of rage at your kind of an approach here. 

 

You say that this Bill entirely was checked out by SARM and 

that somebody else ahead of you did it.  Well I tell you, my 

friend, I've talked to a lot of municipalities and a lot of people 

connected with SARM and they do not agree with you that this 

wording was what they wanted. 

 

There may be an intention that there needs to be some 

accommodation in these areas, but it certainly was never 

intended that the minister in charge should have an absolute, 

dictatorial control of declaring municipalities to become larger 

without any consultation and without any votes or anybody else 

being involved at any future date.  That was not their intention 

when they agreed to having the Bills changed and having 

things updated. 

 

I absolutely, totally and completely disagree with your 

interpretation of what their intentions were because it has not 

been related to me by one councillor or one reeve or one person 

from SARM that their intention was ever to allow any minister 

the right to arbitrarily declare that we would have larger 

municipalities, either one or fifty or any other number in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That was not their intention. 

 

And if you can't do it by changing the wording in this clause 

because it doesn't work out with the next clause, then change 

the next clause as well.  And I guess short of that I say to you 

that you are being less than honest with 

the people of Saskatchewan in your interpretation of the way 

this Bill was presented.  And you're being less than honest with 

yourself if you say that the people of Saskatchewan want this. 

 

And I suggest that you reconsider that point because we intend 

on making it an issue in this province whether you like it or 

not.  You are going to be held responsible for what you're 

doing here.  You're not going to blame it on past 

administrations and other people that came before you or might 

come after you.  You're doing this.  You're doing it today.  And 

we're telling you you're wrong, and we're going to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that you're wrong and that you had the 

opportunity to change your mind here today.  So I suggest that 

you do that, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact 

that I have a letter from the president of the SARM saying that 

they indeed did ask for this amendment, I think that speaks for 

itself.  I think there is no sinister plot, I repeat again. 

 

This amendment was proposed as a result of a problem of two 

RMs, I believe Mervin and Greenfield, who voluntarily wanted 

to amalgamate.  And the Department of Justice suggested that 

the Act was unclear in the authority of the minister to carry out 

their wishes.  And that was the reason for this amendment 

being put forward by SARM. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

there's presently come to my attention that there is a 

questionnaire being circulated to municipalities throughout this 

province.  That questionnaire has several questions that ask 

about a lot of things with regards to where programs are being 

doubled up on and where programs are being worked together 

with other municipalities.  And there is a somewhat sinister 

appearance to this questionnaire that would relate it to a 

justification for amalgamating certain jurisdictions.  Is that 

your interpretation of this questionnaire, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, that is not a 

questionnaire of our department and is totally unrelated to the 

matters at hand. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Again I feel nothing but absolute disgust and 

frustration with that kind of an answer.  You've got a list of 

things in there that are absolutely concurrent with the 

operations of municipalities -- everything from fire protection 

to maintenance agreements between municipalities.  And you 

say this is not related to the possibility of merging 

municipalities.  How can you hand us such a statement, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

doesn't want us to impose our will on the municipalities and 

then complains because we send out questionnaires asking 

them what they think about issues.  And again it's nothing . . . 

This is an amendment that was called for for the purpose of 

handling RMs who voluntarily choose to amalgamate.  And 

this was just to clarify the Act to make that legally possible. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you had absolutely no 

intention whatsoever of ever amalgamating 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

municipalities, why did you say that you were going to do it at 

the SARM convention last March?  In your words, you said it, 

and you said whether municipalities like it or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, what I was said was 

that in all likelihood there will be amalgamations of 

municipalities whether they like it or not because they will be 

forced to choose to do so likely in the future.  And we have 

asked RMs to look at how they can operate more efficiently 

and to do things as efficiently as they can.  And they will be 

totally in control of what structure they choose to operate under 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My question, Mr. Minister, is simply this: 

who are they going to be forced by?  You? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that the RMs 

will, if they are forced to make changes, will be forced by 

dwindling populations and changing social values and those 

sorts of social pressures that will come on RMs to adjust to the 

'90s . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, this questionnaire that you're 

passing around throughout the province, does it ask for people's 

opinion on how they want things run, or does it ask them to 

state how things are now and in that sort of direction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again, I point out that 

is not a questionnaire that went out from this department, and I 

am not familiar with the questions on it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I suggest that you get a copy of it and study it 

then, before you make a blanket statement saying that it has no 

effect on the people of Saskatchewan or the Act that you are 

presently putting in.  You made a statement here today in this 

Assembly saying that this questionnaire has absolutely nothing 

to do with the issue at hand.  And now you stand up before us 

and tell us you don't know what's on the questionnaire.  How 

can you say that it has nothing to do with it if you don't know 

what's on it?  Absolutely ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Minister, you say you have a letter from the president of 

SARM indicating his support for your Bill.  Would you table 

that letter in this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, if this questionnaire that you 

have no knowledge of happens to indicate that ag boards and 

Save Our Soils programs are being duplicated between 

municipalities, will you be abandoning those programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again the business 

at hand is the amendment to the RM Act which, as I stated out . 

. . particularly the clause which we are now debating is a clause 

which allows the amalgamation of RMs in cases where they 

voluntarily choose to do so.  The overall municipal structure of 

the province will be determined by the municipalities and by 

the people in the communities. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, a point of order.  I believe that 

it's customary that when a minister says he's going to 

table it that he does table it, and we'd like to have that please. 

 

The Chair: -- Just on the member's point, I understand the 

material is going to be tabled.  Should we proceed? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that you 

stated that you won't change the wording of your Bill to 

accommodate the fears of most of the rural Saskatchewan 

people in this matter, is it in your interpretation that this 

wording does give you the power to amalgamate municipalities 

without consultation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the old Bill gave the 

minister power to disorganize municipalities, to annex 

municipalities, to eliminate or create more divisions in 

municipalities, to alter boundaries of municipalities.  And this 

addition of "amalgamate" was simply an amendment that 

clarifies the Act in the case of two RMs who are seeking 

amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, that was not my question.  My 

question was, does this in your opinion give you the power to 

amalgamate municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe this 

gives the power.  I think the minister has had the power for 

quite some time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not interested in what the 

minister had before in the old Act.  I'm asking you today what 

powers do you interpret that this Bill now gives you as 

amended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The amendment that we're making 

to this Bill gives in essence no new power. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't care if it gives you new power or old 

power.  Does it give you the power?  Does it give you the 

power to introduce amalgamations of municipalities without 

consultation or without any other input? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat it does not 

give new powers. It's the powers that were always there. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I didn't ask you if it gives you 

new powers.  I asked you does it give you the power to 

amalgamate municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The amendment does not give that 

power. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I'll read you a paragraph into 

the record: 

 

 The S.A.R.M. Board of Directors was made aware that these 

amendments would once again go forward to the Legislature.  

With the undercurrents of change to the municipal system 

being as they are, the Board had some hesitancy in seeing this 

amendment go through. (I should have my glasses on.) The 

letter was sent to the Minister of Rural Development, Darrel 

Cunningham, expressing our apprehension.  The letter stated 

that while we 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

agreed that the amendment, as is currently read was needed, the 

S.A.R.M. Board did not want to see this new power abused in 

any way. 

 

So, obviously, Mr. Minister, they see the potential for abuse in 

this Bill.  And we're asking you today to answer our question: 

do you interpret this Bill as giving you the power to 

amalgamate municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again, that is not the 

way we would interpret that.  I would like to go on to read the 

following paragraph to the one the member opposite just said.  

It says: 

 

 On July 16, Minister Cunningham and Deputy Minister 

Reader met with myself and presented me with a letter which 

states: "With respect to the amalgamation of municipalities, I 

wish to assure you that my government has no plans to 

impose amalgamation on any municipality.  We have 

enclosed a copy of this letter for your records.  The S.A.R.M. 

believes that the amendment, as it now stands, should remain. 

 

And I guess we allayed the fears of the SARM and I think 

those fears only arose out of the fearmongering of the member 

and the misinterpretation of the member opposite to begin with. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you table that letter that 

you sent to the director of SARM so that we could have it in 

this Assembly, please? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. 

Chairman, I've tabled the letter that I sent to Mr. Kirwan that he 

forwarded on to all the RMs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, did I understand that correctly 

that the letter that you sent to the director, or the president of 

SARM, is that the letter you're going to table?  Because that's 

the one I want. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The letter that I've just tabled. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think that 

having read this little bit in this letter which I've never seen 

before but . . . I would say that it is very vaguely worded in 

effect to be misconstrued as any kind of an endorsement for 

what you're doing today.  And misconstrued is all it could 

possibly be.  I think what you did was, you blackmailed the 

SARM into accepting your interpretation in order to get to 

much-needed changes to the rest of the Act to bring it up to 

date. 

 

I believe that you have, I believe that you have suggested to 

them, that unless they co-operate, in private, that you would 

use the heavy hand of your dictatorship to bring about, to bring 

about the county system in Saskatchewan.  This is what I 

believe that you've done.  And this is what I believe that you 

are doing. 

 

And I believe that you did not have the agreement and 

complicity of SARM; otherwise they wouldn't have gone to 

such lengths to vaguely word this letter as they have.  I 

happen to know most of the people that work around SARM 

and I know that they're quite capable of saying, we do agree or 

we do not agree, without all of this kind of preamble, unless 

they have a feeling that they need to show people that they 

were not totally in agreement with what's going on. 

 

They saw a need for some of the changes to happen, but they 

didn't like your wording.  And that's what I'm telling you today.  

They have a need to have the Act.  They have a need to have 

the Act work properly, but they do not need to have words that 

are as strong as the ones that you have used in this section. 

 

They need to have the ability to have municipalities change 

their boundaries in some cases, but they don't want that to be a 

dictatorial, arbitrary decision by the minister.  What they have 

said to you, and I'm going to say to you now as a reeve and as a 

person that pays taxes in a rural municipality, what they need is 

the ability to occasionally change lines because of changing 

economic conditions or perhaps because of geographical 

distortions that have occurred in our country long before the 

lines were ever drawn up.  And those lines somehow have 

taken into account particular areas by size and not areas by 

geographical disturbance as a result of the things like rivers or 

hills or that sort of thing cutting through them. 

 

There is a need there for from time to time for municipalities to 

want to change the lines of their municipalities.  At no time -- 

at absolutely no time -- has SARM or anybody affiliated with it 

ever asked for the minister to have the power to bring in larger 

municipalities or to be able to amalgamate municipalities. 

 

What they have said is that where we need changes and ask 

you for them, we want you to write into the Bill the power to 

have those changes made after we ask for them.  And I am 

saying to you that that can only come in fairness in a 

democracy after the people that are involved have had the 

opportunity to vote on it, if you're going to talk about 

something as big as changing the boundaries of municipalities 

and incorporating municipalities. 

 

They may not need the ability to vote, Mr. Minister, on issues 

of changing a particular line some place if it's only going to be 

moved a few miles over, one direction or another, in order to 

accommodate some geographical difference.  However when 

you're talking about this particular Bill and this particular line 

that we're talking about, we're talking about the full, sweeping 

power of a minister to amalgamate total municipalities, not just 

move a few lines around a little bit in the province to 

accommodate the needs of people. 

 

And that power is too great, and I absolutely refute your 

contention that you have an endorsement from rural 

municipalities of any kind, any place, to take this kind of 

unilateral, dictatorial power.  You don't have that; you haven't 

been given it; and there's no use me repeating myself any 

further on this matter. 

 

I will ask you and your colleagues though to once again 

reconsider our amendment because it does take you off 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

the hook if you truly are not trying to be a dictator and trying to 

take over the municipal system.  You can be off the hook on 

this one simply by passing this amendment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll read a . . . I 

plan on introducing another amendment to this particular thing 

here, and I have a copy of it here so I'll read it.  Proposed 

House amendment moved by . . . that'll be by myself. 

 

Clause 5 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Amend subclause 5(2) of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after clause 15(7)(g) as being enacted therein the 

following clause: 

 

  "(g.1) requiring the minister to seek advice and provide a 

reasonable opportunity for receiving advance public 

consultation and recommendations on any proposed 

regulation or any proposed amendment to a 

regulation made under clause (d), (e), (f) or (g)." 

 

August 10 . . . or this will be the 14th now of 1992. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am suggesting in this 

amendment, just as it says in its wording, that we believe that 

there should be consultation before changes are made to 

municipalities or to any regulation that affects municipalities.  

There should be consultation. 

 

We don't believe that it is a great hardship for that to be written 

into the Bill.  If in fact, as this government has been trying to 

tell us over the past few days, that they're willing to consult 

with people, if they're planning on being open and consultative, 

as they've said they are going to be, then they shouldn't have 

any objection to writing into the Bill the fact that before they 

make changes they will in fact go out and consult with the 

people. 

 

I think it's a very simple, small, word change that again takes 

the minister off the hook.  If he's saying that he's willing to do 

these things, then let's change the wording that makes it say 

that he's going to do it.  Otherwise we seriously have to doubt 

his sincerity.  And the people of this province are saying that 

we are doubting your sincerity.  We want you to put it in words 

that we can understand in the Bill so that in fact it will happen. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the amendment is to 

clarify the present practice.  The amendment we made to this 

section just clarifies that the grants are to be held by the 

municipality and not by the hamlet board.  That's the present 

practice, has been for many years.  The Act was unclear as to 

the wording and so it was changed to make the present practice 

clear to 

everybody concerned.  Therefore I think the amendment has no 

relevance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, this may come as a shock to 

you because you probably don't consult very much with your 

other colleagues, but the Minister of Environment has indicated 

to us that she is willing to have this particular clause put into 

her Bill, and she sees the rationale and reasonableness of this 

request.  We would suggest, therefore, that you reconsider the 

remark you just made and the fact that you considered that the 

wording of the old Act was not clear, was ambiguous.  We're 

saying to you that you have still done that in this Act; you 

haven't cleared up anything.  And our amendment would help 

you to do that.  It would also alleviate the concerns of the 

people of our province as would be indicated through the 

Minister of Environment's actions. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 

 

Pages 4 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

thank my official for coming in and helping with the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like also 

to thank the officials for coming in and assisting us with the 

questions and answers on this particular issue.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of Natural Resources please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I have with me 

Dick Bailey, the assistant deputy minister; Bruce Martin, who 

is a park planner; and Dale Beck, who's a solicitor from the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with 

dealing till item number 4.  If you want to go through it till 

there, I want to visit about that then. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I read in 

here certain parts of this as it relates to a tuning fork and 

measuring the speed of a vehicle.  Can you give me an idea of 

what this is supposed to do in relation to the main Bill? 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a provision 

that's found in The Highway Traffic Act which allows highway 

traffic officers to file prosecutions on the basis of a declaration 

and not having to call witnesses and so on to prove the speed at 

which people were travelling.  And this merely extends that 

provision to provide the same conditions within provincial 

parks that are now provided for under The Highway Traffic 

Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, has this already been passed in 

The Highway Traffic Act already? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  This is identical to section 37 

of The Highway Traffic Act . . . that was section 97. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So what we have is just a change in 

boundaries in all of the rest of the Bill.  Is that correct?  On 

parks.  And there's one name change, I believe, in the one park. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Basically, there's some boundary 

changes.  The big news in the Act, I guess, is the foundation of 

the Athabasca Sand Dunes as a wilderness park and some 

minor name changes.  I think the Nipawin Regional Park name 

change. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank 

my officials for coming in for helping with the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of the Environment please 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today I have 

to my right, David Beckwermert the director of policy and 

legislation branch of the  Department of Environment.  To my 

left is Leanne Schwann from the Crown solicitor's office, 

Department of Justice.  Behind me is Perry Erhardt, the 

legislative officer.  And Larry Lechner is a director of air and 

land branch of the Department of Environment. 

 

The Chair: -- Just inform the House that clauses 1 to 3 were 

previously agreed to, so we're on clause 4. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is the 

clause in which we deal with entry without a warrant.  I'd like 

to just read to the minister a letter I just received from the 

municipality of Prairiedale.  At their regular council meeting 

they discussed this proposed Bill.  And the last paragraph is 

they feel that this kind of power should not be given to 

members of the government and that they should be required to 

have a warrant and the consent of the owners before them or 

any government employee may enter upon private property. 

Because of our concerns and because of the concerns of 

various people around the province, I have discussed this with 

the minister.  And we have an amendment to propose on this 

legislation to help with that entry without a warrant, to try and 

tighten it up a little bit, while still giving the minister the right 

to enter under those circumstances. 

 

I have, I believe, three amendments to this clause.  I'd like to 

read the first one.  This is an amendment to clause 4 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

2.3(2) as being enacted therein and substitute therefor the 

following: 

 

 (2) where the minister, the environment officer, or designated 

person may, without warrant, enter on any land or into any 

building pursuant to subsection 1; 

 

  (a) he or she may collect data or samples; 

  (b) make any inspection, study, or investigation; 

  (c)  examine books, records, and documents; 

  (d) require the production of documents and property for 

the purpose of examination or making copies 

relating to the hazardous substance, waste 

dangerous good, hazardous waste, or other material 

referred to in clause 1(a) or the activity referred to 

in clause 1(b). 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite.  And we accept that amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I have a further amendment to clause 4.  

It's basically the same wording as the previous amendment, it 

just deals with subsection 2.3(9).  It adds on the same wording 

that the previous amendment did.  I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, 

whether I should read out the entire amendment or not. 

 

The Chair: -- I have another amendment in clause 2.3(8)(c).  I 

wonder shall we deal with that first, and then we'll move to . . . 

That amendment is by the minister, and I wonder if the 

minister would then move that amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I move the amendment.  Do you 

want me to read it out, Mr. Chair? 

 

 To amend section 4 of the Bill, clause 2.3(8)(c) to read 

where: 

 

 (c) there is data or information respecting pollutants or 

pollution of the environment on the land or in the building. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minister 

and I have discussed this one, and this was the initial 

amendment that we started working on to make changes to the 

Bill, and I'm prepared to accept this amendment. 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have an 

amendment to make to subsection 2.3(9) of this clause.  As I 

mentioned earlier, it deals exactly with the same thing as 

2.3(2).  I move the clause read: 

 

 Amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

2.3(9) as being enacted therein and substitute therefor the 

following: 

 

 (9) A warrant issued pursuant to this section authorizes the 

person named in the warrant to enter the place named in the 

warrant and any premises connected with that place to: 

  (a) examine the place and connected premises; 

  (b) carry out the activities described in subsection 2; and 

  (c) search for and seize and take possession of any books, 

records, documents and property; 

 that relates to the hazardous substance, waste dangerous 

goods, hazardous waste or other material referred to in clause 

(1)(a) or the activity referred to in clause (1)(b), as identified 

in the warrant. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Once again we 

accept that amendment and we thank the member opposite. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

(1630) 

 

Clause 6 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, I 

have an amendment to make to this clause.  I'll read out the 

amendment first and then if I have any words to add, I'll put 

them in. 

 

 Amend clause 6 of the printed Bill by adding the following 

section after section 35.1 as being enacted therein: 

 

 "Investigation 

 35.2(1) On receipt of an application under section 35.1, the 

minister shall acknowledge receipt of the application and 

investigate all matters that the minister considers necessary 

for a determination of the facts relating to the alleged 

offence. 

 

  (1.1) In making a decision pursuant to subsection (1), the 

Minister shall consider: 

 

   (a) whether the application is vexatious or frivolous; and 

   (b) whether the applicant has presented sufficient 

evidence to present a case that 

the activity being complained of is or is likely to result in 

an environmental offence. 

 

 (2) Within 90 days after receiving an application under 

section 35.1, the minister shall report to the applicants on the 

progress of the investigation and the action, if any, that the 

minister proposes to take. 

 

 (3) The minister may discontinue an investigation where the 

minister is of the opinion that the alleged offence does not 

require further investigation. 

 

 (4) Where an investigation is discontinued, the minister shall: 

 

  (a) prepare a written report describing the information 

obtained during the investigation and stating the 

reasons for its discontinuation; and 

  (b) send a copy of the report to the applicants and to any 

person whose conduct was investigated". 

 

The minister and I have also discussed this one.  And the 

minister may have some words to make on this; I'm not sure.  

But I would like to move it at this present time, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have the entire text of the 

amendment that the member opposite just read out.  I wonder if 

we could have the entire text.  There is a clause in it that we 

hadn't agreed to, and we would like to examine that clause. 

 

Mr. Chair, in regards to (1.1) of the amendment suggested by 

the member opposite. 

 

We have problems with (a) and (b) section under that in so far 

it's very unquantifiable.  What is happening here is a very 

subjective process.  And the department and the officials would 

take into consideration whether it's vexatious or frivolous 

anyhow.  And in regard to the fact that they should have 

sufficient evidence, that is why the officials are entering the 

property in the first place.  So we could not agree to (a) and (b) 

of clause (1.1); but the other amendments following that, we 

would agree to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On section 

(a) where it deals with the application as vexatious or frivolous, 

your department will already be, as you said, looking at that to 

make that determination.  We felt it was important that that be 

a part of the consideration when you do determine whether or 

not to investigate an application. 

 

On part (b) where the applicant has presented sufficient 

evidence, the applicant who comes in, Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, should not just be able to say, well I think you should 

be out there investigating Joe Blow.  They have to have some 

reason why they feel that that person or that corporation should 

be investigated. 

 

And that's why we wanted to include this into this part of 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

the amendment, is that the applicants do present you with some 

evidence to make it worthwhile for your department to indeed 

investigate.  And we believe that that is important that that be 

in there, Madam Minister, that they do have something 

worthwhile to bring to you to ask for an investigation, rather 

than just coming forward and saying, we believe you should 

investigate A, without any evidence to support that kind of an 

application. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, the purpose of this new 

environmental protection and management Act amendment is 

to try to keep equivalency with the federal Act.  The clauses 

that are printed, with the deletion of the one that we take 

exception to, are identical to the Canadian Environmental 

Protection Act.  And that is where we strive to have 

equivalency. 

 

So I would state again that because a Canadian Act states these 

terms that we have agreed to, the province of Saskatchewan, in 

order to maintain the standards and the regulations that are set 

down under the Canadian Act, we want to continue to make 

our Act as compatible as possible to the federal Act. 

 

So therefore we will not agree to your argument of putting 

them in, although we think it is implied anyway in 35.1.  As we 

set out this Act, it is under section 6.  It is already implied there 

that there will not be a vexatious or frivolous nature to the 

investigation.  So we feel that there is adequate provision 

already within the Act to take care of the circumstances that 

you might be talking about. 

 

And secondly, we do desire to keep this Act as closely similar 

to the Canadian Act as possible.  So we have taken from the 

Canadian Environmental Protection Act those same words and 

we put them in our Act and we would say that we would want 

to keep that very tight. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, thank you.  I can 

understand your desire to keep it close to the current national 

legislation. 

 

Although we would like to see this in there, if we could have 

your assurance, and I guess your assurance takes in your whole 

department, that applications will be rejected if they are 

vexatious or frivolous, and that the applicants will have to 

present you with some sort of evidence before you actually go 

out and do an investigation on somebody.  I guess I can say we 

would be prepared to accept a subamendment removing those 

two portions from the amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can give assurance to the member 

opposite, Mr. Chair, that the department will act responsibly 

before they investigate or take upon themselves any of the 

actions provided in this Act.  And they will of course be 

mindful of the fact that they are entering property and it will be 

the requirement not to enter it on a vexatious or a frivolous 

nature. 

 

The Chair: -- If the members are agreed that 1.1 should be 

deleted, then the minister or someone should move -- and not 

the member for Souris Cannington -- that the amendment be 

further amended by deleting all of (1.1). 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I make 

amendment to that amendment to delete all of (1.1). 

 

Subamendment agreed to. 

 

Amendment as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minister 

and I have also discussed this amendment and I'd like to read 

the amendment: 

 

 Clause 7 of the printed Bill is amended: 

 

 (a) by renumbering the clause as subclause 7(1); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subclause thereto: 

 

  "(2) Section 38 is further amended by adding a new 

subsection (1.1) thereto as follows: 

 

   '(1.1) Except in circumstances considered by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to be an 

emergency, the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

shall give advance notice, seek advice and 

provide a reasonable opportunity for public 

consultations on any proposed regulations or 

any proposed amendment to a regulation under 

this Act.'" 

 

I believe it's fairly self-explanatory.  It means that the 

government will consult with the public when changes are to 

be made to the Act. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, we don't have the verbatim 

text that the member opposite just read out and we would like 

to examine it before we agree to it. 

 

Mr. Chair, the amendment that we have for that is a preferred 

one to the one the member opposite just quoted.  Because we 

find that the one opposite leaves it open to interpretation and 

difficulty may arise if a minor amendment like changing a 

phone number or some very small part of it has to be done, 

then it means we have to have public consultations.  And we're 

not quite sure what that means. 

 

And in order to facilitate a reasonable degree of public 

awareness, we feel that the amendment put forward by the 

government is a little tighter and a little clearer than the one 

proposed by the member opposite.  And we would recommend 

deleting some of the words that are in the amendment the 

member opposite read, and go back to the House amendment 

proposed by the government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When I 

compare the two amendments, although they appear to be fairly 

close in terminology, I have some concerns.  The amendment 

as proposed by the minister says that: 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

. . . the Lieutenant Governor in Council shall seek advice and 

recommendations from the public on any proposed 

regulation . . . 

 

The differences in our amendment deal with that the minister 

shall give advance notice of those meetings, in the first part, so 

that people will have the opportunity to know that they're 

coming up, and provide a reasonable opportunity for public 

consultations.  Whereas in the minister's, it says, "shall seek 

advice and recommendations from the public . . ." 

 

I think there is perhaps a difference in the terminology here that 

we're dealing with, Madam Minister, where in yours, you can 

seek advice and recommendations, perhaps from individual 

groups or individual persons within the society, whereas in our 

amendment it allows you to call the general public and seek 

some advice from them.  And I believe, Madam Minister, that 

would be the preferable route to go. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act respecting Certain Services with 

respect to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1700) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

Brent Cotter, the deputy minister of Justice; Doug Moen, the 

co-ordinator of the legislative research branch; Betty Ann 

Pottruff, the director of policy planning and evaluation branch; 

Lisa Ann Wood, the director of the communications branch; 

Keith Laxdal, associate deputy minister, finance and 

administration division; and Gerald Tegart, the Crown solicitor 

in the civil law division. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  All seriousness, 

my first question, Mr. Speaker, is about cemeteries.  I think that 

somebody thought I was fooling, but it isn't, and I'm going to 

do it very quickly, in the essence of time, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I have a whole file here that I received from a fine gentleman 

who lives in Regina and it's over a cemetery problem out in the 

Chamberlain-Holdfast area.  They've been writing letters back 

and forth to the Department of Justice and the RM of Sarnia 

and the people in the town of Chamberlain.  There's a problem, 

who's taking care of this cemetery and the legal rights at the 

cemetery.  This man has really done his homework.  He's got 

the cemetery Acts; he's searched the titles, and nobody's taking 

care of the cemetery.  And it's under the . . . RM owns it. 

 

So all I wanted to ask you here . . . I've got these things here.  

This is . . . (inaudible) . . . order.  It's the names of the churches 

that have owned it through the years.  It's passed through 

ownerships from 1912 until 1972 till now it's been owned by an 

RM.  And this person, this elderly gentleman is quite 

concerned, along with many other people that have come back 

to the province, can't find where their people are buried and 

want . . . They're even trying to want to bury loved ones, and 

they can't find where other graves are in the cemetery. 
 

So the letters going back from Justice are not coinciding with 

the fact, but it's not their fault.  And I have the complete file, 

Mr. Minister.  And for the essence of time here tonight, and 

we're trying to accommodate you for time, all I want is a 

commitment from you that if I . . . I'll take a photocopy after 

supper, table it or have it sent to 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

your office, and if you could get someone that would sit down 

with me and we'll go through the whole problem here.  Then 

we don't have to waste the time in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, yes, Mr. Chairman.  We'll be glad 

to work with the hon. member and try and sort this thing out.  

We'll be glad to do that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much.  And I just have one 

more question.  Are you still . . . you're still responsible -- and I 

should know this -- for the Farm Land Security Board 

mediation services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes we are, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm sure you would.  And have you got your 

officials here to answer questions on that this evening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think we can.  We may not be able to 

provide detailed information to the member, but we can 

certainly deal with broad policy questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, an issue that has been continually 

cropped up and been cropping up over the last little while, and 

certainly as the Justice critic I've had inquiries regarding it . . . 

And we continue to go back to the David Milgaard case and the 

fact that the provincial government has taken a position of not 

having a public inquiry or not coming up with compensation.  

And there are a number of people in the province who feel that 

maybe Mr. Milgaard does have a case, and there are others who 

feel that maybe Mr. Milgaard certainly doesn't.  And it's a 

judgemental question on the part of individuals and based 

solely on what people get in the media. 

 

But I think there are many people out there that feel that in 

light of the decision that was made, the decision by the 

Supreme Court, it would have been only fair to have some kind 

of an inquiry to clarify the circumstances . . . and I'm certain 

even the family of Gail Miller would . . . there's a lot of 

questions they may have as well.  And the question out there is 

why the government or why the Justice Department will not 

take a serious look at some kind of compensation or public 

inquiry, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

member, this of course is a . . . this is a question that has 

received a lot of publicity over the last few months, and indeed 

years, and has been a difficult case for all of the people 

involved: for the Milgaard family, for the Miller family, for the 

Justice Department, for the police officers, for this Assembly 

for obvious reasons. 

 

It led, in due course, to the federal government ordering the 

Supreme Court of Canada to conduct a review.  That was not 

the first review of this matter that had been conducted in this 

sense, that the federal minister had in the past commissioned 

reviews of the file for determining whether or not the inquiry 

should be ordered.  So this is a file that has been worked over 

quite extensively.  And it culminated in the review of this 

matter conducted by the Supreme Court of Canada. 

That was an extraordinary process, Mr. Chairman, that has . . . 

almost without precedence in this country.  One goes back 

many, many years to find any such review being undertaken by 

the Supreme Court. 

 

It was here and it was under terms of reference which were 

quite broad.  The Supreme Court provided great latitude to all 

of the people involved in the hearing, all of the -- I use the 

word parties because that's a term that we use in hearings and 

in trials and in actions to describe the people who are there 

before the Court with an interest in the matter that is at issue.  

And all of the people there, including the counsel for Milgaard, 

were perfectly entitled to call evidence that they wished to call 

respecting the matters in issue. 

 

The position of the Milgaard family was, or the Milgaard 

counsel was, that David Milgaard was innocent.  And the 

Supreme Court of Canada was pressed to to make that finding.  

And the hearing went on for some long period of time before 

the Supreme Court of Canada.  And I just can't find in my notes 

how many days it was, but the member will know that it went 

on with great national publicity for some long period of time. 

 

As I have said, everyone had the opportunity to call witnesses 

that they might want to call in order to review what evidence 

there was against Milgaard.  And indeed many witnesses were 

called and examined and cross-examined.  And looking at the 

whole situation, we came to the conclusion that there just 

wasn't anything left to inquire in to -- nothing left to inquire in 

to. 

 

The federal Department of Justice had complete access to all of 

our files, had had for years, continued right through the time of 

the hearing to have it.  We ourselves provided, I think, 25 

volumes of material, including everything on our file that was 

relevant in any way.  And the hearing, I'm just reminded, 

extended over 14 sitting days in the Supreme Court of Canada 

-- most extraordinary proceeding.  As I was just saying, we 

concluded that, looking back on what had happened at the 

Supreme Court, that there just wasn't anything left to inquire in 

to. 

 

The matter of Fisher has been raised.  Fisher had, you'll recall, 

Mr. Chairman, confessed to having committed rapes, sexual 

assaults in the city of Saskatoon during that period of time.  

Fisher was a witness at the hearing before the Supreme Court 

and gave his evidence. 

 

We looked at all that situation.  And our best advice, based on 

very experienced prosecutors within the department, that there 

is no evidence, no admissible evidence that we could produce 

in respect of Fisher as regards the murder of Gail Miller -- no 

admissible evidence at all.  I say to the hon. member, that it is 

not admissible evidence that Fisher committed other crimes in 

the area at that time.  That simply wouldn't be allowed to be put 

into evidence in the court. 

 

So we look at the whole situation and ask ourself, what is there 

left to inquire in to?  And we came to the conclusion -- and I 

take responsibility for the conclusion -- that there's simply 

nothing left to inquire in to.  And so we are not prepared to 

order an inquiry.  We take the position that the inquiry has 

already been held.  Now I can say to 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

the member -- and I probably have said as much as you 

expected me to say when you asked the question -- but I can 

say to the member that you know we understand that it is a 

frustrating circumstance, particularly for the Miller family, to 

have this matter left unresolved. 

 

And all we can say in response to that is that we're not able to 

resolve it for them.  We have done what we can.  We 

prosecuted David Milgaard back in 1969 and took the case 

before a jury and the jury produced a certain result.  And all of 

our evidence in that respect was called at the time and all of 

that evidence has been rehashed in the hearing at the Supreme 

Court of Canada.  And we don't have any more evidence.  

That's all there is.  And we can't resolve this problem for the 

Miller family in that respect. 

 

Finally -- and I'll sit down after I say this -- with respect to the 

status of Milgaard, all I can say is that the Supreme Court said 

that they could not find him innocent upon the criminal law test 

of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  They could not find him 

innocent in using that yardstick of measurement.  They also 

went on to say that they could not find him innocent upon a 

balance of probabilities, which is the civil test for determining 

issues. 

 

So if the Supreme Court, after hearing 14 days of evidence, are 

not able to pronounce on his innocence, then of course I can't 

pronounce on his innocence.  And a further inquiry in my view 

would not contribute anything towards that end.  There just 

isn't anything left to look at that could lead to any conclusion 

with respect to the question of innocence or guilt. 

 

We just have to leave the matter where it is, I'm afraid, and 

encourage the people involved to try and put that behind them 

and get on with their lives.  And in the case of David Milgaard, 

to get on with what's left for him after having served so many 

years in jail. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I know that your 

response is certainly not the response that a number of people 

were expecting or were hoping to hear.  And of course I realize 

the difficulty that the department is facing.  And when a person 

looks at someone being incarcerated for 23 years and feeling 

very strongly or saying . . . you know, standing on the basis of 

being his innocence rather than maybe confessing and being 

paroled after a period of time, you'd almost think that there 

would be some kind of compensation for having spent that 

time.  And I appreciate . . . And certainly the Supreme Court 

left the door fairly broad.  And I think that's the predicament 

most people face themselves in right now . . . rather than just 

prolonging the debate here because certainly it appears it's not 

going to change the question all that much. 

 

I have another question, regarding the constitutional debate 

that's taking place.  And certainly the minister's aware of a 

committee that's been struck in this Assembly and the ongoing 

discussions that are taking place at the present time.  And it 

seems that we've come to a bit of a deadlock on the 

constitutional issue and hopefully next week as first ministers 

meet, and their officials, that something may be arrived at that 

all of Canada can agree with, or the larger percentage. 

 

But I have some concerns regarding the committee.  I 

believe originally when the committee was established, Mr. 

Minister, it was established under the basis of getting some 

input from individuals.  And I'm beginning to wonder myself if 

indeed that committee still has that basis of operating or if 

that's the intent of the committee or if the committee may now 

be just a spokes-committee for this legislature or if it's indeed a 

spokes-group for the government on the constitutional 

question.  I wonder if you can respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's an important subject.  The 

government wants the committee to function, and there are 

terms of reference that have been laid down.  While I don't 

have them in front of me, let me say that we want the 

committee to fulfil a broad role with respect to constitutional 

questions, and of course the agenda of the committee now is 

driven by the constitutional discussions that are taking place. 

 

We want the committee to relate to the public.  I have 

mentioned to the member before the great difficulties involved 

in getting a public response to the various parts of this package 

that have been discussed over these many months and will be 

discussed again next week.  I believe very strongly, and I know 

the member does, that the people of Canada and the people of 

this province should have a voice in deciding what goes into 

their constitution. 

 

It is, after all, the people's constitution.  They have a direct 

stake in it.  It's their country and it defines the basis on which 

their country operates.  And anything that we can do to involve 

them directly and provide to them information as to what it is 

that we're about, what are the issues and what are the 

arguments, we have to do that.  So we want the committee to 

fulfil that role to the greatest extent possible. 

 

(1715) 

 

So let me also say to the member, Mr. Chairman, that I think 

this Assembly sees that committee as being the master of its 

own processes within the framework of the terms of reference 

that were laid down when the committee was established.  And 

so the committee is in charge of itself and makes its own 

decisions with respect to who it calls, who it invites before it, 

who it talks to, what advice it receives, and in connection with 

this process, what it does in relation to communicating with the 

public on the contents of that package and obtaining the 

opinions of the Saskatchewan public concerning the various 

issues that are involved in either approving or rejecting 

whatever package is agreed upon at the end of the day. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, when the 

committee was struck and the parameters were drawn up, and 

one of the main concerns that was raised at that time by the 

opposition, and the question was posed - 

_ the government certainly was non-committal; I'm not sure 

exactly where you stand as the minister -- but we're aware of 

the plebiscite that indicated many people, in fact I think it was 

in the neighbourhood of some 65 or 70 per cent of the people 

that responded through the plebiscite wanted to have a voice 

and wanted to at least even have a vote when some final 

agreement was drawn.  And it's my feeling, my understanding 

that people still want that. 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

I'm not sure through the committee -- maybe, as you say, by the 

operations of the committee we can lay out some of what has 

transpired over the last past number of months regarding the 

constitution and regarding a constitutional agreement.  Will the 

minister commit himself to at least giving the public every 

opportunity and the ability to indeed voice their concerns and 

even through possibly the use of a plebiscite in this Assembly. 

 

And also another question before the minister stands up.  

Another suggestion has been proposed regarding the use of the 

SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network) 

network, the telecommunications network, to maybe create a 

broader base of input, opportunity for input, as well as to 

become a savings factor for this committee. 

 

I wonder if the minister could respond on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we are acutely conscious 

of the plebiscite result that the member refers to.  It has 

impressed us as it has impressed the opposition and everyone 

that the people were so adamant about . . . so overwhelmingly 

in favour of having a direct voice.  And we very much want 

that to happen. 

 

There are a number of possible scenarios here which make the 

question difficult to answer.  One of them is that it remains a 

distinct possibility that the federal government will have a 

national referendum.  We keep hearing that out of Ottawa and 

it keeps being referred to in the press, and that would not 

surprise us at all. 

 

And if the federal government is going to have a referendum, 

then I think we in Saskatchewan wouldn't have to consider it.  

We wouldn't have to consider having the same referendum 

covering the same package as the federal government.  So that 

would be one scenario. 

 

The other question that I have raised publicly and with the 

committee just the other day was what kind of a referendum 

can we have; what question can we ask.  I jokingly said to the 

committee that we couldn't append -- or could we? -- append 

this document.  And I had in my hand the record of the 

decisions made at the multilateral ministers' conferences.  We 

couldn't append this to each ballot so people going in to vote on 

it would get the whole package in their hand.  And the question 

was, do you favour the attached proposal? 

 

There are so many issues in that proposal.  You know, there's 

the Quebec items, the Quebec minimum requirements which 

are referred to as the Meech items, and the matter of the 

organization of the Senate, and aboriginal self-government. 

 

And then a host of minor issues after that: section 121, the 

economic union clause and the social union clause and so on.  

And how can we have a plebiscite?  How can we design a 

plebiscite?  So there's the practical problems. 

 

But let me say immediately again -- and I'm repeating myself 

here -- that we respect the result of that plebiscite that was run 

last fall.  I mean, we have to respond to it.  And all of us 

remember the Meech Lake aftermath with the 

protests about the constitution having been written by 11 men 

in suits behind closed doors without any real public input at all. 

 

We don't want to repeat those mistakes at all.  We want the 

public to know about what's being considered for inclusion in 

their constitution and have a way to say, yes, I like that, or ask 

questions about it, or say no, I don't like it. 

 

So let me just sum it up by saying it this way.  It's an open 

question as far as we're concerned.  And I asked the committee 

-- and I hope it was fair -- the last time I was there to give that 

some thought and make some recommendations to the 

legislature, if recommendations come out of the committee's 

work, as to what we should do in that connection. 

 

I'm very concerned about it.  I think this is going to be a very 

difficult package to communicate to the public and very 

difficult for the public to respond.  And I'll say to the member, 

that the government wants to do everything it can in order to 

overcome those problems and to make this process work. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess that's one of the major 

concerns I have as well, and specifically being a member of the 

committee.  And in light of the parameters and the idea of the 

committee being a sounding board for Saskatchewan people to 

give them a chance for input, and the thing that I guess 

frightens me a little bit is the fact that if we or if the committee 

proceeds to hold some hearings around the province, and 

should the first ministers come to some kind of a consensus 

next month, that many people are going to perceive that they 

really didn't have that public input -- that indeed all the 

committee's doing out there is now trying to sell a package. 

 

And I think that will create a problem certainly for us as 

opposition members as well.  And just going to sell a package 

when we talked . . . we talked about it during the election 

campaign.  The Leader of the Opposition did.  I believe the 

Premier did.  And I think that's one of the major concerns right 

now, is specifically in light of the concerns people have with 

regards to fiscal restraint. 

 

And it doesn't matter how you cut the dice, for a committee to 

operate it's going to have some financial implications as well.  

And that's the concern I have regarding the committee, the 

operations of the committee and the purpose and the role of the 

committee. 

 

Mr. Minister, another one of my colleagues has some other 

questions, but while I'm on my feet, I just want to get your 

commitment to . . . I handed you over just earlier in the 

afternoon a few questions we felt weren't quite answered as 

fully as we felt or would appreciate them to be answered.  You 

did give a commitment at that time that they would be and sent 

over to us.  If it wasn't possible this afternoon, then I'd just like 

to ask the minister for that further commitment publicly, and 

also thank the minister for the answers that were provided to 

the broad general global questions that we did ask of the 

minister and his department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to confirm 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

that I'm going to respond to the member's memo that he gave 

me earlier as fully as I can, as soon as I can. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don't anticipate 

being long.  I'm sure because the minister's been forewarned in 

question period and other times that he might be asked these 

questions.  I'm going to ask him questions pertaining to Bill 87 

and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and that type of thing. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, now that you have all of your learned 

officials with you here today on this particular area, I'm 

wondering if there is any further enlightenment that you could 

give the Assembly on the questions of the constitutional 

validity question.  I notice that there are 10 whereas's or so in 

front of the particular Bill.  Is the minister absolutely sure 

today in committee that there is no possible constitutional 

challenge to this piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have the Minister 

of Agriculture to stand in his place and answer the member's 

question today.  So in his absence I will do the best that I can. 

 

The Bill was drafted pursuant to drafting instructions.  It was 

drafted by the Department of Justice.  It was a new Bill rather 

than an amendment to an existing Bill.  And the department as 

a matter of course considered the constitutional validity of the 

contents of the Bill. 

 

When the department does that, it does it from two 

perspectives.  First of all, is the content of the Bill within the 

legislative jurisdiction of the province?  And secondly, does the 

Bill in any way offend the charter? 

 

And I want the member and the House to know that the 

department did consider this during the drafting of the Bill.  

And their conclusion was, first of all, that the contents of the 

Bill is entirely within the legislative competence of the 

province.  In other words, it is within provincial jurisdiction.  

Secondly the department concluded that there was no ground 

upon which the legislation can be attacked, can be successfully 

attacked as offending any of the provisions of the charter. 

 

Now I can also tell the member that an outside law firm has 

reviewed that those conclusions, and has agreed that those 

conclusions, are correct.  All of that was done last June, I 

believe, and before this became an issue during question period 

in the last few days.  I think that I can't add anything more to 

that answer. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I fully realize that the policy 

direction did not come from the Department of Justice.  You 

were simply charged with drafting this odious piece of 

legislation, and as professionals your people drafted it. 

 

But I might say, Mr. Minister, I would think that your officials 

would find it a bit of a smelly task to have to put something 

like this together to use so many whereas's to override 

constitutional rights.  I mean this has to be a particularly smelly 

piece of legislation for your professional staff to work on. 

And I would like to leave some things with you, Mr. Minister, 

because the advice that we're receiving.  And I presume you 

have received your advice from MacPherson Leslie on the 

constitutionality of the thing.  We've also received some advice 

from various people that think there is a challenge here.  And 

that's why we've been asking you about a referral.  A referral 

mechanism has been in place for some 10 years.  It is accepted 

practice in Canada today to use the high court of a province to 

do a referral before tying up the Supreme Court of a land with a 

further reference. 

 

And I'm really perplexed, given that there is a debate as there 

always will be in a legal community on a question like this and 

one obviously that you, as the top law person in this province, 

must feel some weight of responsibility when the right to 

access the court is removed from an individual.  That has to be 

a fairly weighty decision that one takes upon their shoulders. 

 

Now I just want to raise a few things with you that, being a 

non-lawyer myself, that people have raised with me for you to 

think about in your response.  And I'm going to refer you, Mr. 

Minister, to some sections in section 7 of the charter.  First 

would be 7-70180.  It's a fairly recent decision.  It'd be 

Pearlman versus the Manitoba Law Society judicial committee.  

It's a new precedent, 1991, I believe, with the Supreme Court 

hearing. 

 

And I just want to read this to you: 

 

 The principles of fundamental justice to which this section 

refers include, but are not limited to, the rules of natural 

justice and the duty to act fairly.  They therefore include the 

requirement of a procedurally fair hearing before an impartial 

decision maker. 

 

And of course they weren't referring to a farmer in this 

particular instance.  But the establishment of the fact that 

everyone's right before an impartial decision maker seems to be 

something that our constitution is fairly strong on. 

 

Another one, Mr. Minister, that I want to leave with you, and it 

has been pointed out to me because there is some suggestion 

that opposition to this particular piece of legislation have some 

onus on them to prove things.  This would be Attorney General 

Manitoba versus metropolitan stores.  I believe the reference 

for the Supreme Court is 1987.  And I'll just read this to you, 

Mr. Minister: the suggestion that there is a presumption of 

constitutional validity in the sense that a legislative provision 

challenged on the basis of the charter must be presumed to be 

consistent with the charter in a full force and effect is 

incompatible with the innovative and evolutionary character of 

the charter as a constitutional instrument.  That does not mean 

however that the onus of establishing that legislation violates 

the charter does not lie with those who oppose the legislation. 

 

(1730) 

 

And one final one, Mr. Minister, that is quite interesting 

because the GRIP Bill is a tripartite arrangement between the 

federal government and the provincial government 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

and the farmers of Saskatchewan.  This would be the references 

to the Quebec Association of Protestant School Boards versus 

the Attorney General of Quebec. 

 

 The Government of Canada has an interest sufficient to 

permit it to intervene in an action for a declaration that a 

provincial statute is contrary to the charter, and therefore of 

no force or effect. 

 

 Provincial legislative authority is now limited by the rights 

conferred by the charter, and the question of conflict between 

the charter and a provincial law is not a matter solely of 

provincial interest. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Chairman -- and this once again coming 

from a layman who doesn't understand all the nuances of the 

law -- at least in the view of some people who've presented this 

to me . . . tells me that there is divergent opinion.  And I have 

many more of these that I could read into the record.  And in 

the essence of time, I will not. 

 

But don't you think, Mr. Minister, given that this thing is so 

controversial, that the ramifications are so dire to so many 

people, that a reference would not make some semblance of 

sense because of its ability to sort of freeze in place all of the 

animosity and the anger that is tied to this particular piece of 

legislation?  That is, I understand, a reference.  It freezes the 

court date in Melville.  It stops everything until the reference 

succeeds. 

 

And I would think, given our history here in this legislature 

with other contentious legislation, that a reference would be in 

order, in order to sort of set aside all of this animosity that has 

arisen over this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 

took a moment to try and cover the many points that emerge 

from the member's question and certainly I understood the 

question, and I thought the member put the question in an 

appropriate way and need not apologize for any lack of ability 

to handle these symbols.  I thought it was handled quite 

appropriately. 

 

I want to say to the member as I begin the answer that if you 

are in a position to share with me any of the legal opinions that 

you referred to, I will be more than happy to look at them with 

my officials and see whether there is something that we have 

overlooked.  We don't think there is. 

 

For example, when we have looked at the charter, we have 

looked at section 7 first and foremost in some detail.  And one 

of the problems that anyone would have in suggesting that 

section 7 of the charter, which guarantees the: 

 

 . . . life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to 

be deprived . . . (of those rights) except in accordance with 

the principles of fundamental justice. 

 

You run into a number of recent Canadian decisions to the 

effect that those rights do not include contractual rights.  And 

that's the first thing you run into but by no 

means is it the last.  We have examined section 7 very, very 

closely, and frankly we can't see the possibility of any serious 

charter challenge being based upon section 7. 

 

We have also gone beyond and considered whether section 8 of 

the charter might have any application.  And again we 

concluded that no argument, no reasonable argument, could be 

founded upon section 8. 

 

And we looked then at section 15 of the charter, which is the 

equality provision of the charter, to see whether there was any 

principle in that section which might affect the GRIP 

legislation, and again came to the conclusion that there was no 

basis for believing that a charter challenge could be founded 

based upon section 15 or, of course, any combination of 7, 8 or 

15. 

 

And then we went again beyond that and looked at our own 

Human Rights Code to see whether there was anything in the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code that might bear on the 

situation -- which is really stretching it a long, long way 

because the human rights legislation is aimed at a different 

aspect of society's functions -- and again concluded that there 

was no basis for a challenge there. 

 

And as I've said earlier, we concluded that clearly this 

legislation is within a provincial jurisdiction.  So at the end of 

the day, we have the very strong, we have the very strong 

opinion within the department that the Bill is constitutional and 

cannot be challenged successfully under the charter.  Now 

that's the opinion of the Department of Justice. 

 

You have correctly guessed that the MacPherson, Leslie & 

Tyerman were the private firm who have also given us an 

opinion, not just confirming our opinion -- which I think is the 

language that I used earlier -- but stating independently that in 

their opinion the Bill is constitutional on both of those grounds.  

It's within the legislative competence of the province, and it is . 

. . it cannot be successfully challenged under the charter 

including sections 7, 8, and section 15. 

 

So this is the situation that I'm in then, that I'm in as the 

Attorney General.  I can't . . . it would be irresponsible of me to 

make a reference in order to relieve the political heat, or to 

unfreeze the situation as you have suggested.  It's tempting, but 

it would be wrong for me to do that. 

 

In order to refer it, I have to have a question in my mind; I have 

to have the opinion that there is something to refer.  And that's 

why I invited you earlier, if you have legal opinions and you're 

able to share them with me, I would be grateful. 

 

Because we don't want to be stubborn about this.  We don't 

want to look foolish about it.  We want to do it in an 

appropriate way.  And if we've overlooked something -- I 

would swear we have not -- but we would be more than glad to 

review our thinking on it in the light of any other different legal 

analysis that there is. 

 

(1745) 



August 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

The process of referring these constitutional questions is not as 

quick as it sounds.  It goes directly to the Court of Appeal, but 

it doesn't get there directly.  There are steps that have to be 

taken. 

 

And the Assembly should not have the view that this could be 

whipped off within a matter of a few weeks.  It is more correct 

to think of it in terms of a few months.  Because the questions 

have to be drafted.  Somebody has to be put up on the other 

side of the question to make the argument to challenge the 

validity of it.  The Court of Appeal has to consider the question 

of who should be invited to participate.  The written arguments 

have to be filed.  Factums have to be filed in advance of the 

hearing.  And we're talking months before we could get this on 

the agenda of the Court of Appeal. 

 

And in the mean time something has to happen with . . . I mean 

there are steps that have to be taken in connection with the 

administration of the GRIP program.  You know that from the 

experience of last year and we know it from the advice we have 

as to administrative steps that are necessary this year in order to 

make the thing go along. 

 

So it is just . . .  That's another ground for it not being . . . It's 

just not practical to sort of suspend the GRIP Bill until the 

matter can be taken before the Court of Appeal, for the reasons 

that I've just mentioned. 

 

So let me repeat for a third time before I sit down, if you're able 

to share your legal opinions with us, I'd be glad to take a fresh 

look at the question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And obviously I'm 

not the one that is doing the research on this type of thing for 

the House.  And if it's felt appropriate I would be more than 

happy to encourage people to share that with you. 

 

I guess the question . . . And I don't want to belabour this 

because I know the minister has things to do.  But we have a 

situation which has arisen here . . . And I fully understand the 

charter in section 7 as far as contractual law and issues of 

financing that inhibit it. 

 

But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, and I made the remarks 

earlier today, that we have a situation which has arisen where 

you simply do not have redress before a judge and 12 of your 

peers -- or six, or whatever you happen you choose -- any more 

in this province on a particular question. 

 

And I would find that you and your officials . . . And I don't 

doubt the hard work that they've done to try and make sure this 

thing is covered off.  I've never seen a Bill that has three 

separate sections to cover off this problem. 

 

You must find that very difficult to administer, that that right 

which is so basic to our society is now gone.  I mean this will 

be used by others as an example.  You will not be able to limit 

this to GRIP, in my view.  You have set a precedent that will 

be used time and time again. 

 

At the same time, you as the Attorney General are engaged 

with the Premier in another constitutional round with some of 

these very fundamental questions of 

provincial rights, federal rights, and how the charter is 

amended in the future, the question of Quebec's right to amend 

-- these things are all in there. 

 

You have set a precedent in Saskatchewan, as far as I know 

from my reviewing of section 7, that goes beyond anything 

done anywhere else. 

 

Now surely the other folks at the constitutional table that you're 

sitting down with are going to say, I look at this and I want the 

same type of rights guaranteed.  You have effectively removed 

the right of redress through the courts by this interpretation, 

and you've worked very hard to make sure it happens. 

 

Now how can you go to the constitutional table, Mr. Attorney 

General, and live with that, is what I want to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I of course have heard 

the premise for the question repeated during debate, and I want 

to tell the member that I plan to enter the GRIP debate on this 

very question of what is taken away by the legislation or what 

rights are affected and why.  And I probably shouldn't seek to 

deal with that in these Estimates. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member that the issues in the 

constitutional discussion are enormously complex and difficult, 

and it is difficult in the country of Canada to get consensus on 

those items.  And I must say that I am unable to draw the 

parallel between the contents of the GRIP Bill and the positions 

and the arguments that we will be making to the first ministers 

in relation to the constitution. 

 

Now it may be that I do not have a sufficiently refined sense of 

propriety or appropriateness, and therefore I miss the member's 

point.  But I want to tell the member that I'm going into these 

discussions with a clear conscience as far as the GRIP Bill is 

concerned and that it will not affect our ability to perform at 

the constitutional level. 

 

I might also mention to the member that to date no other 

premier or first minister or minister or official of any other 

province or territory nor any aboriginal group have raised with 

us the question of the content of the GRIP Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I have a number of questions, Mr. Chairman, and 

they deal specifically with the legal case before the courts right 

now.  And I'm just wondering if we can get a commitment from 

the minister that maybe we can get into these questions with 

the Minister of Agriculture and have the same . . . what we're 

talking about is the cost and the fact that the court asked for a 

$700,000 bond and the cost of the case and all the processes of 

this case. 

 

And if it's possible, if the minister could even give us a 

commitment that we could ask them through the Agriculture 

minister, we could certainly make that commitment and let the 

process proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- In response, Mr. Chairman, we will 

provide an official in the group supporting the Minister of 

Agriculture during committee consideration of the GRIP Bill, 

so that the questions can be asked.  And we'll do our best to 

answer them. 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard August 14, 1992 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 6 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 7 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 28 -- Statutory. 

 

Item 29 agreed to. 

 

Item 30 -- Statutory. 

 

Items 31 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 3 

 

Items 1 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 3 

 

Items 1 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes consideration of the Estimates 

for the Department of Justice.  Would the minister please thank 

his officials?  I would ask the minister to thank his officials. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take this time to thank 

the minister and his officials.  Certainly I appreciate their 

willingness and faithfulness and their patience in sitting and 

waiting and indeed responding to the questions, not only the 

verbal ones, but the global questions that we placed to the 

officials.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to add my thanks 

to the officials for being here this afternoon and for having 

made so many trips over the last while to be at the convenience 

of the legislature. 

 

I want to also thank the critic, the member from Moosomin, for 

the consideration that he's given, shown to me in my particular 

circumstances in enabling us to complete these Estimates 

tonight.  Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Chair: -- It now being past 5 o'clock, this committee is 

adjourned until 7 p.m. this evening. 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


