




















































Hansard: May 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 233 

 May 7, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday ask the government the following 

questions. To the minister responsible for SaskPower: 

 

Regarding the rate increases after November 1, 1991: (1) 

What is the total revenue generated to date, and what is the 

total revenue projected to be generated by those increases 

this fiscal year?  And (2) how much of that revenue is 

derived from (a) customers from the cities of Regina, 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw; (b) customers 

from outside those cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) 

business customers? 

 

While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also give notice 

that I shall ask the minister responsible for SaskEnergy the 

following questions: 

 

Regarding rate increases after November 1, 1991: (1) 

What is the total revenue generated to date, and what is the 

total revenue projected to be generated by those increases 

this fiscal year?  (2) How much of that revenue is derived 

from: (a) customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert and Moose Jaw; (b) customers from outside 

those cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business 

customers? 

 

I also want to give notice that I will be asking the minister 

responsible for Sask Water the following questions: 

 

Regarding the rate increases after November 1, 1991: (1) 

What is the total revenue generated to date, and what is the 

total revenue projected to be generated by those increases 

this fiscal year?  (2) How much of that revenue is derived 

from: (a) customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw and Prince Albert; (b) customers from outside 

those cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business 

customers? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the 

following question.  To the Minister of Health: 

 

Regarding the user fee applied to cancer patients staying at 

the patients' lodge: (1) What is the total revenue raised by 

the user fee to date? (2) What is the total revenue projected 

to be raised for the current fiscal year? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday ask the government the following question -- minister 

responsible for SaskTel: 

Regarding the rate increases after November 1, 1991: (1) 

What is the total revenue generated to date, and what is the 

total revenue projected to be generated by those increases 

this fiscal year?  (2) How much of that revenue is derived 

from: (a) customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert and Moose Jaw; (b) customers outside of those 

cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business customers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on Tuesday ask the 

government the following question.  To the minister 

responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance): 

 

Regarding rate increases after November 1, 1991: (1) 

What is the total revenue generated to date, and what is the 

total revenue projected to be generated by those increases 

this fiscal year?  (2) How much of that revenue is derived 

from (a) customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert and Moose Jaw; (b) customers from outside 

of those cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business 

customers? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly some 46 grade 8, 9 and 10 students 

from the great town of Colonsay in my constituency.  They 

came down today to have a tour of the Assembly and to other 

parts of Regina. 

 

First I would introduce the teachers that are accompanying 

them:  Mr. Barry Peters, Ms. Sandi Pearson and Mr. Ari Avivi.  

I would hope that they have a good visit to Regina.  Enjoy the 

proceedings on this great day in our Assembly. 

 

I would ask all members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Budget Provisions 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in about a half an 

hour's time people in Saskatchewan will find out whether the 

budget leaks as revealed by the official opposition last week 

were true or not.  As you know, Mr. Speaker -- and I think to 

the Premier -- there's a long-standing tradition in the British 

parliamentary system that when budget leaks happen it is your 

duty, sir, to make sure that they do not. 

 

Mr. Premier, if the budget speech confirms that your 

government has broken your commitment to Saskatchewan 

people to de-insure optometrists for most Saskatchewan 

people, will you, sir, ask for the resignation 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

of your Minister of Finance? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question is very clear and very simple: no, because this 

government does not believe in reacting to speculation, which 

is what the official opposition in part or in total has been 

indulging in since this session has been convened.  This 

Minister of Finance, as his lengthy service in this legislature 

and service to the public of Saskatchewan has demonstrated, 

has acted with integrity across the piece.  No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, that is exactly what I'm talking 

about, is the integrity of this legislature and the integrity of our 

system. 

 

Mr. Premier, last week the official opposition brought to this 

Chamber the fact that your Minister of Finance had leaked 

matters pertaining to user fees dealing with the chiropractic 

profession. 

 

Mr. Premier, if the budget delivered in a short time confirms 

those leaks that your Minister of Finance put out, will you do 

the right thing, sir, and ask that minister to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to respond to the member opposite that this 

government does not react or make decisions on speculation or 

deliberate things that the opposition does to try to mislead the 

public.  This is a new approach that this government is 

employing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As the members and the people of 

Saskatchewan will see, this is a new, open, honest approach to 

governing which we have been sorely lacking for 10 long years 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, if this new approach of your 

ministers about leaking line items of budgets is the way that 

you want Saskatchewan to go in the '90s, sir, then our system is 

in sad repute. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is: it was revealed by the official 

opposition last week in a budget leak that there would be a 10 

per cent hike in personal income tax to citizens in this 

province.  Sir, if the budget delivered in a short while confirms 

that 10 per cent tax, will you ask for the resignation of your 

Finance minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to make something very clear to the 

 member from Thunder Creek and the members opposite.  This 

government was elected to get the financial affairs of this 

province under control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The people of Saskatchewan have 

told us that we either have to do it now, we have to get it under 

control, or we jeopardize the future of our children.  And I can 

tell the member opposite we're not prepared to let that happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to tell the member opposite 

that the role of government is to protect the interests of future 

generations, not the self-interests of a few people in power 

which unfortunately was the case before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I want to say to the member 

opposite that yes, I will confirm, I will confirm to this 

legislature and to the public of Saskatchewan that that 

expectation and that mandate which the public gave us will be 

confirmed when he hears the budget speech in a few minutes 

from now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, the mandate of your government 

was not to have selective leaks put out by your Finance 

minister, sir, your Finance minister, so that certain individuals 

in our society could take advantage of those leaks.  Mr. 

Premier, your own Associate Minister of Finance, when 

questioned by the press, said that if I were to divulge that type 

of information I would have to resign. 

 

Mr. Premier, last week in this legislature your budget leak of 

about a dollar a pack on cigarettes means, sir, that someone in 

this province could take advantage of other taxpayers.  Mr. 

Premier, if the budget delivered later this day confirms about a 

dollar a package increase in tax on cigarettes, will you, sir, ask 

your Minister of Finance to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the only people who 

seem to be talking about what might be in the budget are the 

members opposite.  That hardly, Mr. Speaker, can be 

considered a leak of any kind.  The fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And furthermore, as my colleague says, that's a 

pretty reliable source of information . . . unreliable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that this government, 

in putting together this budget, consulted.  We consulted in 

such a way that there has never been a consultation of this kind 

prior to any budget in the past.  We don't apologize for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And we're going to take measures 

in this budget which I will be presenting in a few moments 

from now which will respond to the things that the people of 

Saskatchewan told us because they elected us to listen to them.  

And I only ask the members opposite to be patient and listen to 

me when I deliver the speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  All I can 

say, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance is, well, well, well.  

You say you run an open, honest government, that you 

consulted.  Well my goodness, Mr. Speaker, I just happen to 

have the Star-Phoenix here, and it says: "Optometrists decry 

lack of consultation process." 

 

This is the consultative government that is being . . . 

Optometrists angered.  And we could go on but we don't have 

time, Mr. Speaker -- I realize that -- in question period. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier.  Your Minister of 

Health, Mr. Premier, is on record saying, and I quote the 

member from Regina Hillsdale: we categorically reject the 

concept of health care deterrent fees.  She repeatedly made 

these statements while in opposition and during the campaign, 

and I suspect many of the good folks here have helped knock 

doors for her on that premise. 

 

Mr. Premier, we know that directly following question period, 

your government will be imposing user fees for optometrists 

and chiropractors.  We knew this a week ago when the leaks 

first started.  Mr. Premier, seeing that your Minister of Health 

-- and you can be smug about it and you can laugh about it -- 

but we know that your Minister of Health stated that your party 

categorically rejects the concept of health care fees. And will 

you be asking that minister for her resignation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the 

member opposite is that he will hear what the measures are in 

the budget when the budget is presented.  We could spend all 

day here talking about what has been or what may have not 

been in the press in the last several weeks.  That is nothing 

unusual.  It happens all the time prior to a budget.  In fact, it's 

an interesting, sometimes very useful debate. 

 

But to talk about it as if there are leaks, Mr. Speaker, is 

absolutely incorrect.  The member knows that there has been 

no deliberate leaks of any kind on the budget and he is simply 

running out of substantive questions to ask, as the member for 

Thunder Creek has run out of substantive questions to ask, 

because they're too embarrassed to ask the questions which 

they know will reflect on their legacy which they left behind 

because of the last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I say, 

well, well, Mr. Minister, we shall see in a few moments, shall 

we not. 

And I direct my question again, and I hope this time the 

Premier will have the courtesy of answering this question since 

I am directing the question to the Premier, and I hope that he 

will have the courage to stand and answer for his government.  

Mr. Premier, on October 3, 1991, you stated and I quote:  We 

will not charge premiums or deterrent fees or utilization fees as 

they are called, for a number of reasons.  Basically the 

fundamental is they are not a fair way to finance the health care 

program. 

 

Mr. Premier, this statement was made during the election 

campaign.  Mr. Premier, this afternoon the leaks regarding user 

fees will be confirmed.  Mr. Premier, if indeed user fees for 

optometrists and chiropractor services are implemented, are 

you prepared to admit that you and your Minister of Health 

misled the voters of this province?  And will you indeed ask 

your Minister of Health to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The line of questioning taken by the opposition today, the way 

it's going if we have enough time in question period, would 

have me have everyone of my ministers resign.  But no such 

luck for the official opposition because the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan have elected us to a four-year 

mandate to clean up their mess.  Nobody's resigning, and we're 

going to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, he says October 3; I 

campaigned and my party campaigned on The Saskatchewan 

Way.  There's our platform card.  First thing we say here is: 

"First Things First -- Common Sense Financial Management.  

Open the books . . . comprehensive review of (all) PC 

privatization . . . deals . . . (and) a balanced budget (in four 

years)" 

 

And that's exactly the mandate.  I remind the member from 

Rosthern as well that on October 3, the then minister of 

Finance, the member from Weyburn, Mr. Hepworth . . . I wrote 

to the premier and I said, what was the size of the deficit.  The 

premier referred the letter to his minister of Finance and on 

October 3 he wrote to me as follows, quote: "On balance . . . I 

see no reason to alter our target of a $265 million deficit."  

That's what he told us.  When we won the election on 

November 1, we found the deficit was over $950 million.  If it 

had been $265 million we could have balanced the budget 

without the measures that the public have contemplated.  

You're to fault, not us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I say 

to the people of Saskatchewan the Premier is fantasizing.  Now 

you're correct when we could go from one minister to the other 

asking for their resignation.  In fact what the people of 

Saskatchewan are telling me in the Rosthern constituency is, 

we should ask for the resignation of the government. 

 

You were elected under false pretences, you were elected under 

false pretences -- fraud.  And your $265 million -- 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

you conveniently forget the $180 million lost through 

harmonization.  You forget your own Gass Commission; you 

forget a lot of things very conveniently.  Selective amnesia, Mr. 

Premier, that's what you've got. 

 

But I want to get back to the the train of questions that I was 

asking.  You once stated, Mr. Premier, that the only way to turn 

things around, the only way to turn things around in health care 

was to elect an NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We will see today, oh yes, we will see today, 

Mr. Speaker.  We will see if the NDP government imposes user 

fees.  You can hide.  The more nerves I hit, the more they clap, 

Mr. Speaker.  I think the problems of this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I've been very lenient 

with the question time and also the answers, but I would direct 

the member from Rosthern to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one quote to set the stage 

for the question.  Mr. Premier, your Minister of Health stated 

this on October 21, 1991, and she said: the opposition is going 

to fight these health care cut-backs and these changes to 

medicare.  It's going to fight the erosion of the principles of 

medicare . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I've given you well over a minute and a half to ask 

your question.  I want you to put your question directly. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Premier, you know the quote that I was 

quoting, so I won't complete it completely.  Your minister said 

that. 

 

Now I ask you, I ask you, Mr. Premier, and I ask the minister: 

are you prepared to admit right now that yes, we did mislead 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it falls ill from coming 

from the mouth of that member to talk about misleading the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan after that last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I must say, Mr. Speaker, however, he 

has made one very tempting suggestion, that maybe we should 

all resign and have another election because we'd have fewer 

than 10 Tory MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We'd have fewer than 10 Tory MLAs, 

and that's a very tempting offer you know, Mr. Speaker.  But 

we're not going to because we've been given a mandate to do 

what we are doing in this budget and this Speech from the 

Throne:  to open the books and 

to reveal the level of the mismanagement and the size of the 

debt, to review the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

privatizations, which are now beginning, to balance the budget. 

 

And he says to protect and save medicare -- you doggone right 

what we're doing is a first step to preserve and protect 

medicare.  Because unless we get this high interest rate on the 

public debt and the public deficit under control -- which you, 

sir, and the Leader of the Opposition racked up to absolutely 

unbelievable lengths and heights -- until we get this under 

control there will be no medicare.  We are out to save medicare 

and the future of the province of Saskatchewan because of your 

10 years of waste and mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Final 

question to the Premier.  You can make light of the convictions 

and the commitments that your Minister of Health made on 

behalf of you, of herself, and the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan heard you and they 

heard her on the doorsteps prior to and during the campaign.  

The people heard you and they actually believed you.  You said 

that you would do more with less.  You said, no new taxes.  

You said that, sir.  You said $4.5 billion is enough for any 

government to operate.  And your Minister of Justice said, if 

you can't, you don't deserve to be in government.  That was 

your Minister of Justice.  You knew, Mr. Premier, you knew 

the state . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  

Put the question, please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  I 

will certainly do that.  I say to the Premier, you knew. But I 

want to ask you, is it your personal view that it is better to tax 

the sick, to make those in pain pay, to make the middle class, 

and take them out of eye care?  Is that better than it would have 

been to have a 7 cent tax on hamburger?  Answer that, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the 

House and the people of this province to contemplate the logic 

behind this question.  You listen to me for a moment.  You 

listen to me for a moment.  His colleagues sitting on the front 

benches on October 3 under minister of Finance letterhead -- 

I'm still old-fashioned enough to believe that when someone 

writes under the minister of Finance letterhead -- told me and 

told all the people of Saskatchewan that the debt for the year 

'91-92 would be $265 million.  That's what I knew.  That's what 

you knew.  Now you're telling me . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I want to ask the 

member from Rosthern -- I gave him ample time to ask his 

question.  He wasn't interrupted -- I'm asking him to let the 

Premier answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But I can 

fully understand the minister's reaction because he 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

has an allergy to truth.  And the truth of the matter is that 

there's a $265 million commitment made here by the minister 

of Finance which proved to be false.  A total and complete 

falsehood. 

 

And you're asking me now to say that everybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan should not have believed your own 

minister of Finance.  That's what you're saying.  How illogical 

is that?  How credible is that?  I tell you, sir, the comments that 

we made were based on that figures . . . on those set of figures, 

and either you were part and parcel of the cover-up, in which 

case you should be resigning, sir . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- . . . or you should be putting the 

opposite, a truthful statement of that operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Foreclosures 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give her snoose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's always a pleasure to be back in 

the House with my hon. friend from the Quills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the Minister of Agriculture 

with just a small point that the Premier . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you can if you like. 

 

Well we're having a little bit of fun in here in question period 

prior to the budget.  One thing that I'm sure the Premier and I 

and the members of the legislature and all the visiting guests 

and indeed the people of the province do recognize:  during the 

last campaign and today, there was and there is a rural crisis, 

serious crisis.  And we can kibitz in here and we can have some 

good fun, but people know that it was real.  Tens of thousands 

of farmers are hurting and indeed thousands came out in a 

campaign.  And I believe, Mr. Premier, you said this, and I 

quote:  We're not going to lose more farm families in this time 

of crisis. 

 

Given that and the serious nature of it, I ask the Minister of 

Agriculture who on December 1991 put a freeze on farm 

foreclosures for the people of Saskatchewan to know there'd be 

some . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  

He's gone on almost two minutes.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Could you tell me 

and the members of the legislature, Mr. Minister, how many 

farmers were foreclosed upon in that 90-day period and how 

many were foreclosed upon from March 31 to April 30, 1992? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Leader 

of the Opposition says it's nice to be back.  I say to the Leader 

of the Opposition, it's nice to have you back, so welcome back. 

 

No, we're not having fun.  The fact of the matter is we're 

dealing with serious issues.  I say to the Leader of the 

Opposition two things in quick answer of this question. 

 

First of all, all of us in this legislature should be uniting around 

the fact that the federal government by virtue of its 

constitutional and financial responsibilities, owes the people, 

the farmers of this province, in excess of $500 million on the 

third line of defence, not yet paid for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I say to you, sir, in your absence, 

sir, in your absence -- probably because you weren't here -- 

your caucus members voted against that money for the farmers 

of the province of Saskatchewan, to vote against it. 

 

What we need to be doing is to be making a common cause in 

ensuring that the federal government fulfils its obligations with 

respect to third line of defence, makes the appropriate changes 

to income stability programs, does the job on GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) that we both have talked on 

in the past and have agreed upon.  This is what we should be 

doing. 

 

The question of the foreclosures and the numbers of farmers 

affected, those will be provided for you in due course.  These 

are numbers which we do not have . . . we do not have these 

numbers handy, but they'll be very, very easily available to you 

and we'll make them available to the Leader of the Opposition 

and the members of this Assembly at a very appropriate time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact is that 238 farmers 

received notices of foreclosures from the Farm Land Security 

Board alone between January 1 and April 30 and another 1,200 

received notices from the Farm Debt Review Board during the 

same time period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have got thousands and tens of thousands of 

farmers in trouble in Saskatchewan.  And we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, in a crisis of historic proportions, the cancellation of 

the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program where 

it's gutted, no debt restructuring, farms' costs going up.  And 

we're asking the government of the day to say, will you stick up 

for rural people? 

 

I ask the Premier, if your plan so far has meant 1,200 new 

foreclosures on farm families, then we, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Premier, are going to be waiting to hear your solution of higher 

taxes, higher utility rates, closures of hospitals, penalizing rural 

people. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell this House that you are going to have 

the support for farm families that you promised in the last 

campaign? 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of 

respect to the former premier and Leader of the Opposition, 

that if he was as committed to the farm situation as he 

describes, the first thing that he should have done for 10 years 

is guarded the public treasury and the public purse so that we 

would have the capacity today to deal effectively with all of the 

needs of all of Saskatchewan people.  But he didn't do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I say to the former premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition that if he was as committed to rural 

Saskatchewan as he says, he would not have allowed the 

closure of post offices and VIA Rail; he would not have 

succumbed and acquiesced to the non-payment of the $500 

million third line of defence; he would have not acquiesced to 

the numerous changes that the federal government 

implemented, all of which have hurt rural Saskatchewan and 

farmers.  He would not have done that -- all of the off-loading 

which has taken place. 

 

The reality of the matter is, sir, that what this government is 

endeavouring to do is to put into place a set of solid farm 

policies based around the preservation of the family farm, 

given the financial mess which we have inherited from you, sir.  

And we invite you for the moment to leave behind your 

partisanship and join us in a concerted, all united Saskatchewan 

approach to your friend, the Prime Minister of Canada, and say, 

own up to your obligations to help, not only rural people, but 

all the people of Saskatchewan.  That's our job and you should 

be there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a message 

from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits Estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 1993, and supplementary 

Estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1991, and 

March 31, 1992, and recommends the same to the 

Legislative Assembly.  Signed by Sylvia Fedoruk, O.C., 

S.O.M., Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

the following motion, seconded by the Premier, the member 

from Riversdale: 

 

That Her Honour's message, the Estimates, and 

supplementary Estimates be referred to the 

Committee of Finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

honoured today to present this government's first budget to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Before I go to my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to maintain an honoured tradition in this 

House, and that is present the copy of the speech and the 

Estimates and supplementary Estimates to the two opposition 

political parties. 

 

I want to also indicate that we started a new tradition as part of 

the new, open style of government in Saskatchewan.  And a 

copy of the budget speech and the supporting documents were 

provided to both leaders of the opposition parties at noon today 

for their information so that they could prepare for the speech 

that is going to be delivered at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, last October 

Saskatchewan people turned from secrecy to openness, from 

conflict to co-operation, from inequity to fairness, from 

injustice to compassion.  Today we begin rebuilding 

Saskatchewan together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This government is turning a new 

page in our province's history by restoring sound financial 

management, re-establishing open, honest, accountable 

government, and renewing Saskatchewan's fundamental values.  

This budget is a new beginning.  It has two straightforward 

goals: protection and restoration: protection so that our 

generation, like those before us, can safeguard all that our 

community has built for our children and our grandchildren; 

and restoration so that this province can once again enjoy 

financial freedom, because without it there is no future. 

 

This budget delivers a message of realism from which springs 

hope and optimism.  Now, Mr. Speaker, we inherited a 

financial burden but we're going to provide the leadership that 

is needed to solve it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This financial difficulty cannot be 

wished away, but it can and it will be resolved by working 

together.  And it's going to take all of us to be part of the 

solution for Saskatchewan, because if all of us come together 

now to tackle this unprecedented financial crisis, we will make 

the 1990s Saskatchewan's decade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't deny that it's going to 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

mean some very hard choices, but the measures that I'm 

announcing today set the stage for a positive future in this 

province -- a future that our children and our grandchildren can 

look forward to.  This province has a great future.  The 

opportunities here are almost unlimited if we make the right 

decisions now.  Our present financial predicament is robbing us 

of opportunities, and we have to turn this situation around now 

so that it won't rob our children of their future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, when this 

government took office some six months ago, everyone 

expected the financial situation of the province to be grave.  

People knew that.  But little did anyone know that the true 

extent of the previous administration's irresponsibility in proper 

decision-making and reckless extravagance was to the extent 

that it was. 

 

You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that last spring 

Saskatchewan taxpayers were told that last year's deficit was 

$265 million.  Was it $265 million, Mr. Speaker?  No, it wasn't.  

In fact, after taking office we found that that deficit was in fact 

$960 million.  And it took a series of tough measures but we 

have reduced last year's 1991-92 deficit to $846 million.  Mr. 

Speaker, it can be done and we've shown that it can be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, there's 

something that my parents taught me for which I will for ever 

be grateful.  They taught me that people should be forgiven for 

their mistakes, but the one thing that could never be forgiven 

was dishonesty.  Honesty was not in the last budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and it was not there for the last 10 years.  And for that 

I will never forgive the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because you see, miscalculating the 

deficit was not the exception to the rule during the last 10 

years, it was the order of the day.  In 1986, an election year, the 

members opposite said that the deficit was $389 million.  It 

wasn't $389 million, Mr. Speaker, it was $1.2 billion. 

 

In 1991, again an election year, the members opposite said that 

the deficit would be $265 million, Mr. Speaker.  It wasn't $265 

million, it was almost $600 million more than that.  It is no 

wonder that they arbitrarily shut down this legislature last June 

to avoid public scrutiny of their budget and their spending of 

tax dollars.  Because the scrutiny would have revealed some 

incredible waste; almost $2 million in salaries to provide 

political staff to the Premier's office hidden in other 

departments and Crown corporations; $1,000 a night hotel 

bills, $3,000 a day consultants, and the list goes on and on and 

on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, upon taking office this government acted 

quickly to restore integrity to the province's finances.  The 

legislature was recalled to restore accountability and to rebuild 

public trust.  The Public Accounts and the financial report were 

tabled to outline 

the province's financial position.  An independent Financial 

Management Review Commission was established to open the 

books and recommend ways to improve accountability.  And 

legislation was introduced to end unconscionable severance 

packages. 

 

And millions of dollars in wasteful spending was eliminated -- 

things like closing of the trade offices in Hong Kong and 

Zürich and Minneapolis, saving $2 million a year.  Spending 

on supplies and acquisitions and advertising and travel was 

reduced, saving $28 million.  The Premier's office in Prince 

Albert was closed, saving $150,000 a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new government saved $114 million in only 

six months.  We have turned the corner and ended 10 years of 

blatant mismanagement of taxpayers' dollars. 

 

(1445) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Much has been accomplished, but 

there is still much more to be done.  The legacy of debt and 

mismanagement left by the previous administration extends far 

beyond what any of us could have imagined possible. 

 

In February the Financial Management Review Commission 

reported to the people of Saskatchewan.  Its report exposed the 

reasons why the public lost trust in the previous 

administration's ability to manage the province's finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we didn't wait.  This government acted promptly 

on the commission's proposals to restore public accountability 

and renew public trust.  Almost $1 billion in bad loans and bad 

debts have been written off, including such things as $750 

million in the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation and $184 million in the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation, the vast majority as a result of the 

Rafferty-Alameda project.  Taxpayers have to carry that 

burden, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Independently established accounting principles are being 

adopted, putting Saskatchewan at the forefront in open, honest, 

accounting practices.  The Heritage Fund is being combined 

with the Consolidated Fund to form one major operating 

account for the government.  And the financial well-being of 

our Crown corporations is being restored. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a moment to talk about 

what has been done to our public enterprises.  The previous 

administration plundered our public enterprises to pursue 

unwise investments and cover up ever-increasing, public 

deficits. 

 

In 1991, the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

lost over $600 million.  But that's not all, because in addition 

$875 million in non-recoverable debt was identified, meaning 

that assets under which the debt was originally incurred no 

longer exist or are no longer capable of generating a return high 

enough to service the debt.  The Potash Corporation of 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

Saskatchewan -- now here was an asset that paid hundreds of 

millions of dollars in dividends and taxes to the province.  It 

was privatized at a loss of $361 million, a loss that we now 

have to pay through our taxes. 

 

Crown corporations were called upon to pay dividends to the 

province to cover up budget deficits, even if it meant that they 

had to borrow the money to do it.  That's a loss of $312 million 

that we now have to pay through our taxes.  The Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company -- a Crown corporation so badly 

mismanaged that the Provincial Auditor's report has warranted 

an inquiry by the Department of Justice. 

 

All of these, Mr. Speaker, are losses that you and I and the 

people of Saskatchewan now have to pay through our taxes.  

Well as one who was born and raised here and loves this 

province, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that any government 

which tries to hide its spending, cover up its deficits, and run 

our public enterprises into the ground cannot be forgiven. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to assure you on behalf of 

my colleagues that with this first budget this government is 

changing all of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Our public enterprises will be part 

of rebuilding Saskatchewan.  However, it is not without cost. 

 

As a direct result of restoring the Crown Investments 

Corporation's financial position, the 1992-93 budget deficit will 

increase by $93 million.  And to ensure that our public 

enterprises are accountable to the members of the legislature 

and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, audited financial 

statements for the Crown Investments Corporation will be 

presented to this Assembly for public scrutiny each and every 

year from now on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This government has adopted 

accounting, auditing, and reporting systems to make sure that 

the financial dealings of this province will never be hidden 

from the people of Saskatchewan again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, today our province 

stands at a critical crossroads.  We must choose a path for the 

future and that choice must reflect the harsh realities of what 

the previous administration did to the financial integrity of 

Saskatchewan.  It is simply beyond imagination to think that 

Saskatchewan's financial position deteriorated so much in such 

a short time. 

 

In 1983 the former premier was quoted as saying the following 

and I think he said it in New York to a business crowd.  He 

said, and I quote: Saskatchewan has so much going for it that 

you can afford to mismanage it and still break even.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, he was dead wrong. 

No family could have run their household the way they did run 

this province.  There is not a business or a farm in 

Saskatchewan that could have operated that way and survived.  

A proud history of operating surpluses became an unbroken 

string of deficits year after year after year. 

 

The debt accumulated at an unprecedented pace.  The total debt 

of Saskatchewan increased by $10 billion in 10 years -- $10 

billion in 10 years -- and to what end?  To what benefit? 

 

Well there are some results.  There is a result that every man, 

woman, and child in this province has been saddled with 

$10,000 of new debt -- every single individual person, the 

youngest and the oldest.  The first 17 cents of every dollar that 

your government raises this year will go just to pay interest on 

the money borrowed by the previous administration. 

 

In 1981-1982 government interest charges amounted to only 

$43 million.  Do you know what they are now?  This year 

taxpayers will spend $760 million on interest charges -- more 

than $2 million a day -- $760 million in interest charges. 

 

But consider this.  Imagine the jobs and the economic 

opportunities that could be created with $760 million or the 

educational opportunities that we could provide to our young 

people.  Imagine $760 million cut in taxes this year.  Imagine 

all of that and realize all our community has lost because the 

members opposite would not and could not bring their 

spending and their borrowing under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had neither the courage nor the will.  

Saskatchewan families did not create this situation.  

Saskatchewan's new government did not create this situation.  

Our community has inherited a legacy from that previous 

administration that cannot be forgotten and will not be ignored 

because the responsible path at the crossroads is clear.  We 

must now pay for the mismanagement of the past 10 years.  

The mortgage is due.  We must start to live within our means 

because it is the only way to rebuild Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government has acted decisively to get 

spending under control.  For the last 10 years operating 

expenditures increased on an average of 6 per cent a year.  This 

year, in this budget, operating expenditures will be reduced by 

3 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- However interest on the public debt 

will increase by $237 million -- the largest single increase of 

expenditure in this budget.  And that interest expense is the 

direct result of billions and billions of dollars borrowed over 

the past 10 years.  This borrowing cannot continue.  Steps have 

to be taken to reduce Saskatchewan's deficit.  Spending must be 

brought under control. 

 

My colleagues and I have looked carefully and responsibly in 

evaluating government expenditures and in so doing we did not 

ask more of our community than 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

we have demanded of ourselves.  Cabinet ministers have taken 

a 5 per cent cut in salary.  Extra pay for legislative secretary 

positions has been eliminated.  Allowances for government 

members with extra duties have been reduced.  

Communications allowances for MLAs have been cut by 25 

per cent.  Out-of-scope salary ranges in the public service have 

been frozen.  Advertising and communication budgets in 

government departments will be cut by almost 30 per cent. 

 

Almost 40 boards and commissions are being dissolved and the 

membership of others, including the boards of directors of 

SaskTel and SaskPower and SGI, is being reduced to eliminate 

more than 500 appointments.  In our Crown corporations, 

executive car allowances and other perks are being reduced 

very substantially. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government is leading by example and 

with these actions we have proven that the days of unrestraint 

and reckless spending are over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But that's not enough and we have 

not stopped here.  In addition my colleagues are introducing 

greater cost efficiencies and savings in government operations. 

 

The Family Foundation will be eliminated and its priority 

functions amalgamated with other departments.  The Farm 

Ownership Board will be merged with the Farm Land Security 

Board to consolidate services.  The communications policy unit 

in the Department of Education will be eliminated.  And 

funding available for payments to physicians will be reduced.  

Fair and open tendering is being restored again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that this is not 

the end of our search, but the beginning of a process that will 

see government operations managed more cost effectively in 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But all our community has had to 

be involved.  Expenditure reductions has also involved our 

hospitals and our universities and our schools and our 

municipalities.  Their funding has been reduced this year and 

will be reduced further next year.  Over the next two years the 

government will work with local authorities to find greater cost 

efficiencies, improved services, and plan for the future based 

on local priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the grim reality today is that the previous 

administration mortgaged our children's future, and that's why 

we can no longer pay for all of the services that governments 

provide.  Programs that we simply cannot afford will be 

eliminated.  And other programs will be modified to ensure that 

they can continue during this fiscal crisis. 

 

And I want to say to the House, Mr. Speaker, and to the people 

of Saskatchewan, that in total, expenditure reductions in this 

budget amount to $344 million.  More than 20 programs are 

being eliminated.  Some with some difficulty, but it has been 

necessary because of the 

financial situation. 

 

Programs like the mortgage protection plan, the Saskatchewan 

pension plan, operation quick start, and feed grain adjustment 

program are the programs that are being modified to ensure 

that they continue during this fiscal crisis. 

 

Because the important thing here, Mr. Speaker, is that if we 

don't get the financial affairs of this province under control and 

managed well, many of the social services and health care 

programs that we now have we are in danger of losing.  And 

we were not elected to let that happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And as a result, optometric services 

will continue to be provided free of charge to low income 

seniors and families, as well as children under the age of 18.  

But all others will pay for eye examinations. 

 

Funding for chiropractic services will be reduced.  

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan will be changed to save 

$27 million this year, and costs will rise for most Saskatchewan 

residents.  But those most vulnerable to excessive hardship will 

be protected.  In addition the senior citizens' heritage program 

will be changed to target benefits more directly to lower 

income seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget does not introduce health care 

premiums. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the details on these and many other initiatives that are 

included would be provided by my cabinet colleagues in the 

days ahead. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, difficult decisions were demanded, and 

difficult decisions were made.  But our children did not create 

this financial crisis, and we have no right to burden them with 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In 1984 the minister of Finance at 

the time, Bob Andrew, said -- and he was correct in this quote 

-- he said the following.  He said: I believe that all governments 

must work in concert to reduce budget deficits.  Failure to 

accomplish this will force harsh financial penalties on our 

children.  It is inevitable that mounting deficits will result in 

unwanted reductions in government services and tax increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he was seemingly unaware in 1984 of just how 

quickly his government's failure to reduce budget deficit would 

cripple our community and require the things that he 

forewarned about to have to happen.  And as members opposite 

know, deficits are just deferred taxes.  The bill has come due.  

And as a result, some tax measures are required to reduce this 

deficit -- tax measures which are made necessary because of 

the 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

mismanagement and the irresponsibility of the former 

government during the whole of the last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And so today we ask everyone in 

our community to join in restoring financial help in 

Saskatchewan based on their ability to do so.  A 10 per cent 

deficit surtax will be introduced on the personal income tax 

system effective July 1. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, an increase in personal income tax is the 

fairest way of asking those who can most afford it to contribute 

to the deficit reduction and the restoration of financial 

well-being in Saskatchewan. 

 

The corporate sector will also be asked to contribute to deficit 

reduction.  The general corporation income tax rate will 

increase to 17 per cent effective January 1.  The corporation 

capital tax surcharge rate on resource corporations will increase 

to 3 per cent effective April 1, and the corporation capital tax 

on the financial institutions will be increased to 3.2 . . . three 

and a quarter per cent effective April 1. 

 

And further, as of midnight tonight, the tobacco tax will be 

increased by 33 cents a package of 25 cigarettes, with similar 

increases for other tobacco products.  And the education and 

health tax will be increased by 1 percentage point that will be 

extended to include tobacco products. 

 

The tax on gasoline and diesel fuel will be increased by 3 cents 

per litre. 

 

Now in addition, Mr. Speaker, the farm fuel tax exemption for 

gasoline will be restructured so that its very important benefits 

are distributed fairly throughout the farming community. 

 

Effective midnight tonight, bulk dealers will be required to 

collect a fuel tax on their sales of gasoline to farmers and other 

primary producers, and the current farm fuel tax exemption 

will be replaced by an annual rebate program.  But this will not 

apply to diesel fuel.  This change, Mr. Speaker, is being made 

necessary to ensure that the farm fuel tax exemption is 

provided only to those persons in the farm community who are 

entitled to it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today all of our community has to pay for 

the mistakes of the members opposite.  These tax changes 

necessary to reduce the deficit are a direct consequence of their 

mistakes.  And I say to them, Mr. Speaker, you jeopardized 

everybody's future with 10 years of runaway spending and 

uncontrolled deficits and for that Saskatchewan people will for 

ever hold you responsible for this burden. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me take a moment to put the 

depth of the previous administration's legacy into perspective.  

The revenue and expenditure measures contained in this budget 

would represent an operating surplus for the province of $243 

million.  Let me say that again, Mr. Speaker: the revenue and 

the expenditure 

measures in this budget would represent an operating surplus of 

$243 million, except for one thing -- the payment of $760 

million in interest charges, money spent paying for the 

previous administration's mistakes.  And that's shameful, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Overall, including the interest charges on the debt accumulated 

over the last 10 years, the province's deficit will be $517 

million, down more than $300 million from last year.  We have 

established a clear, downward trend in the province's deficit 

trajectory and we are adamant about staying that course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the 

province's financial situation, this government is determined to 

protect the most vulnerable members of our community.  And 

I'm pleased to be able to announce that the Saskatchewan child 

tax reduction for low income families will be increased by 25 

per cent to $250 per child annually, effective July 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Funding for child hunger programs 

will be increased by 35 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Grants for child-care centres will be 

increased by 21 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Rates for the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan will be increased by $120 annually.  Home care funding 

will be increased by nearly 20 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Twenty-eight million dollars in 

additional funding for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan will 

be provided; and the new community employment program 

will create 1,000 jobs and help Saskatchewan communities 

undertake worthwhile projects. 

 

In addition, the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan special 

allowance for the disabled will be increased by 25 per cent.  

Transit assistance for the disabled will be increased by 15 per 

cent. 

 

Four million dollars has been targeted to meet priority water 

and sewer infrastructure needs in northern communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The northern food allowance in the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan will be doubled to $50 a month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, we are 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

committed to compassionate policies and that commitment is 

reflected in this first New Democratic government budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Even when we have to apply tough 

measures in a budget of restraint, because we have to deal with 

the financial circumstances of this province, we have paid 

attention to those who are most in need in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, rebuilding 

Saskatchewan together also means working to address the 

critical situation facing our rural communities and our farm 

families. 

 

The farm trek to Ottawa in November marked the beginning of 

a concerted effort to find long-term solutions to the problems in 

agriculture -- debt and income.  To begin to address the 

problem of farm debt, this government will act on the 

recommendations of the Farm Debt Advisory Committee by 

establishing a six-year leaseback program for farmers, 

developing a voluntary farm debt mediation process, enabling 

farm families to offer additional security to access operating 

and other credit, and examine alternate forms of financing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And as for farm income, we began 

six months ago with totally inadequate farm safety net 

programs agreed by the previous administration.  And with the 

advice of a producers' committee we've been able to make 

some changes to the gross revenue insurance plan this year.  

However, Mr. Speaker, these changes are only modifications to 

a fundamentally flawed program.  We recognize that. 

 

This government will continue to negotiate with the federal 

government for an effective program for Saskatchewan 

farmers.  Ottawa promised an adequate income stabilization 

program and we're going to do all that we can to make Ottawa 

keep its promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, while Saskatchewan 

farmers face the most serious crisis since the 1930s, the 

government in Ottawa continues its practice of financial 

off-loading on individuals and provincial governments.  This 

year, this year alone, federal off-loading in agriculture 

programs will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers over $200 million. 

 

This trend started because the previous administration caved in 

to Ottawa's pressure to cost-share programs that were clearly 

the federal government's responsibility.  In total the federal 

off-loading in areas like agriculture and health and education 

mean a loss of more than $500 million to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers in this year alone -- $500 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it were not for the federal government's 

off-loading, this budget would be balanced.  Ottawa is 

abdicating its responsibility to promote and protect agriculture 

and vital social programs like health and education.  Ottawa's 

failure is hurting Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me assure you that 

within our limited financial resources, this government will do 

all it can to meet the needs of Saskatchewan families.  The 

budget I am presenting here today launches major new 

initiatives to enhance wellness and prevention, including 

important initiatives like forming new partnerships with 

Saskatchewan communities to promote the development of 

community-based services, focusing resources on prevention of 

illness, addressing urgent health needs in northern 

Saskatchewan, enhancing mental health services, and 

encouraging healthy life-styles. 

 

These measures reflect our commitment to community-based, 

community-driven health care founded on wellness and 

prevention, Mr. Speaker.  The people of Saskatchewan and my 

party together pioneered medicare.  Today the people of 

Saskatchewan and this government together will forge ahead, 

building a new generation of health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget provides 

$20 million for family support programs, including new 

initiatives like counselling and services for expectant teen-age 

mothers; a community-based family planning initiative; and 

measures to address the problem of family violence. 

 

Programs currently available throughout government to meet 

the diverse needs of Saskatchewan women will receive greater 

funding this year, including the breast cancer screening 

program, child-care facilities, the automatic enforcement of 

maintenance orders, child-care services in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With this budget, the government has turned the corner and 

renewed Saskatchewan's fundamental values of fairness and 

compassion.  This budget is a new beginning for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- One of the most important priorities 

for Saskatchewan people has to be stimulating economic 

opportunities and creating jobs.  And in sharp contrast to the 

financial position of the government, the underlying strength of 

our economy is good reason for hope and optimism.  

Saskatchewan's economy is strong. 

 

The province's rich endowment of resources, the lower interest 

rates, and the lower exchange rate all add up to new 

opportunities for Saskatchewan men and women.  Just look at 

the housing starts -- more than double what they were last year, 

Mr. Speaker.  Government is determined to assist 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and communities to make the 

most of these opportunities in 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

our economy. 

 

And I am pleased therefore, Mr. Speaker, today to announce 

that the small-business corporation income tax rate will be 

reduced to 9 per cent effective July 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And to assist our rural hospitality 

industry, benefits from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board's 

discount policy will be redistributed so that the smaller vendors 

get a larger share; and video lotteries will be introduced, 

starting along the international border. 

 

And to keep our manufacturing and processing industries 

competitive with other provinces and to protect jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, the education and health tax on direct agents used in 

manufacturing and processing activities will be phased out over 

the next three years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Initiatives to enable co-operative 

and private and public sectors to work together in partnership 

to invest directly in Saskatchewan business will be undertaken.  

And funding for a new institute for energy conservation and 

development will be provided in this budget.  These positive 

measures, Mr. Speaker, will provide jobs today and economic 

opportunities for our future. 

 

But that's not all.  Our Crown corporations will also develop 

new and more effective ways to contribute to Saskatchewan's 

economic future.  In co-operation with the private sector, 

Saskatchewan Power is exploring new co-generation projects 

which will strengthen economic development.  SaskTel 

International is actively engaged in foreign markets, providing 

jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan people and 

telecommunication services for other nations. 

 

Funding in this budget and the activities of the Crown 

corporations, including capital and environmental projects and 

student summer employment and new housing initiatives, will 

provide economic opportunities and create thousands of jobs 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Premier's Economic Action 

Committee will develop a long-term economic strategy for 

Saskatchewan through an effective, co-operative partnership 

with all sectors of our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ours is an approach based on the belief that while we compete 

in a global economy, achieving success depends on working 

together at home.  The whole purpose of producing greater 

wealth, more goods, and better services, is surely to make life 

better -- not only the standard of living but the quality of life. 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And like generations before us, by 

following the principle of co-operation, we will rebuild 

Saskatchewan together and that is the opportunity of the 1990s 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All the people in Saskatchewan 

know, members in this House know, that this province has a 

proud history of pulling together during tough times.  That is a 

kind of creative, co-operative effort that is needed today.  In 

every community, large and small, no matter where they may 

be, people believe that we have got what it takes to turn things 

around right here at home.  And as I travel from one end of this 

province to the other, people everywhere talk about the need to 

pull together and to fight for the future.  They want to work 

together in a significant and a meaningful way to overcome the 

difficult financial situation. 

 

They want an opportunity to invest directly in rebuilding 

Saskatchewan.  People want government's borrowing outside 

of the province reduced.  And they're tired of seeing millions of 

dollars in interest payments leave this province each and every 

year.  Saskatchewan people know that their hard-earned dollars 

could be better spent right here working for our communities 

and our families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We recognize that, Mr. Speaker.  

This government recognized that because we'll listen to the 

people.  And I'm pleased to announce today that your 

government is going to provide that opportunity and 

Saskatchewan savings bonds for Saskatchewan people will be 

introduced in June. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We're going to show the world that 

we've got what it takes to turn this around and make the 1990s 

Saskatchewan's decade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget is 

founded on fiscal responsibility, public accountability, fairness, 

compassion, and economic reality.  Fiscal responsibility 

because we are defining the road to recovery and working 

towards financial freedom.  Public accountability because we 

are laying a solid foundation to provide open and honest 

government.  Fairness because we are calling on all of our 

community to join us in rebuilding this great province.  

Compassion because we will protect those most vulnerable in 

our community.  And economic reality because stimulating 

economic opportunities and helping to create jobs is a vital part 

of rebuilding Saskatchewan. 

 

Today is a new beginning in this province.  Today we begin to 

confront the future with high hopes and great faith, secure in 

the knowledge that New Democratic governments throughout 

our province's history have been successful in achieving their 

mandates. 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They've been successful in 

achieving their mandates, and as they have succeeded, so too 

will we. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It will not be easy.  Nothing this 

important ever is.  While we have to pay for the mistakes of the 

previous administration, let us look forward to the day when 

our community can join together in celebrating our financial 

freedom. 

 

Let us look forward to the day when we can tell our children 

that though we entered the 1990s plagued by financial crisis, 

we made the difficult decisions.  We turned a new page in our 

history and we put this province firmly on the path to 

prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is now time to rebuild Saskatchewan together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I now move, 

seconded by my colleague, the House Leader, the member 

from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to thank the Minister of Finance for sending the 

copy of the budget across at 12 noon today.  I think that is an 

important tradition that should be respected in this House from 

now on, and I congratulate him on it. 

 

I must say however, Mr. Speaker, that it does take that extra 

amount of time when one has this much deception to go 

through, so I did enjoy the extra hour and a half. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers' dollars were at work today.  They 

were at work today in presenting this budget address to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In my seven years in this Assembly, and from those that I've 

talked to that have served here a lot longer than I, they say they 

have never seen a document as political, as full of political 

attack and deception, as this one is.  Mr. Speaker, I say to the 

Hon. Premier, your Sunday night video of last week was paid 

for by members of the New Democratic Party.  In my view, 

and I think others around this province will support me, this 

document here should have been paid for by the NDP party and 

not the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, it was only a few short months 

ago in this very Assembly that I heard the members of the then 

opposition saying: axe the tax.  And I heard them all around 

our province saying to taxpayers in this province: axe the tax.  

They said that $180 million that was the free choice of 

taxpayers to pay is better than the 

500 million that we say the taxpayers are paying today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governing is making choices.  Governing is 

simply not political rhetoric.  It is making choices that are fair.  

It is making choices that are honest.  And the choices that I 

have seen made for the people of Saskatchewan today in this 

budget are neither fair nor honest.  Because if they were, then 

the members of that government would have lived up to their 

word to Saskatchewan voters last October.  They were quoted, 

member after member after member, as saying: 4.5 is enough.  

There would be no new taxes for at least four years under a 

New Democratic government.  There would never be the things 

that we have seen in this budget today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe if this budget as presented by that 

political party had been presented last October, they wouldn't 

be government today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, we've seen a document that 

bloats the deficit unnecessarily.  And I don't say that, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't say that, Mr. Speaker, from a partisan point of 

view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers as presented by the Finance minister 

today only confirm what the hand-picked economists for 

organized labour said in their submission to cabinet a short 

while ago. 

 

They said, Mr. Finance Minister, you are taking charges that 

don't need to accrue to this budget year and moving them up to 

inflate your deficit by a half a billion dollars. 

 

And by doing that, Mr. Finance Minister, you are putting a 

jeopardy to jobs of hundreds of Saskatchewan people.  You are 

being fiscally irresponsible because of the increased debt 

charges that will occur quicker than they need to. 

 

And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, the only reason that that was 

done in this document was so that that Finance minister and 

that government could try and cover their political tracks with 

the people of this province who they promised a short six 

months ago never to do any of the things that they have done 

today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think every taxpayer in this province 

agrees that deficit reduction is fundamental for the well-being 

of our province in the future.  And everybody says it must be 

done in a fair and equitable manner. 

 

I appreciate the Minister of Finance saying today in this 

Chamber that small business, the engine of growth in our 

society, needs help.  And we'll be watching with interest the 

numbers that were laid out today to see exactly how much help 

there is in the reduction of 10 per cent to 9. 

 

I'm glad to hear him say today that he is going to adopt some 

different auditing and accounting principles that have been 

recommended by the national chartered accountants' 

association of Canada.  I think all taxpayers look forward to 

those PSAAC (Public Sector Accounting and Auditing 

Committee) guidelines. 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1992 

But I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, given the numbers that we've 

seen today, how small business is going to cope with things 

like the high increases in personal income tax; how they are 

going to cope with the high increases in all of the utilities and 

services that they use in their everyday business lives -- how 

they are going to cope.  How they are going to cope with the 

necessary increases from our municipal level, because the 

provincial government has abrogated its responsibility today 

and has off-loaded as much as any other system of government 

that we've seen in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope, as far as small business is 

concerned, that The Freedom of Information Act brought in by 

the former government last year is applied properly by this 

government of the day.  That members of the media, that 

members of the taxpayers' association, that any person in this 

province who applies to this government for information will 

not have to go through the appeal process time and time again 

to get that information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance today made great light of 

some numbers.  And I say to you today and to members of this 

Assembly and to the public gathered here and watching on 

television, that the leader, our Premier of Saskatchewan, knew 

last fall, knew last summer, has known for a long time certain 

premises about the finances of this provinces that he has tried 

to cover up today. 

 

That number that the Minister of Finance talks about today -- 

that 265 that he made such light of -- was a harmonized 265.  

And the minute that you pull 180 million out, you must add 

that on to the deficit.  And the Minister of Finance well knows 

that the difference in the sign-up program for the '91 GRIP 

contract increased the cost to the province of Saskatchewan by 

$58 million. 

 

You take 265 and 180 and 58 and you're at 503 already, Mr. 

Speaker, 503 already.  That Minister of Finance has said in this 

Chamber before that there were other costs.  I think he 

identified 121 million, as he called them, incidental costs to 

government.  You keep adding them on, Mr. Speaker, and you 

come up with numbers that aren't that far different than what 

this Assembly was presented last year at budget time. 

 

(1530) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that budget was predicated on certain things 

that the hidebound ideology of this government will not allow 

it to happen.  It will not allow things like AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) to occur in this province, which could 

employ thousands of our citizens. 

 

It means that share offerings in government enterprise will not 

occur even though many people in the private sector have told 

publicly and privately to our Premier that that may be the best 

way to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you are hidebound by ideology, if you cancel a 

very fair tax because you have a strong desire to get elected 

and you bloat your deficit by half a billion dollars, then you 

have the budget that was presented to this Assembly today.  

And that is done on the backs of the taxpayers of this province.  

And, Mr. Speaker, people out 

there, I think, will be questioning the choices that were made 

today, because as I said before, choices demand leadership.  

Choices don't necessarily need partisan rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance neglected to tell the 

people today about the 500 pink slips that are being issued to 

people in the Government of Saskatchewan.  They just 

dismissed that as irrelevant. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying today, that the former 

government believed that there were efficiencies that needed to 

be achieved in government services and that there are 

down-sizing and amalgamations and many things that we can 

do as legislators and as taxpayers that make sense in this 

province.  But, Mr. Speaker, when 500 people are getting pink 

slips because these people are trying to cover their political 

tracks and the promises they made to this province last year, 

then that is inherently unfair to those people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And I say to the Premier today, the promise 

that your Justice minister made to this House yesterday will be 

watched very carefully because he said that not one of those 

people who are getting a pink slip today from your Finance 

minister will have their job back-filled by an NDP partisan.  

And, sir, we will watch very carefully to make sure that doesn't 

happen, because, sir, unfortunately your track record so far in 

that regard is not good - 

_ is not good. 

 

It was interesting to note today, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister 

of Finance talked about his down-sizing efforts -- how they had 

amalgamated agencies and therefore helped out the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  And yet in the Premier's own 

throne speech of a week ago, he brags about appointing 580 

people to government agencies, boards, and commissions in the 

province of Saskatchewan; 580 in six short months.  And my 

guess would be, Mr. Speaker, my guess would be that most of 

them would be friends of the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, Donald Gass said that this Premier knew the state 

of the finances in this province.  Organized labour's 

independent analysis says that this Premier knew.  Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan, as they fill up with 

purple gas, will know that this Premier not only knew but has 

broken every promise made a short six months ago in that 

election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say on the budget presented 

to us today so I will ask for leave to adjourn till another day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

a motion, seconded by my colleague, the Minister of Health: 



May 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 

resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed 

on Friday, May 8, 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:37 p.m. 

 


