




















































Hansard: August 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2069 

 August 7, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Health to please 

introduce her officials to the House. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair.  

I'd like to introduce the officials.  To my left is Mr. Lawrence 

Krahn, executive director of the medical care insurance branch.  

And immediately behind me, is Mr. Bryan Middlemiss, 

associate executive director of the medical care insurance 

branch, and to my right is Gerald Tegart, Crown solicitor, 

Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Madam Minister, I'm wondering if you could, in as precise 

manner, I suppose, as you are able, to give your viewpoint as to 

why an Act such as Bill no. 71, to amend The Saskatchewan 

Medical Care Insurance Act, is necessary at this time, firstly.  

And secondly, what do you hope to accomplish by making the 

amendments as you are proposing to do here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair.  I believe 

the member opposite is aware that the amendments are dealing 

primarily with budgetary items with respect to chiropractic and 

optometric programs and services.  And I think he is also aware 

that there are provisions in the legislation that deal with 

providing further savings to government by allowing 

Saskatchewan Health to recover monies from SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and other insurance 

companies for medical costs paid in connection with a 

third-party liability. 

 

And so I think the member opposite is very much aware of the 

fact that the legislation has to deal with budgetary items. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And, Madam 

Minister, so if I read your answer correctly then, on two 

occasions now you have indicated that the purpose for these 

amendments is budgetary.  The purpose for these amendments 

have one thing in mind, and that is to save money for the 

government.  Is that correct, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The purpose of the amendments, Mr. 

Chair, is to attempt to get a handle on the $15 billion debt that 

this province has been left with. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What consideration then, Madam Minister, 

have you given to the fact that we are dealing with the health of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan?  What 

degree have you now been willing to accept the deterioration of 

health services for the people of Saskatchewan in your wild 

scramble to save money at all costs?  Could you answer that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is also 

very much aware of the health care programs in other parts of 

this country.  And the amendments that are taking place today 

leave Saskatchewan with a higher quality health care system 

than what we see in many other parts of the country.  And I 

think it's important to bear that in mind. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, we are quite aware that we 

have had a good health system in Saskatchewan, and that is 

something I think that all of us can be proud of.  And it's 

something also, Madam Minister, I would suggest to you, that 

we all want to keep. 

 

Now could you explain to me and to the people who are 

watching and listening to this, what rationale you are using by 

indicating that we will maintain our health services and the 

quality of health services that we have been experiencing, 

while you are at the same time undermining the very fabric, 

undermining the very infrastructure, that allows us to have that 

quality of health care.  Could you explain that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we have provided for safety 

nets for people who can't afford health care services, for 

example.  We have an expanded safety net system in the 

province of Saskatchewan as the result of budgetary measures 

as well. 

 

The fact of the matter is, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

also looking at health care reform inasmuch as there are ways 

of repriorizing spending so that we can make sure that the 

quality of health care is improved and maintained. 

 

Now improving and maintaining the quality of health care 

doesn't mean that every single health care service that is 

available to people will be fully funded by the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  There are services today that aren't funded and 

never have been in the past.  But maintaining quality health 

care doesn't mean that every single service that is available, of 

course, will be funded. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you're saying now that to 

maintain a quality care system for our residents does not mean 

that all of those services have to be fully funded by the 

government.  Now, Madam Minister, that is a contradiction in 

terms of what you have been saying over the last four or five 

years while you were in opposition and while you were the 

opposition Health critic, when you screamed loud and hard any 

time there was only a slight increase in monies provided for 

Health, when you said you would never do that, when you said 

and you chastised us for putting at risk and putting in peril the 

health care system as we knew it in Saskatchewan, while we 

were giving increases. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you are doing directly the opposite.  

Madam Minister, what you are saying to the people of this 

province now is that we are not going to 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

fully fund you.  We're going to undermine you.  We're going to 

reduce the amount of money that Saskatchewan people are 

putting . . . or the Saskatchewan government is putting into 

health services.  Now you're saying now that it does not have to 

be fully funded.  How do you square that with your position 

prior to the election, Madam Minister? 

 

You say also, Madam Minister . . . you made three points, and 

I'm going to ask you questions on those three points.  That was 

my first one.  Secondly, Madam Minister, you say that there 

are some people that cannot afford it.  How are they going to 

be met?  You say that there is going to be an expanded safety 

net.  You said I was aware of your expanded safety net.  No, 

Madam Minister, I am not.  I want you to fully explain to me 

and the people of this province what you meant by your 

expanded safety net.  Explain it to us. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, going back to the second point, the 

people can't afford, that you're going to take care of them, who 

are you talking about, Madam Minister?  Are you talking about 

those on social welfare?  I know they're taken care of.  What 

about the working poor?  What about those that are just beyond 

social welfare but yet are struggling to maintain the dignity of 

their lives and their working lives.  How are you taking care of 

the working poor? 

 

Those are the three areas I would like you to cover, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all let's get the facts on the table 

here -- the truth out.  The fact of the matter is, is there are 

health care services in this province that the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government never funded.  Dental services for 

adults, they never funded them.  We still aren't funding them.  

They never funded certain physiotherapy services, massage 

therapies.  There is a whole range of health care services that 

are not funded. 

 

The point that I was making is not that health care shouldn't be 

funded but that the Government of Saskatchewan can't afford 

to fund every single health care service because we're left with 

a huge debt legacy that the members opposite created and 

imposed, because of their mismanagement, on the people of 

Saskatchewan.  This government is caught between the devil 

and the deep blue sea, as the seniors have said, and must take 

very stern fiscal measures in order to preserve our health care 

programs for future generations. 

 

Now in making those decisions to preserve our health care 

programs within the context of a government and a province 

that is virtually bankrupt, we have to make certain cuts and 

certain decisions that yes, are tough, and we'd rather not, 

believe me, have to make them.  There's absolutely no way we 

want to be making some of these cuts.  We have to do it in 

order to preserve health care programs for future generations, 

to get a handle on your deficit, to get a handle on the mess that 

you left this government. 

 

And so we will.  We've got the courage to make those 

decisions.  And we will help poor people and people on welfare 

to make sure that they have access to health care 

services.  And we've asked health care professionals to 

participate in that process. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is there's another thing that's 

happening in health care that I know the members opposite will 

not recognize because they were unable to understand it when 

they were in government.  We want to look at controlling funds 

in certain areas of health care services and repriorizing 

spending.  For example, if we can move people into their 

homes out of hospitals sooner or keep people in their homes 

sooner, we will save money for other health care programming 

that will provide better outcomes in terms of quality of health. 

 

Now I know the members opposite didn't do that because their 

positions with respect to health care were totally political and 

had nothing to do with health care reform and had nothing to 

do with improving the quality of health -- the outcomes.  They 

didn't understand what the word outcomes meant. 

 

And when we criticized their spending, it was because they 

were pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into things like 

GigaText and who knows what else -- sweetheart deals for 

their friends.  And yet they were engaging in restraint in other 

areas. 

 

The point that has to be made here is this government has had 

restraint right across the board.  It's attempting to get a handle 

on the deficit.  Everyone is going to have to pay their fair share 

of this deficit.  It's not their deficit; it's your deficit.  They are 

going to pay their share of your deficit.  And unfortunately it's 

going to affect social programs.  But if we want to maintain 

those social programs for future generations, these kind of hard 

and difficult and unpopular decisions have to be made.  And 

this government has the courage to do it, because we're doing it 

for our children.  That's why. 

 

(0915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What an irony and contradiction of 

statements, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, does that mean 

now that you've got your political rhetoric off your chest?  Can 

we get on with the business of answering good questions with 

good answers?  You didn't even attempt to answer my 

questions that I posed to you.  You went on to your political 

rhetoric, budgetary driven. 

 

Madam Minister, may I remind you what you were saying prior 

to the election, of how you would be doing more with less, of 

all of this extra money that you would be pouring into Health 

because of the underfunding that the Tories had been 

accomplishing.  Madam Minister, how do you square that? 

 

Prior to the election you said you would be spending more on 

Health.  Now don't give me those buzz words of that 

gobbledegook about GigaText, where you immediately run to 

hide behind.  You knew what the financial situation in this 

province was.  We told you, and we told the people of this 

province what the financial situation was, yet you chose to 

ignore that.  You fully knew the financial situation of this 

province. 

 

And it was your own Donald Gass whose commission 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

said the same thing.  The books were always open.  The books 

were there for interpretation of anyone who knew how to read 

accounting books.  Can I assume from that, Madam Minister, 

that, number one, you didn't bother to read the books because 

you didn't want to know, so that you could go out there and 

make promises that you knew that you couldn't keep?  Or is it 

simply that you are not capable of reading accounting books? 

 

So don't give us that, that you didn't know what the situation, 

the financial situation in Saskatchewan, was prior to the 

election when you, Madam Minister, were running around 

saying that we're going to be spending more money on Health, 

when you criticized us, when you chastised us for only having 

a 4 per cent increase in Health. 

 

Now what are you doing, Madam Minister?  You're doing 

exactly the opposite.  And you're hiding behind the skirt of the 

wellness program to justify what you're doing.  That, Madam 

Minister, is not acceptable. 

 

Now I want to know, Madam Minister, answers to the previous 

questions that I asked.  What are you doing for the working 

poor? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, during the election our 

promise was to balance the books and to get a handle on the 

deficit.  That was the promise of the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) Party during the election. 

 

The promises went on to say that we would improve certain 

programming and services when we could fiscally afford it.  So 

let's get the record straight.  During the election the promise 

was to get a handle on the deficit.  That was the promise of this 

government, and that's what this government is attempting to 

do. 

 

We were saying, as soon as we could afford it, we would also 

improve certain health care services and certain services for 

women and certain services in other areas.  So let's get the 

record straight about what took place during the election. 

 

Now with respect to people who have difficulty providing 

health care service . . . or receiving health care services, for 

example, under the drug plan I have on numerous occasions 

and set out what the safety net is with respect to drugs.  There 

is . . . with respect to optometric services and chiropractic 

services, we are looking after people who are on the 

supplementary health programs, seniors receiving a 

Saskatchewan Income Plan supplement and recipients of the 

Family Income Plan benefits.  And I believe these are some 

8,800 recipients in the latter one; and 21,000 with respect to 

seniors receiving SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan); and 

supplementary health programs, some 62,000 recipients.  And 

this has to do with chiropractic services and optometric 

services. 

 

In the drug area I have set out in this legislature numerous 

times what the safety net is.  If someone feels they cannot 

afford their drugs, whether they are on social assistance or not, 

they can fill out an application form that they pick up at the 

druggist, or they can get it from their MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) or from the Department of Health.  Send 

it into the department, and we will take a 

look at the cost of their drugs, what it is costing the family, as 

well as what sort of means they have to pay for them and 

provide them with assistance.  It may mean removing the 

deductible.  It may mean reducing the co-payment, but 

whatever it is that help these individuals pay for their drugs. 

 

We have also a system whereby in an emergency situation, if 

someone is at a druggist and cannot afford the drugs, the 

druggist can phone the Department of Health -- we have a 

24-hour WATS (wide area telephone service) line -- and get 

permission to fill that prescription in an emergency situation of 

that nature. 

 

So there is a lot of different safety nets that are there to help 

people out who are on social assistance or who are the working 

poor. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A member in support of the minister says, 

good answer.  Well I fail to see any kind of an answer in that at 

all, Madam Minister, when you get up and try to justify over 

300 per cent increase, for example, in the drug plan.  What did 

you say, Madam Minister?  Do you want me to quote your 

comments about the drug plan when we instituted the original 

drug plan?  Do we want to go back to what you said at that 

time?  And now what are you doing, Madam Minister?  You 

have more than tripled -- more than 300 per cent -- from $125 

to $380.  That's the amount that you have done to the drug plan. 

 

This is the government that always said that we would be doing 

so much more for our folks when it comes to health.  Madam 

Minister, your actions are diametrically opposed to what you 

have always been saying and, in part, the reason why you were 

elected.  Because people at that time, in October of '91, chose 

to believe you.  They know now of course that that was a 

drastic error on their part.  At every twist and turn of what your 

government is doing in this legislature and out, you're doing 

exactly the opposite of what you always said. 

 

One twist and turn in your response that I did not follow, 

Madam Minister, was your attempt to answer, what about the 

working poor?  Could you explain to me once more . . . Let's be 

specific. Let's first of all take FIP (Family Income Plan).  How 

does that help? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- All the families who are on the FIP 

program at this point in time, or in the future of course, will 

receive full coverage for chiropractic and optometric services.  

Now people who are on the FIP program are working poor. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Does that include those on the senior income 

plan as well? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- In addition, we have another 21,000 

seniors who are receiving the SIP payments, and they will 

receive full coverage. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And just to refresh my memory, the numbers 

on FIP that would be included are . . . what did you say, 8,000? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 8,800. 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And how many people would be insured 

under SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan)? 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Approximately 60,000. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So according to my calculations then we're 

somewhere around 75,000 people that are insured under these 

plans, both those that are totally without income, totally 

dependent upon government income, and those that are to an 

extent earning their own way by getting some form of 

supplement.  So we're talking about roughly 75,000 people.  Is 

this correct? 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The figure is closer to 90,000.  It's closer 

to 90,000 as opposed to 75.  And with respect to SIP and FIP, 

of course, these are people who are receiving supplements from 

the government and have other income of their own.  They're 

not totally dependent on government.  They are working poor 

or seniors receiving supplements. 
 

Now, with respect to optometric, it's also important to note that 

children under 18 are fully covered. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Madam Minister, what you're telling me, 

and I'll take your figure of 90,000 people then that are covered, 

either as working poor or those fully dependent upon 

government funding -- and that of course, Madam Minister, is 

less than 10 per cent.  We're probably talking about 9 per cent 

of the population.  So we're talking about 91 per cent of the 

population that are going to be affected -- some, I would 

suggest to you, dramatically -- by these decisions that you have 

made. 
 

Now these decisions that you have made that are going to 

impact negatively on over 90 per cent of our population, what 

did you do in making sure that what you were doing was 

something that they agreed with? 
 

I'll repeat the question for the minister, Mr. Chairman, and put 

it as succinctly as I can.  What consultation did you have with 

the people that were going to be most dramatically affected by 

your decisions? 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the election, I want to 

make the point I made earlier.  This government campaigned . . 

. I'm going to tell you about consultation.  On every doorstep in 

my constituency, and likewise with all the members here, we 

talked about getting a handle on the deficit.  And everyone 

wanted to see that occur. 
 

We have had extensive consultation with the people of this 

province in dealing with the financial situation of this province.  

People understood that it would be necessary to take some very 

tough decisions when we get a handle on the deficit in this 

province. 
 

So there has been very substantial consultation about the 

direction that this province should be moving with respect to 

the deficit situation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I can't believe that answer, Mr. Chairman.  I 

can't believe the minister would get up and say what she just 

said.  What you told me, Madam Minister, just now is that you 

understood the full financial difficulties that this province was 

in and that you went 

around campaigning, promising people: elect me; I will 

become Minister of Health and I will gut health services for 

you. 

 

That's what you just said, that people understood.  You just said 

people understood financial problems that this province was 

having and that they were prepared to bite the bullet and take 

all these dramatic, Draconian cut-backs throughout 

government. 

 

You just told me that you went ahead and campaigned that the 

first thing that you would do is increase SGI rates.  You just 

told me that you campaigned that on the basis of the deficit, on 

deficit reduction -- that's what you just said -- that you 

promised people that you would increase their power rates.  

You just told me that you campaigned on the promise that if 

you elect me, I will make sure that there's a 30 per cent 

increase in telephone rates.  That's what you just told me, 

Madam Minister.  And I can't believe this. 

 

And you also just told me that you campaigned that we will cut 

health services by 4 per cent, that we will de-insure diabetics, 

Madam Minister -- that's what you just told me -- because we 

have to fight the deficit.  And we're prepared to fight the deficit 

on the backs of the diabetics.  And you just told me that you 

campaigned and told the people we will cut out optometric 

services; that we will cut out chiropractic services, that people 

understand; that they understood this when they elected an 

NDP government; that they were prepared to do this.  That's 

what you're just telling me, Madam Minister. 

 

That was your consultation?  That's what you mean by 

consultation?  And you also told me now that you have 

consulted with the groups, the care givers.  You've just told me 

that you consulted with the chiropractors of this province prior 

to the decision.  You just told me that the optometrists knew 

what you were going to do to gut their program, that you 

consulted with them, that they understood and that they agreed 

with you. 

 

That's what you're telling me, Madam Minister, when you say, 

prior to the election everybody knew what the situation was 

and we went ahead and told them that we would do these 

things if you were elected. 

 

(0930) 

 

Madam Minister, had you been honest during the election, had 

you been forthright, up front, and told people exactly the litany 

that I have just gone through . . . and essentially what I'm doing 

now is fleshing out your brazen statement.  The people knew 

what would happen if they elected an NDP government, and 

you're doing it all on the premise of deficit reduction.  You're 

doing it all because of the financial situation in this province.  

That's the basis of all of your dealings so far.  So what you're 

saying is, that the end justifies any means that we have to do, 

that we have to use in order to accomplish that end. 

 

Madam Minister, is that what you mean by consultation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite has a very vivid 

imagination.  I make the statement that we campaigned on 

getting a handle on the deficit.  And he 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

tells me and goes on for 10 minutes what I told the people, 

making all sorts of extrapolations.  Well I'm not even going to 

respond to that, because it's plain ridiculous. 

 

What I said was we would get a handle on the deficit, and that's 

what we campaigned on.  The fact of the matter is, is because 

they had played jiggery-pokery with the books for so many 

years, it was necessary for us to set up a commission to look at 

the situation, determine what the financial situation was of the 

province, and then subsequently make decisions to determine 

how we would get a handle on the deficit and where we would 

make budgetary reductions in order to do that. 

 

Those decisions were not made going into the election.  The 

decision was made to get a handle on the deficit.  But where we 

would deal with it specifically was not determined when we 

moved into an election.  We didn't have the information 

available to us to make that decision. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is there are many, many people in 

this province who are prepared to make difficult decisions and 

to support us on difficult decisions because they understand 

that we have to do this to preserve our social programs.  And 

I'm going to quote from a seniors' commentary where the 

seniors themselves say: 

 

 The government found itself caught between the devil and 

the deep blue sea, but without stern economic measures at 

this time the situation would deteriorate even further. 

 

And I would ask the members opposite to listen to this: 

 

 Simply stated, taxpayers in a province of just under one 

million people cannot afford to pay $1.5 million every single 

day just to cover the interest on Saskatchewan's debt -- not 

without placing our cherished social programs in severe 

jeopardy. 

 

The medicine was necessary in the budget.  It was tough to 

swallow.  "The government did its best to be fair". 

 

The fact of the matter is, the member opposite has to wake up 

to the reality that there are many people in this province who 

believe that what we are doing to preserve programs for the 

future, for future generations, is the right measure.  It is tough 

medicine today but it is taken for the purpose of a brighter 

future for everyone in Saskatchewan. 

 

Because if we can get a handle on the debt that is crippling this 

province, if we can get it under control, we can then move 

towards providing higher quality social programs, health care 

programs, education programs, for the people of this province.  

And that's our objective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, let me just remind you once 

more, your own Donald Gass Commission that you love to 

quote all the time said that you, the NDP government, knew 

what the financial situation was, you 

knew what you were getting into.  And yet in spite of that you 

pulled the wool over the people's eyes and said that you would 

do everything to maintain quality health care. 

 

And I'll tell you why -- I'll tell you why you did that.  Because 

a survey taken just prior to the election indicates that: of what 

do you consider to be important in maintaining quality health 

care?  That was a question.  Would you feel that maintaining 

health care at its present level is extremely important in your 

life?  Do you know how many people said yes to that?  

Ninety-five point eight per cent -- 95.8 per cent. 

 

And you knew that.  And you were prepared, you were 

prepared, Madam Minister, to build on that because you knew 

what you had to do in order to get elected.  But I say to you 

again, Madam Minister, in order to get elected you made all 

those wild promises, knowing full well that you would not be 

able to keep them.  Now you are saying that there are many 

people out there who are prepared to sacrifice their health 

system in order to get a hold of the deficit problem. 

 

Now this side of the House -- this side of the House, our party 

-- has no problem with building efficiencies into the system.  It 

is something that we have to do and we recognize it.  But, 

Madam Minister, the direction in which you are going boggles 

the minds of many of the people of Saskatchewan, including 

my own.  I don't understand why your government in so many 

areas is bent on doing things that are counter-productive. 

 

You are, for example, in Agriculture you did away with 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) to save money.  But 

to save $5 million . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I want to remind the member for Quill 

Lakes and the member for Pelly and the member for 

Shaunavon, who have on occasions interrupted with loud 

voices, that the business of the Assembly is consideration of 

the Bill that's before us, and that the Chair is in not much of a 

mood to tolerate any kind of interruption. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I concur with you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm not in a 

very good mood either. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I don't expect any reflections on my 

statements from any of the members. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not in a very good mood either, Madam 

Minister, and so therefore I can see why your colleagues 

around you are getting upset.  I can see why the Associate 

Minister of Finance, the toy minister, is adding his words of 

wisdom to this particular discussion, because you are all upset. 

 

You're all upset because the truth is now being known.  And 

the people of Saskatchewan are seeing how you deliberately 

pulled the wool over their eyes.  And now you are gutting the 

systems.  And before I was so rudely interrupted by your 

colleagues, I was trying to make the point that much of the 

thing that you are doing is counter-productive. 

 

We know that you're trying to save money.  And 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

essentially we do not have a problem with that.  What we have 

a problem with is, number one, you said you wouldn't have to 

do it.  But, number two, you're trying to save money in foolish 

ways.  You're trying to save money that is counter-productive. 

 

You cut the FeedGAP program; you save $5 million.  But in 

the meantime you cause farmers to go broke.  You create a lot 

of anguish and stress in farm families who are teetering on the 

edge, who are almost at death's door.  And you're grabbing 

onto them and trying to pull them through, but in the opposite 

direction -- counter-productive in many, many programs, 

counter-productive in chiropractic services.  So now you're 

going to prevent the people from going to a chiropractor.  You 

know what they're going to do, Madam Minister.  You know 

what they're going to do; they're going to go to a higher-cost 

system.  They're going to go to physiotherapists. 

 

Optometrists, Madam Minister, you're trying to save money by 

de-insuring optometric services.  Where are these folks going 

to wind up ultimately?  In the higher cost factors.  It's going to 

cost you more money in the long run, Madam Minister, 

because what you are doing is counter-productive. 

 

Now what we're going to be doing during the balance of the 

discussion in this committee is to go through that process and 

show you why you're counter-productive.  But, Madam 

Minister, I want you to explain to me now why you think that 

by de-insuring chiropractors, by de-insuring the optometrists, 

you're going to be saving money. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have not de-insured chiropractors.  

The fact of the matter is there is some consumer participation 

with respect to chiropractic services that is affordable.  There 

have been no restrictions put on the need for the care.  There is 

no cap on the number of visits.  Consumers will . . . 

Government I believe pays approximately $7.50 per visit.  The 

average visits that people make are about eight visits a year, 

but there's no cap; if they want to make 100 visits per year, 

they can.  Other provinces have caps.  There's no cap in 

Saskatchewan.  The total average cost will be about 50 or $60 

we anticipate to the consumer who takes eight visits to a 

chiropractor.  So chiropractic services are not de-insured. 

 

On top of that, the working poor on FIP and your social 

assistance people in SIP are fully covered.  So let us be honest 

with the people of Saskatchewan as to what has taken place 

here. 

 

With respect to optometric . . . And I want to say this on 

chiropractic services.  Quebec does not insure them.  Nova 

Scotia does not insure them.  Prince Edward Island does not 

insure them.  Newfoundland does not insure them.  Yukon does 

not insure them, and the North West Territories does not insure 

them.  Other jurisdictions have limits in every other province.  

Saskatchewan has a better chiropractic service system than any 

other province. 

 

So let us get the facts correct.  The member opposite is trying 

to leave the public with the impression that the 

health care system has been gutted.  It has not been gutted, not 

even in the least.  There are safety nets available for the poor 

and the working poor.  With respect to chiropractic services, 

they're still insured.  There's just some consumer participation 

being asked.  With respect to optometric services, children 

under 18 are insured.  Seniors on SIP will be covered.  Family 

Income Plan people are covered.  Social assistance people are 

fully covered.  And the only thing that's de-insured with respect 

to optometric services is the routine eye exam.  If a person has 

an eye disease, it's covered. 

 

So I think it's time for the members opposite to deal with the 

reality of the situation and the real facts, which is that the 

health care system in Saskatchewan is actually being improved.  

And let me show you how it's being improved. 

 

In the health budget this year, home care was increased by 

some 20 per cent -- virtually 20 per cent for home-based 

services.  The fact of the matter is, is that there has been 

enhanced northern nursing, health educator, dental health, and 

mental health services. 

 

There has been increased specialist services in northern 

Saskatchewan.  There have been new bursary programs for 

northern residents, integrated mobile health team to provide 

services with communities, supported by northern health and 

SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission).  There have been substantial measures taken in 

northern Saskatchewan which, incidentally, people in 

Saskatchewan understand but the members opposite may not 

have because they never did make that kind of commitment to 

the North, a huge inequity in health care services and the 

availability of services in northern Saskatchewan.  One of the 

goals of this government is to try to overcome those inequities. 

 

And so the fact of the matter is, is that we are increasing -- it's 

not a lot and it's not enough, but a little bit -- the funding that's 

available to northern Saskatchewan because we have made a 

commitment to try and reduce that inequity.  And we've shown 

that in this budget.  Not with huge amounts of money because 

this government doesn't have it, but it's established a direction. 

 

Now with respect to mental health services.  There are 

increases in funding in mental health services in this budget 

because we also realize that that is another area of great 

inequity that the former government neglected.  And we want 

to do what we can to reduce that inequity. 

 

There again, it needs much more money but we don't have 

unlimited dollars.  We are into a situation where we're trying to 

reduce the spending of government in order to get a handle on 

the deficit.  But we provided what we could in mental health 

services to show that we have a commitment to that area and 

we will slowly work at improving those services within the 

context of a situation that is extremely difficult and that is 

requiring budget reductions right across the board. 

 

So we made a commitment to mental health services and there 

was funding there.  There were other initiatives such as 

increased resources for community therapy programming, 

increased resources for family planning.  This government has 

made a commitment to try and get a 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

handle on the number of unintended pregnancies in the 

province.  So there was increased funding for family planning.  

There was a development of a provincial aid strategy beginning 

with a provincial symposium in June.  There has been family 

violence initiatives in mental health, SADAC, in community 

health, and funding for that. 

 

(0945) 

 

Because these are areas -- and I'm going to get back to this -- 

these are areas where there are outcomes, and we can improve 

the quality of life and the quality of health care.  Because in 

these areas that we've targeted -- mental health, northern 

Saskatchewan, community therapy, home-based services, 

family violence, unintended pregnancies -- if we can somehow 

deal with these problems, we will improve the quality of life 

for people. 

 

Pouring money into capital construction in an unlimited and 

irrational fashion doesn't improve the quality of health and the 

quality of life in the province.  What will improve it is if we 

deal with things like family violence and unintended 

pregnancies, mental health, northern initiatives, and so on.  

That's what's going to improve the health status of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I say good 

morning to Madam Minister and her officials.  I'm pleased to 

have an opportunity to raise concerns over this Bill that I 

sincerely hope you'll be able to clarify for me and take into 

consideration for future changes. 

 

Madam Minister, some of the people who have spoken to me 

as health consumers, as care givers, friends of the ill in our 

province, are quite concerned about the choices that were made 

by your department regarding chiropractic and optometric 

services.  And they believe, and in fact have articulated quite 

well, that they believe that your department failed to 

understand the importance and the integral nature of these 

services in providing preventative care. 

 

Will you provide for me, please, in writing, what consultations 

you had before choosing to make changes to chiropractic and 

optometric services, at what times these meetings were held 

and with whom you spoke. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will ask the department to get together 

whatever information is available on that.  But I wish to remind 

the member opposite that with respect to putting together a 

budget after an October election, a budget where we do have to 

get a handle on the deficit immediately and quickly and in a 

short period of time, takes some necessary measures. In that 

interim there is very little opportunity for extensive 

consultation.  Further, there's the whole issue of budget secrecy 

that we have to consider. 

 

Now if we had gone out to all the individuals in the province 

and said, should we make this cut or this budgetary reduction 

or that budgetary reduction?  Everyone would be lobbying us 

to do nothing, and then the issue becomes whether you do any 

budgetary restraint at all. 

So faced with that kind of difficulty, the need . . . And that's 

why budgets are done within government, and perhaps we have 

to review that process and look at having the whole public 

involved in a budget.  My question is, is do you ever get to the 

point where you get a budget then? 

 

But I do want to say this.  That faced with that difficult 

situation with respect to trying to get this first budget out, I will 

do what I can to provide you with whatever information the 

department has on that issue.  But we are also faced with trying 

to get a budget out and very difficult decisions that were being 

made, tough decisions that the government felt simply had to 

be made. 

 

Now the other thing that I want to point out is that we have had 

extensive consultations with chiropractors and optometrists and 

physicians.  As we were moving in, you will recall there was 

concern being expressed prior to the budget coming out about 

chiropractic services.  We had talked to chiropractors at that 

time. 

 

There was some concern expressed by optometrists that they 

might be de-insured.  We were talking to them, leading up to 

the budget.  There were discussions subsequently, very 

substantial discussions.  And we've had, and I tabled in the 

House, discussions with all sorts of organizations and groups 

and individuals. 

 

As we are moving through this whole reassessment of health 

care, health care reform, and from the . . . actually from 

February on, those discussions may not have been specifically 

with respect to budget cuts.  But they would have been 

discussions of a more general nature. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I guess we'll 

have to agree to disagree, particularly when it comes to 

process. 

 

I happen to believe that the role of bureaucrats and politicians . 

. . first of all the role of the politician is to provide the vision.  

The role of those in the civil service were to hire the best minds 

to help us make the best decisions in the best interests of the 

people.  And the role of the civil service, in my view, is to help 

accomplish what the vision is of government by having the 

expertise to put in place the dollars and cents, for example 

budget-wise, that's within the purview of the dollars and cents 

available to the government. 

 

And I find it rather curious.  My view is that in health care, if 

indeed we had from government a particular sum saying this is 

how much has to be cut from the health care budget, that I 

think that the best people to say where should we be finding a 

savings in the health care field would be from health care 

professionals.  I think that these are the individuals who in fact 

would have the expertise to say, this is where we could save 

monies.  You have spoken on several occasions about 

amalgamations of health boards, the inclusion of people in 

helping to make decisions and transition, etc.  And I just don't 

happen to agree with the process that was used, and we're 

going to have to agree to disagree on this. 

 

I know that there are problems with trying to deal with the 

kinds of money problems that are facing the province, but 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

I happen to think that if we have issues in education for where 

we have to make reductions, that we should be dealing with 

educators.  Similarly if we're dealing with necessary cuts in 

expenditures to health care, we should be going to health care 

people. 

 

And I would like, for your information, to just read to you from 

the optometrists in this province, what they have said to me.  

They've not only said this face to face, but they have said this 

in writing.  And of their six points that they have made 

regarding -- these are the optometric association in 

Saskatchewan -- the six points that they've made in this letter to 

me regarding this particular Bill, I'll read you the first item. 

 

And it states: 

 

 Changes made with absolutely no consultation with ANY of 

the eye specialty professions.  A meeting was held May 3rd 

after the budget leak, between department officials and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists.  The leak was 

neither confirmed nor denied.  At that meeting, (at the 

meeting) the Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists was 

told no prior consultation was permitted.  Later meetings 

were for the sole purpose of implementing the changes. 

 

So on the basis of what people have been saying to me, both in 

writing and in person, I will have to disagree with the 

information that you provided me this morning. 

 

My second question to you, Madam Minister, is that I have 

some difficulty in understanding the decision to de-insure 

preventative services like those offered by optometrists and 

others that would take . . . that really you would do this prior to 

the release of your paper on the wellness model.  I do 

understand that you are attempting to say to the public that you 

have a vision for where you want health care to go, but how do 

you justify making specific changes like this before you come 

up with your overall plan?  I mean, when you have an overall 

plan, you have an understanding of how the component parts fit 

together.  And without this overall plan, your decision to no 

longer deal with these services in a specific way really does 

appear to many like a slash and burn attempt to do one thing, 

and that one thing is to save money, not to improve the health 

care system.  I would like you to please rationalize your 

decision. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite touched on a 

couple of items.  And first of all, I'll deal with the optometric.  

Nova Scotia, as she probably knows, has moved in the same 

direction as Saskatchewan this year by de-insuring routine 

examinations.  Prince Edward Island, it is not an insured 

service, nor is it in Newfoundland.  So this isn't something new 

in Canada.  The fact of the matter is, is it exists in other 

jurisdictions as well. 

 

I think it's also important to note that the government was 

paying $35 for routine eye exams, and I think another $8 for a 

tonometry exam.  The major cost of eye care, the major cost of 

eye care is the price of glasses.  Some people pay several 

hundred dollars for glasses.  Now if society is so concerned 

about a 35 or $40 payment for a routine eye exam, why aren't 

they outrageous about the cost of eye glasses? 

I suggest to the hon. member, it's because the general 

population understands, fully understands the need to get a 

handle on the deficit, and they're prepared to pay for routine 

eye exams. 

 

I also want to point out that eye disease, eye disease is covered.  

If someone has something like retinal detachment, for example, 

or glaucoma, there will be coverage.  And if they see an 

ophthalmologist there will be coverage for eye disease. 

 

Now you asked, how do we justify not coming out with an 

overall plan and making specific changes.  The changes that we 

have made this year are not going to affect our overall plan.  

The budgetary reductions and getting more consumer 

participation with respect to the payment of some health care 

services that aren't core services such as hospitals and doctors, 

that aren't the sort of services that are referred to under the 

Canada Health Act with respect to being core services in health 

care, getting some consumer participation with respect to 

chiropractic services, for example, optometric, and the drug 

plan, does not in any way deflect from our overall plan. 

 

We will be looking at, and as we move through other health 

care decisions in the future, we will be looking at repriorizing a 

lot of our spending by maintaining available service.  We will 

still have in this province the availability of chiropractic 

services for people, of high quality chiropractic services.  

Those who can't afford to pay will be helped.  There'll be full 

coverage for people on FIP who are working poor, and for 

seniors on SIP who need some help. 

 

And the fact of the matter is that we have other services as 

well, like dental care, that is not covered, and some people 

would say is much more important than some of these other 

services that are covered.  That's a reality in our health care 

system right across Canada.  Not all services are covered. 

 

That doesn't affect the health care plan.  That doesn't affect us 

moving to get people to co-ordinate and integrate services on a 

district basis, to look at moving to more home-based services, 

to look at initiatives in the family-planning area, in family 

violence, and in other areas. 

 

And our overall plan is not going to envisage a system where 

the taxpayer pays for every single service that people can get.  

If in community health centres in rural Saskatchewan we move 

towards more chiropody and more chiropractic and more 

physiotherapy, it doesn't mean the taxpayer is going to pay for 

every single one of those things.  That's not part of our plan. 

 

And so there isn't an inconsistency in our plan and the 

decisions that were made in this budget. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With all due 

respect, I think that there are enormous inconsistencies when 

what your government claims to be doing is having a concern 

for wellness and focusing on 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

preventative care. 

 

And I really think that there is a failure to recognize some of 

the component parts of these services such as optometric 

services.  And if you were to go to an individual in this 

province and say, could you in fact, if you had to make a 

choice, live without your teeth or live without your sight, I 

think that you know what that individual would tell you. 

 

And I think the point is this: under no circumstances do I 

believe that the taxpayer has to be paying for every single 

service in this province.  And I think that that's more of the 

point of view of New Democrats than it ever has been Liberals 

in this province. 

 

And when you cite other provinces and simply use them to try 

to justify the decisions that you're making, whether you talk 

about Prince Edward Island or you talk about Nova Scotia or 

New Brunswick, other provinces, what you're not talking about 

is the overall decisions made by these governments and how 

their different departments interrelate. 

 

I don't know if Nova Scotia or Prince Edward Island or other 

provinces profess to be going toward a wellness model.  I don't 

know whether they are saying that their entire focus is on 

preventative care.  So to simply use them as a method of 

justifying the decisions that you're making, I don't think can 

hold water, primarily because that's not what we're talking 

about.  We're not talking about some other province and their 

decision specifically regarding optometric services or any other 

kind of service.  We're talking about the province of 

Saskatchewan, the fact that you have said consistently, day in 

and day out, that we have a wellness model in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1000) 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to see your wellness model for 

Saskatchewan.  The optometric association would like to see 

your model of wellness. People who are seniors who have now 

had their grants cut, who are now having to pay more for 

prescription drugs, who were going to use those grants to pay 

for more costs in their prescription drugs, would like to see 

your wellness model. People who are concerned because 

they're on workmens' compensation and need to have 

chiropractic services and have been very, very concerned by 

some decisions that are made, would like to see your wellness 

model. 

 

And I don't think that it's unfair for me as an elected official or 

for a citizen on the streets of Swift Current, Saskatchewan or in 

the north of Saskatchewan to say, if you are going to change 

our health care system and you say you know what you're 

talking about, you should be able to show us what your 

wellness model is and how the decisions you've made are going 

to impact on different departments and on the people of this 

province. 

 

And that's what concerns me most, is a sense that decisions 

have been made with one concern in mind, the concern being a 

dollar sign.  And I concur with you 100 per cent that the people 

of this province need to be served better in terms of judicious 

use of their tax dollars, in 

being able to get a handle on the deficit, on being able to have a 

handle on the debt of this province. 

 

People are primarily concerned about their quality of life when 

it comes to health, and if you're going to tell people that you 

have a wellness model, then you should be able to show it to 

them.  And that's what I'm asking for.  I'm saying, for months 

and months and months the justification and rationalization for 

doing what you're doing in health care has been one thing -- the 

wellness model and preventative care. 

 

And there are people in this province, be they recipients of 

services or givers of services, who have been saying 

consistently, these decision are not good decisions because 

they're having a deleterious impact on our health, or the 

services that we are providing.  So those receiving the service 

are concerned; those giving the service are concerned. 

 

And I think that it's only fair for you to outline your plan for 

the wellness model and to show people how all of these things 

fit together.  I would very much appreciate if you would 

provide to me some specificity about what your wellness model 

is and when these things are going to be implemented over a 

period of time and what you think the final result will be. 

 

Because we're talking about this kind of thing.  We're talking 

about the optometrists saying that the decisions that were made 

in the Department of Health fail to recognize that good vision 

adds a quality of life no matter at what age; that it fails to 

understand the nature of many disease processes in the eye; 

that the lack of understanding is so evident for what a modern 

optometric examination involves.  In fact they state that much 

of the equipment used in the majority of the tests performed 

have absolutely nothing to do with refraction for glasses. 

 

So when we're talking about this issue, what is concerning me 

is an individual who lives in rural Saskatchewan who is a 

middle-aged diabetic.  And when you say that you're concerned 

about wellness and preventative care, and that individual has 

more and more difficulty being able to access optometric 

services and pay for optometric services because of decisions 

made, that person can become a charge to this province, the 

taxpayers of this province, in an overwhelming way, simply 

because of changes to optometric services which could prevent 

this individual in the long term from losing his sight. 

 

And that's what this is all about.  I again ask you if you would 

provide to me a specific model of wellness that your 

government is going to give the province of Saskatchewan, and 

how your preventative care is going to be the goal that is 

reached by this model. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite says people are 

going to lose their eyesight because we've de-insured routine 

eye exams for people over 18.  And I say that's a gross 

exaggeration.  I don't think there's any evidence to show that 

people will not priorize their spending to save their eyesight.  

The fact of the matter is, is if they have eye disease, it's 

covered.  So the fact of the matter is, is if there's a sickness 

with the eye, there is coverage.  We are 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

talking routine eye exams. 

 

So I think that's an exaggeration on behalf of the member and 

I'm sure she didn't intend to engage in it.  Because there is a lot 

of information being passed around that is an exaggeration on 

this particular issue.  The fact of the matter is . . . and I want to 

say this with respect to the wellness approach.  The member 

seems to think that what the government is going to do is come 

forth with a whole bunch of programs that we're going to 

implement in wellness.  Because the statement was made that, 

what are you going to do when you're putting this wellness into 

effect, what is it going to do?  And I forget the exact wording 

of the member.  I didn't write it down.  But it left me with the 

impression that she felt we were going out and implementing a 

bunch of programs.  We're not. 

 

Wellness is a concept; it is an approach.  It is not a service.  

What we will be doing is talking to communities about the 

concept of wellness and the general approach and direction, 

and getting their input and their ideas about how they can live a 

healthier life, and what sort of programming might be needed. 

 

As we can afford the programming, funding would be offered 

in those areas.  But it will be a developmental approach.  The 

government's not coming forward with a plan that says, we're 

going to provide X number of services here; wham, here it is.  

That's not what's happening.  It'll be a direction.  It's a concept.  

It's an approach.  We'll be having community consultation.  

And it'll be developmental. 

 

So I want to get that clear.  Wellness does not mean there's 

going to be more funding for massage therapy, for example, 

although massage therapy may be very well part of a wellness 

model.  It doesn't mean there's going to be funding for it.  What 

it means is we'll direct people's attention to how they can 

receive better outcomes in terms of health status.  And then 

communities will make a decision as to whether or not they 

want to encourage chiropractors or massage therapists into 

their communities, and whether they want to provide them with 

some financial support for it. 

 

So the government isn't going out and setting up a plan that 

provides all kinds of programming that we call wellness.  It 

isn't.  It's a concept.  And I want the member to understand that 

very fully. 

 

The member also made comments about using other 

jurisdictions to justify budgetary reductions.  And I want to say 

that that's not what I did.  What I did was point out to the 

public of Saskatchewan what the situation is across Canada.  I 

think it's important that people in Saskatchewan know what is 

happening in other jurisdictions. 

 

And I also want to say this: that they're right across this 

country, right across Canada, people are saying that there has 

to be cost containment of health care services.  At the last 

Health ministers' conference, that was the topic of discussion.  

People want to look for ways to improve the quality of health 

care, but still contain health care costs. 

 

And so when we talk in terms of wellness, it's an attempt 

by our government to look at improving health status in this 

province by repriorizing spending and by some co-ordination 

and integration and efficiencies being created in the system, not 

by increasing spending, but by doing it in a responsible way, 

vis-a-vis the taxpayer and the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is being discussed right across this country, ways that 

we can move towards better health status and yet contain costs.  

We have to do it by repriorizing spending, by perhaps more 

consumer participation in some services like chiropractic 

services, still making available to the public the service, but 

putting it in a different context than before. 

 

I believe that it is absolutely crucial that we preserve our 

medicare system in Canada.  We will not be able to do it in 

Saskatchewan if the debt in this province continues to escalate.  

Any budgetary reductions in the future will be made by 

Toronto and New York if we don't get a handle on this budget.  

And so it is absolutely crucial that the Government of 

Saskatchewan get a handle on the deficit in order to preserve 

health care programs for the future.  And I would say that 

there's a lot of people across this province who understand that. 

 

But in the weeks to come, Madam Member, we will be coming 

forward with more clarification on the general direction in 

health care.  And I would be prepared to sit down on a 

one-on-one basis and just describe what some of our thoughts 

are on that and get any input from you that you might think 

would be helpful as we move into a new direction and health 

care reform. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have some guests in 

the gallery today.  There's 12 people from the Open Door 

Society, and their teacher, Carolyn Petersen.  I am very happy 

to welcome them here and look forward to meeting after for 

drinks in the members' lounge.  And we'll meet on the steps 

outside for photographs after.  Thank you for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins the member for Regina Lake 

Centre in welcoming guests. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, I guess 

there's a part of me that is somewhat concerned that you feel 

the need to preach to me about wellness model being a concept.  

I've been a health care professional for years.  I've not only 

taught university in the field, I've dealt with 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

people who have very serious problems, been in the employ of 

the Centre for Agricultural Medicine at the College of 

Medicine. 

 

And I too am very interested in preserving the medicare system 

-- not simply because I've been a health care provider, but 

because I've been the recipient of the health care system in such 

a way that for many, many years without their services I would 

not have been able to walk into this Assembly today.  And had 

I lived in another nation, my family would have been bankrupt 

because of their need to pay for services to care for me.  So I 

find it very condescending and quite unacceptable that you felt 

a need to tell me that the wellness model is a concept. 

 

What I was referring to about using other jurisdictions is the 

fact that people can be misled by simply giving them one piece 

of the puzzle.  And I'm going to use an example here of what I 

have quite a lot of concern about in our own province and with 

your department and other departments of government. 

 

(1015) 

 

There seems to be little acknowledgement about the 

interrelationship between various departments.  Decisions 

made for budgetary reasons in the Department of Health can 

have an extraordinary impact on the Department of Social 

Services, the people who receive services from them or, for 

that matter, the ministry in charge of seniors.  Changes in one 

department can in fact have such an important impact on the 

service to people in our province. 

 

And I'll use an example which I cited earlier.  There have been 

cuts to seniors who live in subsidized housing.  The minister in 

charge gave a very reasonable explanation as to why this had 

changed, why this change was necessary, how in fact there was 

a contingency plan in place and this was not going to have an 

impact on these individuals. 

 

However, I do get calls from people.  It's unusual for people to 

call in great numbers about anything.  But elderly people are 

very concerned about this.  And you want to know why they're 

concerned?  It's not so much what happened -- that the minister 

in charge did in that department -- it's the impact that that 

decision is going to have on decisions made in conjunction 

with what you have done in your ministry, namely the fact that 

prescription drug costs have gone up.  And so people were 

going to use this particular extra funding as seniors in 

subsidized housing to pay for the added costs in prescription 

drug care. 

 

Now I really would like for you to explain to the people in this 

province how your department studied this; how your 

department studied the changes to the drug plan and other 

kinds of health responsibilities, and how that would have an 

impact on people who are high risk and what sorts of studies 

were done, impact analyses were done to look at changes that 

were occurring to save monies in other kinds of departments of 

government.  And such people as seniors, or whether they be 

low income earners or aboriginal peoples -- high risk 

individuals -- where a change in any way in their income can 

be . . . really have such serious results because of one change in 

the 

Department of Health. 

 

Were there studies done to look at the changes that were done 

department by department and the interrelationship of those 

departments, the impact that it would have on people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  I think that is a 

very important point that the member opposite has brought up 

and I want to say this.  That there were extensive consultations 

amongst departments with respect to the various impacts that 

budget changes would have on individuals being under the 

ambit or the jurisdiction of different departments. 

 

We also have an ongoing committee that reviews that situation 

and looks at impacts and how it's going to affect people and 

how we can co-ordinate these different programs and so on, 

with respect to budget restraints.  So it is very much in the 

forefront of our thinking.  It is something that we are analysing 

on a regular basis. 

 

We also have ongoing interdepartmental committees on a 

number of different issues pertaining to health, and the 

implementation of a more holistic approach towards health 

care.  And I think that your concern in this area is a valid 

concern.  It's something that we are also concerned about and 

we are dealing with it on an ongoing basis. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wish to go 

back to one of the things that we'd talked about earlier and 

that's regarding optometric services.  Unlike what you have 

told this Assembly, people with eye disease are not covered.  

There is no coverage for people with eye disease to see an 

optometrist no matter how serious.  They can only see an 

ophthalmologist. 

 

You seem to think that this won't hurt people with eye disease, 

and that is absolutely incorrect.  What this will do for people in 

rural areas where there is no access to ophthalmologists, is 

going to be very, very serious.  And the example that I used 

with an individual who has diabetes who needs regular access 

to an optometrist, this individual is going to be in very serious 

trouble. 

 

There are not enough ophthalmologists in the province of 

Saskatchewan so people are going to have to wait.  And 

because of this wait they are going to have to put at risk their 

health care.  And I can tell you, we're going to see some people 

whose health care is going to be declining as far as their 

particular eye care. 

 

I would like to understand how you can justify this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- If the people have eye disease, it is 

covered by medicare. They can go and see a medical 

practitioner who will look after the eye disease problem.  It's 

covered by medicare. 

 

With respect to routine examinations, they've been de-insured.  

And if there's follow-up, just to check the eye exam, that's not 

insured. But a person who has a disease and requires a medical 

practitioner to look at it, it's covered by medical care. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Madam Minister, but the point 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

I'm making is that it's more money to go to an ophthalmologist 

than it is to go to an optometrist.  And someone who needs 

ongoing eye care, like an individual who is at risk for going 

blind because of diabetes, this makes absolutely no sense 

whatsoever. 

 

And if I may, I'll put in this context, because of what happened 

in Alberta -- you seem compelled and deeply rooted in wanting 

to use other provinces as an example.  Then I find it interesting 

that you've chosen to neglect to mention the province of 

Alberta who, by the way, did precisely what your government 

has been doing, and after monitoring the situation, has turned 

around and completely changed the decisions that they made 

because they recognized that they had made a mistake. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I did not choose to neglect to mention 

Alberta.  And I resent the innuendo in that statement.  I did not 

mention Alberta because it's not de-insured in Alberta.  I 

mentioned the provinces within which it was de-insured. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that with respect to medical 

conditions, my advisors tell me that although optometrists can 

identify medical conditions, that a medical eye condition 

should be treated by a physician.  And so I want to make that 

particular point.  Now with respect to . . .  However, 

optometrists can identify many of these medical conditions, so 

I think I've responded to your question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, I would hope that your 

officials looked across the nation, if in fact what they've been 

doing is trying to look at what the Maritimes is doing to lend 

support to what the province of Saskatchewan is doing. 

 

The province of Alberta did indeed de-insure.  They de-insured 

optometric services.  They have now reinsured optometric 

services.  And they have reinsured this because what they 

found was that there were so many waiting-lists for 

ophthalmologists, that they learned their lesson. 

 

Now what we're talking about here, even if you're not 

concerned or you have fewer concerns about the long-term 

health care of people who are not in a position of being well 

because right now they're not being well, if you're only 

concerned about dollars and cents, then it doesn't make some 

sense at all to be focusing on having ophthalmologists be more 

responsible for eye examinations and referrals and the costs 

therein, than simply having people who are in optometry, who 

identify the majority of diseases in this province and then make 

the appropriate referrals to those who are specialists who can 

treat them.  I'd like your comments, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite obviously isn't 

aware of the fact that with respect to routine eye exams that 

they are de-insured for ophthalmologists as well.  So the 

problem that existed in Alberta is of a different nature.  Also 

the fact of the matter is, is the medical association is helping us 

to manage this issue to ensure that it's fair for all residents.  So 

if a routine eye exam is de-insured for optometrists, it's also 

de-insured for ophthalmologists. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, I'll actually leave the rest 

of my questioning with the exception of one. 

 

Earlier I asked if you would provide me with your wellness 

model.  You indicated to the Assembly that your wellness 

model is simply a concept.  Well the calls that I get from 

people with diabetes, the calls that I get from seniors who no 

longer have their heritage grants and are going to have to pay 

for an increase in prescription drugs and are very worried, are 

real.  They're not dealing with concepts.  The calls that I get 

from people on workmen's compensation who have grave 

concerns about what will it mean to them if they go back to 

work and they can no longer get the kinds of chiropractic 

services that they require -- these are real.  They're not dealing 

with concepts. 

 

I would appreciate very much if you would provide to me not 

only an outline of this concept of your wellness model, but the 

studies that you've done that look at the impact analysis where 

you've done a cost/benefit analysis, where you have indicated 

your actual projected savings that will accrue to this province 

as a result of the changes, at the same time outlining that you 

have actually got a plan to deal with the possible negative side 

effects on the lives of real people.  And I'd appreciate that very 

much. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to indicate to the member opposite 

that we did not say that the wellness model was simply a 

concept.  What we said was that wellness is a concept.  It is not 

a statement of programs that are going to be implemented here, 

there, and everywhere, costing the taxpayers millions of dollars 

more.  We did not say that. 

 

We said wellness is a concept, it's an approach, it's a direction.  

And the member opposite knows that.  She indicated earlier 

that she's a health care professional, and she understands this.  

But right now she's playing games with what is taking place in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

She knows what wellness is.  She knows that wellness is a 

World Health Organization concept.  That health is mental, 

spiritual, and physical well-being and that we have to look at 

health care services in that context.  And we have to move 

towards developing programs that realize that vision. 

 

But for her to take a vision of this nature that comes from the 

World Health Organization, and to try to demean it by saying, 

she said, it was simply a concept.  I would have expected more 

of the member opposite, because she knows how important this 

vision is to health care and people throughout this nation, and 

to people around the world.  She knows that.  And I would 

expect her to participate with the government in trying to 

realize this vision for people, not to demean a concept that has 

international acclaim. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that I will attempt to provide 

the member opposite with the information that she . . . 

whatever information we have with respect to the question she 

has asked. 

 

I also want to say that people on workers' compensation 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

will have their chiropractic services fully covered.  She should 

know that.  And I think that's very important, because that was 

one of the questions she raised. 

 

And yes, we will be giving you more information as the weeks 

and months go by with respect to health care direction and 

health care reform, and how we can take the concept and make 

it into something that's real for Saskatchewan people.  We will 

be telling you how that is going to happen.  How working 

together with communities, we will take the vision of health 

care services that are holistic and make it more real for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, my 

comments regarding the gentleman in workmen's compensation 

who phoned me this week, he would like to be able to have a 

sense of dignity. And indeed while he's on workmen's 

compensation he will be able to receive chiropractic services.  

His concern is what it's going to mean to him to return to work.  

So I indeed understand it. 

 

You, Madam Minister, are the Minister of Health.  I'm not the 

minister of Health.  You have an incredible budget at your 

disposal; you have officials at your disposal; you have 55 

members in this Assembly and you are part of government.  

We are not simply here to talk about some vision that is going 

to be accepted by and promoted by the world at large.  We're 

talking about your responsibility for the people of this province 

-- real, live people who may not in many circumstances have 

an ability to think so much about wellness in the future because 

they are sick right now.  And that's what I think that people 

have a right to know about as well.  It is very important. 

 

(1030) 

 

And I have supported you, Madam Minister, in this Assembly 

in some of the decisions that have been made in your 

department.  And if you're talking about people who are game 

players, I think you have to admit, if there's one person who 

doesn't play a lot of games in here, it's me.  And so I resent that 

comment a great deal. 

 

And one of the things that concerns me a great deal is the fact 

that what you've been doing is trying to undermine what I think 

are very, very important questions.  The questions I'm asking 

you to answer are not unrealistic nor should they be evaded. 

 

You should be able to provide to us where it is we're going in 

this province.  You should be able to provide for us the impact 

analyses that you've done, that the Department of Health 

decisions that have been made and the impact that's going to 

have on people's lives.  We should be able to have from your 

department the cost/benefit analyses that you've done.  We 

should be able to know your projected savings, but most 

importantly, the impact this is going to have on the lives of 

people. 

 

And I don't think that it's wrong for me, I think it's my job, to 

be able to raise the issues that people call me about.  And they 

want to know where we're going.  Because I know that you 

have a view of where we're going, and I 

know that you understand this.  But the people on the streets of 

Saskatchewan don't understand it and they're telling me two 

things: it's too nebulous what the government is talking about 

and what the Minister of Health is saying; and secondly, they're 

worried, they're very worried about their lives, their health 

care.  That's what they're worried about. 

 

And that, I believe, is your responsibility to lay at rest.  It's my 

responsibility to ask about and convey to you; it's your 

responsibility to lay to rest.  And that's what I would prefer 

very much that I be able to leave here with today, is a sense of 

satisfaction and relief that I know that you are going to do that 

for them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the sick -- are sick right 

now and they want to know if they're going to be looked after 

-- if someone needs to see a doctor, they can go and see a 

doctor and they're fully insured.  If someone needs to get into a 

hospital, they can go . . . if they have to be in a hospital, they'll 

be admitted to a hospital. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is we have a very strong health care 

system in Saskatchewan.  Sick people will be looked after.  We 

have nurses, we have doctors, we have a whole range of health 

care professionals.  The member opposite knows that, and I 

don't have to tell her that, as she's pointed out to me.  But to say 

the sick people want to know they're going to be looked after is 

a statement that's an exaggeration, if I can state that with all 

due respect.  Sick people are being looked after in this 

province.  There have been some budgetary restraints that I 

know are tough.  I know that.  And they were tough decisions 

that we had to make.  But we're doing it so that the sick people 

can be looked after in the year 2000. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 

to get back into the questioning of the minister here.  And I 

think to start off with . . . I'll ask you a very simple, basic 

question, and that is that we've been talking about routine eye 

examinations and whether they're being covered or whether 

they're not being covered. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I would like you to take me through 

what a routine eye examination entails, what it's all about: the 

things that they do, the things that are insured, and those that 

are not. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The routine eye examination, Mr. Deputy 

Chair, is the examination of the eye to determine what type of 

eye wear a person may need in order to correct their vision. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's not good enough, Madam Minister.  

What type of things would the optometrist be looking for?  

What kind of diseases would they be looking for that will 

determine what type of eye wear?  You're sloughing it off.  

And I think you're being insulting to the optometrists with an 

answer like that, that is the only role that they play is to provide 

eye wear. 

 

What about their role in terms of diagnosing and finding out 

what diseases of the eye that this patient that has come forward 

is experiencing?  Let's not just slough them off and say all they 

do is put on eyeglasses on people.  Surely there's much more 

depth to it than that. 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well there's no intent here to be insulting 

to optometrists. 

 

My officials advise me that in going through the various tests 

in the examination that takes place, and that it is true that 

optometrists can diagnose eye disease and then they would be 

referred to an ophthalmologist or a physician.  So there is a 

review of the need for eyeglasses whether or not there is any 

specific need in that regard.  And also in doing the various 

tests, they can diagnose eye disease. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I understood you to say that 

approximately $35 plus $8 before, so approximately 45, $50 

would be the cost of a visit to an optometrist.  Is that correct, 

number one, Madam Minister? 

 

Number two, I still haven't heard you say what the actual 

diseases are that are being tested for -- than an optometrist is 

going to be getting $50 for.  I want to know the list of those 

diseases that are included in that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, we will undertake to provide you 

with that information. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm amazed, Madam Minister.  You have 

just de-insured optometric services, and you don't know what 

you've de-insured? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We do not . . . there's a whole range of 

diseases that could be detected, and I will provide you with a 

comprehensive list. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Madam Minister, you have de-insured 

optometric services.  People can no longer go to an optometrist 

and have the government pay for it because you have deemed 

that because you're fighting a deficit you've slashed optometric 

services because obviously you don't consider them to be 

important enough to be insured. 

 

And I'm asking you, do you know what you've done?  And 

you're getting up now and answering to me, no, I don't know 

what I've done but I'll find out what I have done.  That's not 

good enough, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite knows that 

glaucoma, things like detached retina, things like cataract 

development, for example, can be diagnosed by an optometrist.  

There are other diseases as well.  I will provide you with a 

comprehensive list. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Madam Minister, I guess that will 

have to do.  I will appreciate getting that information once you 

have found out for yourself the impact that your decision is 

going to have on people. 

 

Now am I to understand now . . .  You talked about retinal 

detachment, you talked about the identification of cataracts, 

glaucoma, retinal diseases, and so on.  These are the kinds of 

things that optometrists would be doing.  Now your 

government, our government, till you made this decision, 

insured those services, because we felt that it was important for 

people to understand the development of their eyes and 

possible diseases that were 

setting in, so that preventative measures could be taken. 

 

But now you're saying no; on second thought the deficit is very 

high, it's very important, so therefore the preventative 

diagnostic tests that optometrists could be taking are not 

significant any more, so therefore we will not pay for them.  

Therefore we are going to get the people to pay for it 

themselves, or by doctor's referral they will now have to go to 

the much higher cost of ophthalmologists.  Where's your 

rationale in that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are other services.  The member 

opposite . . . first of all, let me state that people will still receive 

optometric services in the province.  They have to pay a fee for 

it.  That's the difference.  They will still receive the service.  

The diagnosis will still take place.  And if they have a disease, 

it will be looked after by a physician.  Those are the facts. 

 

To suggest that people aren't going to be . . . glaucoma isn't 

going to be treated or a detached retina isn't going to be treated 

is far-fetched.  People will be treated for eye disease.  They 

will be paying for their optometric eye exam.  That's the reality 

of the situation, providing they're over 18 or they're not . . . 

they will pay for it, provided they're over 18.  Under 18 is 

covered, and working poor on FIP, seniors on SIP, and social 

assistance people will be covered. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is there are other services in 

Saskatchewan that people pay for.  And these health care 

people, such as dentists, are also in a position of detecting 

disease such as oral cancer.  But we pay for our dental services.  

So this isn't something completely new to Saskatchewan.  

People have been paying for dental services for years, and 

dentists detect disease. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, how does this, what you've 

just said, fit into your concept of the wellness model?  Could 

you explain that to the people?  You talk about the wellness 

concept, and I'm assuming now that your wellness concept is 

basically preventatively based -- prevention of disease. 

 

Yesterday, I think, in this House, or the day before -- my 

concept of your wellness concept is that you better get well and 

stay well or farewell.  Because that's essentially what you're 

doing.  I don't see how de-insuring optometric and chiropractic 

services play into the role of the wellness model, premised on 

the fact that it is preventative.  We're trying to prevent 

deteriorative conditions resulting from diseases, that it will go 

now undetected. 

 

What, Madam Minister, what kind of incentive is there now for 

people now to make sure that they get their yearly, or for that 

matter bi-yearly eye examination if you're a diabetic?  What 

incentive is there for them now to make sure that they're going 

to get this done on a preventative basis? 

 

I don't understand how you put the two and how the two are 

compatible at all.  I'd like you to explain that to me. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well I have much more respect and 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

confidence in the people of Saskatchewan.  People who need 

an eye exam will go and get it.  And I believe people will get 

routine eye exams.  Before optometric services were insured, 

people got routine eye exams. 

 

People are responsible in this province and they will take care 

of themselves.  To suggest that people aren't going to go and 

see an optometrist because the government's not paying for it is 

really, is just going too far. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How can you say that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well that's what you've just said.  The 

fact of the matter is that people will obtain medical services, 

but they will be required to pay for the routine eye exam.  In 

the same way they will participate and pay for a portion of 

chiropractic services. 

 

Now with respect to the wellness approach, or the preventative 

approach to health care, I want to make this statement: that we 

have never said that there wouldn't be increased consumer 

participation. 

 

In fact the preventative approach talks in terms of the need for 

more individual responsibility for health care at a number of 

different levels, at understanding what healthy life-styles are, 

and in terms of simply taking more responsibility. 

 

The fact of the matter is, as I've pointed out earlier in this 

Assembly, is that although we will be moving to a more 

preventative approach of health care, it doesn't mean, it doesn't 

mean that we are going to be paying for every single 

preventative health care measure that's available out there 

across the country. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

you say people will continue to have their examinations 

because people will continue to pay, that they don't mind 

paying $50 for their health. 

 

Madam Minister, I have statistics already since you 

implemented this program since June 1, that categorically deny 

exactly what you have said -- categorically deny that. 

 

If it wasn't so sad, I would really laugh about the comment that 

you just made.  The buzz-word, the new coined word, the new 

phraseology that you use when you say, increased consumer 

participation -- increased consumer participation, and you said 

that without even blinking an eye.  You know what that is -- 

that's user fee.  It's a user fee. 

 

The Minister of Health, who was the Health critic for four 

years or five years, roundly condemned the previous 

government for any attempt to put a rationalization in the 

expenditures of government, now has coined the term increased 

consumer participation.  If you want to stay healthy, if you 

want to make sure that you're going to be healthy, you got to 

pay your way for that. 

 

What about universality, Madam Minister?  What is this going 

to do to universality in medicine?  Is this going to be 

equal access?  Is this the accessibility that you talk about?  

You're fond of talking about what you're going to be doing for 

those on social welfare.  You're fond of talking about how 

you're going to support senior citizens with your SIP program.  

You're fond of talking about what you're going to be doing for 

those low income earners just above welfare rates, the FIP 

people in other words.  You're fond of talking about those 

90,000 people that you're going to be covering. 

 

But what about the other 990,000 people?  What about the 

other 91 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan that's now 

going to have to pay their own way?  You choose not to talk 

about those, Madam Minister. 

 

I have a series of questions that I want to ask you now.  Some 

of them will be somewhat repetitive.  But because this is 

coming from an organization that's very, very concerned about 

health care and about vision in particular, I'm going to ask you, 

first of all, there was a period of time, Madam Minister, when it 

looked as if the chiropractors, along with optometrists, were 

threatened that their fees would be capped.  And of course the 

reason that these fees are going to be . . . well I'll ask you, why 

are you threatening that their fees are going to be capped? 

 

I'm not talking about the $40 that we're covered under the 

insured program before, but now that you've de-insured them, 

optometrists are saying to me that you are threatening right 

now that you're going to cap the fee that they can charge, that 

they will not be allowed to charge $55 or that the fellow down 

the street will be prevented from charging $60 if he or she 

chooses to do so.  Is there truth in that?  Is that what you're 

contemplating? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The professional organizations have told 

us that they'll be very responsible with respect to the fees that 

they're going to be charging and that they will be monitoring 

their professions to make sure that outrageous fees aren't 

charged.  We believe them that they'll be doing this, and we're 

prepared to allow them to control their professions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So, Madam Minister, you are giving me now 

your unequivocal commitment that the government will not 

step in and regulate in any way whatsoever, optometric fees 

that have been de-insured. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think what's important here is to realize 

that there are two values that are operating.  First of all, we 

believe that the professions will be responsible.  The 

government also has a duty to the public and the public 

interest.  And we believe we've got no reason to believe at this 

point in time that the professions will not be responsible.  

They've told us they will be and we believe them, and so we 

are not moving to cap the chiros and optos. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Your escape hatch, I think, is apparent to 

anyone who's listening.  So what you're essentially saying now 

-- confirm it for me that I've understood you correctly, Madam 

Minister -- is that as long as you are able to threaten the 

optometrists to maintain a reasonable rate for their optometric 

fees, you will leave them alone.  But as soon as they step out of 

line, you will use the threat 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

of what's good for the public interest, and come down and 

legislate a fee schedule for the optometrists.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm not going to speculate as to the future 

because I believe what the professions have told me.  The 

professions have told me that they're going to be reasonable, 

and I believe them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think you've answered the question for me.  

In other words, that threat of a capped optometric fee legislated 

by the government hangs over the heads of the optometrists 

right now if they dare step out of line.  That is what you just 

said, Madam Minister.  And if not, then please get up and say 

no, Mr. Member, you are wrong.  Tell me that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it's important to note that Bill 71 

that we are dealing with here today has no provision in it to cap 

optometric services.  And the reason for that is that we believe 

what the optometrists have told us, which is that they too want 

to make sure that the fees that are charged to the public are 

reasonable and fair, and that that's what they'll do, and that as a 

profession they will monitor them.  And I believe them when 

they tell us that, and there's nothing in this Bill to cap 

optometric fees. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You keep talking, Madam Minister, that the 

optometric profession is telling you this and telling you that.  

Am I to understand that you've met with them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We've had several meetings with them 

since the budget on this specific issue.  We've also had 

members of our caucus meet with them.  I have met with 

officials from the optometric association.  The department 

meets with them on an ongoing basis, and there's been ongoing 

consultation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, with whom did you meet in 

the optometric profession and when? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Dr. Larry Selvig and that was in June.  

And the other names of the individuals that people have met 

with we will have to . . . I'll have to compile that list for you if 

you want further details. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I would 

appreciate that if you could do that for me.  And there's no 

specific rush for that information.  But as soon as it's available, 

I would appreciate that. 

 

What time in June? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'll have to get you that information.  I 

don't remember the time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- When did this de-insuring of optometric 

services come into effect? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- June 1. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So you met with the optometric profession 

after the deed was done, after the de-insuring took place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The officials have met with the 

optometrists prior to that on a number of different occasions to 

work out the details with respect to the de-insurance, prior to 

June 1. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So in other words, Madam Minister, what we 

see here is an example of what you mean by the consultative 

process.  If it was not the opposition bringing out the fact that 

these kinds of things were happening, the public and in fact and 

indeed, Madam Minister, the professions themselves would 

probably not be aware of your intent until the deed was done. 

 

So as an after-effect, once pressure from the public and from 

the professions rises to such a level, then you will condescend 

to meet with them.  I think, Madam Minister, that's a further 

example of insulting the professions of our province.  And I 

don't think that stands you in very good stead as being an open, 

honest, forthright, consultative government that acts first and 

then reacts afterwards. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, getting back to the example of the fees 

-- and I'm still with the same questions, but I guess we will be 

doing some tangential work as we branch off onto different 

areas depending on what type of answers you will be giving me 

-- I know that you have now said to the optometrists, look out, 

because if you charge too much we're going to legislate you 

and we're going to cap your fees.  Just for everybody's 

edification, would you confirm that again, Madam. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to simply reiterate the 

government's position, which is that we have been advised by 

the professions, by optometrists, that they will be monitoring 

their profession as all professions do.  The Law Society 

monitors their profession for fees that are out of control, and 

the optometrists will be doing the same thing. 

 

As a result, this government has no intention of capping fees 

with respect to optometric services. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Never? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it's important for me to ask the 

members opposite what they would like us to do.  Would they 

like us to never, never do anything in this area to protect the 

public interest if fees got completely out of control?  Is that 

what the members opposite are asking us to do? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm very pleased to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan that we never de-insured 

optometrists at all.  We have never done that.  So why are you 

asking me that kind of a question?  You are the government, 

Madam Minister, and it behoves you to accept the 

responsibility that goes along with forming a government.  And 

these are your options; these are your choices.  You are making 

these choices. 

 

Now don't give me a lot of political rhetoric about the deficit 

again.  We've heard that 10 times.  And on the back of the sick 

and of the elderly and of the blind, you are fighting the deficit.  

And that's all I'm asking.  I want a commitment from you what 

your intentions are. 

 

I recall now one of your previous answers.  You were 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

talking about the fact that it took an Act, a change in the Act.  

Well, Madam Minister, it doesn't take a change in the Act to 

make regulations.  Any Act has a set of corresponding 

regulations.  Is that how you're going to limit them, through 

regulations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well obviously the member opposite is 

prepared, if optometric services and optometrists started 

charging outrageous prices -- which I believe they won't do 

because they said they wouldn't -- but let's speculate, because 

that's what the question is, it's speculative.  Obviously the 

member opposite is saying the government should not exercise 

any control or concern over it.  And on the other hand he says, 

you have to make the decisions and you should be concerned 

about these things. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is as a government we have the 

responsibility in this area.  And we believe the profession when 

it tells us it's going to be reasonable, so there's no need to do 

anything.  But we will not for ever foreclose government 

responsibility in this area as the member opposite is asking me 

to do.  He's asking me not to have any position, and to suggest 

that even if these get completely out of control, that we leave it 

be. 

 

Well I'm not going to do that, Mr. Member, because we believe 

the optometric profession when it says that they're going to 

monitor it and it'll be reasonable.  And there's no need for me to 

speculate on what's going to happen in the future unless 

something did occur.  Then we can talk about it again.  But at 

this point I will not speculate on that because I believe what 

I've been told by the profession. 

 

Now with respect to whether we need an Act or not, my 

officials advise me that there's no power, no regulation-making 

power to deal with optometrists in the legislation. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me, Madam Minister, is 

that like a lot of Acts that regulate . . . Acts can be empirical, 

but the definitive nature of the actual costs that are going to be 

charged in most cases are set by regulation subsequent to the 

Act. 

 

So what you're telling me, Madam Minister, your officials are 

advising you that this Act does not have the parameters to 

allow for regulations to regulate those kinds of fees.  And if 

that is the case, Madam Minister, if that's what you will 

confirm when you get up, you are telling me then that the only 

way that you would be able to do that is to make an amendment 

to this Act.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  It seems 

to me that another factor that will come into play here, as it 

does in the market-place of every commodity, if we could bring 

the optometric services to that level, that there is a 

self-regulating mechanism out there that anyone charging an 

exorbitant fee as opposed to someone else is obviously not 

going to have a long line of potential patients.  So in that sense 

it should be self-regulating. 

But on the one hand if you agree with that, and you are, on the 

one hand, if optometrists charge a routine examination of the 

eyes is $34.35 for a complete examination, then would you not 

agree, Madam Minister, that there seems to be a discrepancy in 

what people are charging.  Because that selfsame examination 

performed by an ophthalmologist is not going to be $34.35, but 

rather in the range of 85 or $90 for the very same examination.  

Why are you prepared to allow that to happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have been advised by the optometric 

association that they will be charging in the range of 50 to $60 

for routine eye exams. It was formerly 34 plus 8, which is 42.  

And for what the government . . . and the government was 

paying 42.  For those services they've advised us that they 

would charge somewhere between 50 to 60.  Now if they start 

to provide . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The ophthalmologists or optometrists? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Optometrists.  Now if they were to 

provide other services as well other than the routine eye exam 

and tonometry there might be some other costs in there.  And I 

don't have the details of that. 

 

But basically for the services that have been de-insured it's my 

understanding that it's 50 to $60 will be the sort of standard fee.  

That's what we've been advised.  And yes you're right that 

optometrists are self-regulating and we understand that they 

have a very strong regulating body and that's the reason why 

we are not moving in this area to cap fees. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're not moving now, Madam Minister, but 

you are poised to strike at any moment when you so decide. 

 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Optometrists tell me that they have two basic requirements that 

they want to see protected for the citizens of this province.  

One of them is that there be a minimal safety net.  And I know 

that we've spent a good portion of this morning talking about a 

certain safety net and I think we have defined the safety net 

right now as approximately encompassing 90,000 people or 

approximately 9 per cent of the population. 

 

Now the other thing that they want and are quite adamant about 

when I speak to them is that there will be an insured service 

commitment to medical referrals.  That is what they are asking.  

Medical referrals in other words are to be an insured service.  

How do you react to that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think it's important for us to say at this 

point, that with respect to the minimal safety net, for example, 

the safety net and new services being insured, I think it's 

important that the department have ongoing dialogue with the 

optometric association.  Naturally we will be reviewing the 

program. 

 

Now if there's an opportunity for the government in the future 

to extend optometric services, from a fiscal point of view and 

also from taking other matters into 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

consideration, that these discussions can continue.  Now I don't 

want to mislead people into thinking routine eye exams are 

going to be insured.  That's not what I'm saying here.  But I do 

think that we have to have ongoing dialogue with the 

optometric association, as we do with other health care 

professionals in Saskatchewan.  And if there's some 

opportunity for us to expand services and financially the 

government can afford it, we can look at that in the future. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well two things in response to that particular 

statement, Madam Minister.  First of all, you are again 

reconfirming that your wellness program, which involves 

de-insuring and cutting back on expenditures in many of our 

health care services, is totally budget driven.  It's deficit 

reduction driven.  That's what you're saying again.  So it 

doesn't matter whether it's good for the people, if it's good for 

the welfare of the citizens of Saskatchewan, you are making 

choices and you are priorizing, and your priority is the deficit 

over health. 

 

I have to say that.  I have to say that because the thing that 

bothers me in this whole thing is the counter-productivity of 

many of your government's actions, not only in the field of the 

wellness program but in many other aspects.  You're doing 

things that you think are going to be productive in terms of 

saving money.  But in the long run -- and we're going to be 

going through this time after time after time -- it's not going to 

save you money.  It's not going to save you money in the long 

run and at the same time you are jeopardizing the health of 

many of the citizens of this province.  That's what you're doing 

and that's why we're taking a long time on this particular Bill.  

It's very, very fundamental. 

 

The other aspect of your response I am sure is going to please 

some of the people that are listening, because you are admitting 

now that there should be an ongoing dialogue, that there will be 

a consultative process.  Madam Minister, this program was 

designed to the exclusion of the health care givers and the 

health care receivers.  It was essentially done by you and your 

bureaucrats.  That's where this program is at. 

 

Now in response to the pressure and the heat that you are 

feeling, particularly from the health care givers at this point but 

also the health care receivers . . . Because Madam Minister, if 

your program is so tremendous, why are we getting the number 

of petitions in right now?  We've got thousands, thousands of 

people who have taken the effort of signing their name to 

petitions, saying, Madam Minister, please reconsider, please 

reconsider; your program is not good. 

 

Why are we getting those in then?  Not only from the health 

care receivers but also particularly for the health care givers 

that have an overall, encompassing view of how your programs 

are affecting the people. 

 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan optometrists association 

believe further that the following should be exempt from 

optometric fees, and I've already indicated medical referrals as 

one of them, but also diagnosed diseases.  How do you react to 

diagnosed diseases? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There has been ongoing 

consultation with the department and professional 

organizations throughout the years, I am told, and that is 

continuing of course.  Now with respect to major budget 

reductions of course, as I indicated earlier, because of the 

secrecy surrounding a budget, it isn't appropriate to have 

consultations about specific budget reductions.  It's not 

appropriate, and the members opposite understand that. 

 

Now with respect to diagnosed diseases, I'm not quite sure 

what the member is talking about.  I indicated earlier that if a 

disease is detected in a routine eye exam, that a physician is 

covered to treat that disease.  And I also want to make this 

point once more: that the department will be having ongoing 

consultations with the optometric association.  And if within 

the fiscal format there is an ability to look at new ways of 

doing things, that the government and the department would be 

amenable to it.  But I want to point out again that it will have to 

be done within the fiscal format of the government. 

 

And I also have to say once again for the purposes of the 

record, that I recognize that the budget reductions that occurred 

in the budget are tough decisions and that it means consumers 

will pay for optometric services and a portion of chiropractic 

services, for example.  But I want to say that these steps and 

these decisions were made by the government in order to 

preserve the financial situation of the province so that we can 

continue to afford health care programming of this nature for 

future generations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You talk glowingly of your consultation and 

so on that you had with the optometrists.  Why then were they 

not aware of the significance of the changes that you were 

contemplating?  They were caught totally by surprise.  That 

does not seem to me that you were keeping them well informed 

and that they were a part and parcel of the process. 

 

And you talk also about the secrecy of the budget, that you had 

to maintain the secrecy of the budget.  Well that was the most 

leaky document I think that Saskatchewan has ever had.  So 

there was not much secrecy involved there. 

 

The diagnosed service diseases on the optometric fees, why are 

people going to have to pay them, is what I'm asking.  And the 

same thing with diabetics.  When a diabetic goes to an 

optometrist for . . . and they have to go twice a year.  What is 

the position of your government, Madam Minister, in terms of 

optometric fees for diabetics? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Diabetics who go to an optometrist for a 

routine eye exam will be required to pay for their routine eye 

exam.  And if they do that twice a year, then they will pay for it 

on a twice-a-year basis.  With respect to diagnosed diseases, if 

that's discovered during a routine eye exam, the person who 

obtained the routine eye exam pays for the routine eye exam.  

The treatment of the disease, however, is paid for under 

medicare when the person goes to a physician. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well that's exactly my point.  That's 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

exactly my point.  Here is a person, through no fault of his or 

herself, comes down with diabetes.  And we know the effect 

that diabetes can have on the eyesight and the vision of 

individuals. 

 

But what are you doing as a government now, Madam 

Minister?  You're telling that person that twice a year you're 

going to pay $50 for eye care, or for an eye examination.  And 

at the same time, what else have you done for diabetics?  What 

about the insulin charge, Madam Minister?  It used to cost $1 

or $1.20.  I forget the exact figure. But now it's over $20 that 

they are required to pay. 

 

So if you're a diabetic, you have not stayed well.  And you talk 

about your wellness program.  What are these diabetics going 

to do?  Are they going to go and visit their optometrist twice a 

year so that they can continue to monitor the potential 

deterioration of their eyesight, their vision?  Are they going to 

do that? 

 

Or are some of them going to make choices?  Are you going to 

force some of the lower income people in particular to make 

choices -- whether in your own terminology they're going to 

buy food for their family?  And that's a term that you have used 

consistently in this House.  You're making a diabetic now 

potentially make the choice between food and going to get a 

medical examination at the optometrist. 

 

Particularly, and this boggles my mind, particularly a diabetic 

-- and it's well known the extra concern that we should have, 

the extra potential for a diabetic to have failing eyesight. It's a 

known fact.  And yet you say that doesn't make any difference 

for us. 

 

You laugh about it now, Madam Minister.  Come on.  Pay 

attention.  Get serious.  This is a very, very serious situation 

that I'm addressing.  Diabetics are getting a double whammy all 

over.  How in the world are they going to be able to afford 

that? 

 

And you talk about universality.  You talk about equal access.  

Why are you doing that, Madam Minister?  We are talking 

about diabetics here who is known for the potential 

deterioration of their eyesight.  And you are saying, sorry folks, 

you pay twice. And if you don't want to pay, then don't go. 

 

And who's going to be the end winner on that?  You're saving 

money? This is what I mean about the counter-productivity of 

many of your programs, Madam Minister.  And that's why the 

optometrists are saying to me, talk to Madam Minister about 

this.  Talk to her about it and see if she will agree that diabetics 

should be exempt from optometric fees. 

 

Would you agree that that's a logical request, Madam Minister?  

I'm not the one asking it now, although I guess in a way I am 

because it's a personal concern.  But it's the optometrists 

particularly, and the diabetic association that I met with in 

Regina . . . or in Moose Jaw.  They are concerned about this. 

And I think they have a very, very legitimate concern. 

 

They're not . . . this is not normal.  I mean, if it was some of 

your colleagues or my colleagues here that can well afford to 

pay that, I guess we'll pay that.  I've done that.  I'm wearing 

these things for the first time in my life this fall -- or this 

spring. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It hasn't helped you to see straight. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And it hasn't helped, the member says, to see 

straight.  Well that may well be.  That's a matter of debate, I 

would suggest. 

 

But we're talking about a very serious concern that the 

optometrists have asked me specifically to bring forward to 

you.  Madam Minister -- the politics aside and the political 

rhetoric aside -- would you not agree that they have a 

legitimate concern here because of the seriousness and the 

gravity that diabetics and vision have?  Would you not agree, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, I want to say this because of 

comments the member opposite made which were somewhat 

misleading: that this government takes the situation of diabetics 

very seriously, and that we are concerned about diabetics in the 

province, and we do not laugh at their situation. 

 

The member opposite however becomes very self-righteous in 

his remarks for a man who has participated in a government 

that has led this province to a $15 billion debt that makes it 

almost impossible for this government to maintain social 

programming at the same level.  So for him to be as 

self-righteous as this, when he should be taking responsibility 

for the actions of his government which have led us to this 

situation, I find that rather laughable, his self-righteousness, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Now with respect to the diabetic issue, I want to say this: that 

the Department of Health is meeting with the Canadian 

Diabetic Association and they have an ongoing consultation 

process with them where they are examining issues that the 

member opposite has raised.  And in fact I met with them 

myself back in June, I think it was, or this spring some time.  

And we will be having ongoing consultation, we will be 

monitoring the situation, and we will be looking at ways that 

we can be helping diabetics, for example, within the fiscal 

framework. 

 

So we do not take the situation lightly.  We understand the 

impact of many of our decisions. We attempted to provide a 

safety net to deal with people who could not afford services. 

We have sent correspondence out to diabetic people with 

respect to drugs, for example, to inform them of what services 

are available if they couldn't afford the service. We have told 

people if they can't afford optometric services and they're on 

FIP that they will be covered. And the government is doing 

what it can to help out low income people and people on social 

assistance, and we are having ongoing discussions with the 

Canadian Diabetic Association. 

 

So this government doesn't take the situation lightly, and I don't 

want that impression left to the public.  We take it very 

seriously.  And we're doing what we can under the 

circumstances, where we are faced with a financial situation 

that is devastating. 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, we're back to square 

one again in your answer on this one.  Fifteen billion dollar 

deficit and you rest your case, you sit down.  That's what you 

said.  That's what you told me.  We'll go talk to people, but we 

won't do anything about it.  And you say you're concerned. 

 

You have the one deficit and then you're trying to work on that 

deficit on the backs of the sick.  That's just simply not good 

enough, Madam Minister.  You have a lot of choices.  You had 

a lot of choices in dealing with that deficit. 

 

And I could go into a harangue about the horrible situation that 

your Economic Diversification minister is making here, in 

terms of what is happening to the potential economic recovery 

of this province.  We could talk about the AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement that you forfeited.  We 

could talk about all the other kinds of economic activity that we 

could have in this province, from Piper to whatever; oil 

upgrader the Minister of Energy has let go down the tubes -- all 

of these kinds of things that we could talk about where you 

could stimulate economic recovery. But you refuse to do that.  

And instead of what you're doing, instead of taking that 

approach, you're taking the approach of saving money. 

 

Now I understand that Health is one-third of our budget.  It's a 

big-ticket number.  And if you're going to have an impact on 

the deficit, there's no point in taking a look at Parks and 

Renewable Resources budget or some of these smaller ones, 

because that's not where the money is.  The money is in 

Education.  The money is in Health.  And that's why you've put 

a 4 per cent reduction in each of those.  You're making choices. 

 

And all I'm saying to you is that while you're making the 

choice for diabetics to pay for their two eye examinations on 

their own, I'm saying I don't think that we would have made 

those choices.  There's other ways in which you can do it, and 

that's why you're misguided.  And that's why your cost 

recovery is not on the right path. 

 

And you can talk to me about your concern; you can talk to me 

about your ongoing consultation with the Canadian Diabetic 

Association.  I didn't hear you mention anything about the 

Saskatchewan chapter.  But I'm assuming that that would have 

in due course been . . . and I'm assuming that you forgot to 

mention that. 

 

You say you're continually monitoring the situation.  Would 

you please for me and for the people who are watching and the 

people who are listening, would you describe to me what that 

monitoring system entails. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Deputy Chair, what is 

happening is that we are having discussions with people, as I 

indicated before.  We will be compiling data through the 

information that we receive and the feedback that we receive 

from groups and organizations with whom we talk, as well as 

any sort of statistical data that the department may have.  And 

when we talk about monitoring, I'm talking in terms of 

receiving that information -- the data, the discussions with 

individuals.  And as we move into the next budget cycle, we 

will develop whatever is necessary, within the context of the 

budget and the fiscal restraint the government is implementing, 

whatever programs are required for the purposes of providing 

health care services for the people in the province. 

 

So we are having ongoing discussions.  We are reviewing data.  

We're getting feedback.  And we'll be putting that all together 

as we make decisions for the future. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just for clarification.  From whom are you 

getting feedback? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are getting feedback from people 

such as the diabetic association.  We're getting feedback from 

individuals, diabetic people for example.  We're getting 

feedback from other health care professionals.  We have 

statistical data that the department has access to, as we look at 

who's using what services and how the budget decisions have 

been implemented.  And we will be putting all that together as 

we move into the next budget cycle in determining what 

programs will be initiated or what decisions will be made in the 

next budget cycle. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What type of feedback are you getting, 

Madam Minister?  I'd like to get a sample of what you're 

talking about. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well for example, I met with the 

Canadian Diabetic Association.  They were concerned about 

the drug plan changes.  However they weren't fully aware of 

the safety net was there, the safety net that was available for 

people who couldn't afford it.  And when we explained that to 

them, that provided them with some further information.  We'll 

be having discussions with them.  We will be having 

discussions with them with respect to things, preventative 

measures that could help diabetics in terms of monitoring the 

disease on an ongoing basis; what sort of programs can be 

devised in that area, for example; can the government afford 

them.  We'll be having these kind of discussions with them. 

 

And at that meeting I can remember telling them that some of 

the suggestions they were making in this regard sounded very 

positive.  So we will be getting this kind of feedback from 

health care people as to new directions we might take and new 

ways of dealing with some of these health care difficulties. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You talk about feedback and statistical 

information that you're receiving now.  This new program was 

implemented on June 1, and here we are, getting well into 

August.  So I would assume that you've got that back and that 

you've taken a look at the first month at least of the month of 

June, possibly July.  What does that indicate to you? 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- At this point in time I am advised that it's 

too early for us to take a look at all the data, for example with 

respect to optometric services and chiropractic services.  There 

was a . . . prior to the budget restraint coming in, there was a 

rush on the programs.  I am told that it is . . . At this point in 

time it's too early for us to put the data together that comes to 

the department and 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

draw up a conclusion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What you are 

telling me then is that you're working in limbo and you have 

really no idea at this time the effect that your program is 

creating on people.  That's what you just told me.  You have no 

idea. 

 

You talk about your consultation that you did.  And do you 

know what was remarkable in your litany of people that you 

had talked about?  That you did not mention the Saskatchewan 

chiropractic association.  You didn't mention them at all, that 

there was any feedback from them.  And the people themselves 

. . . and I know they are because I've got the letters, I've got the 

petitions on my table, and I'm sure you do as well.  You chose 

not to mention that. 

 

And believe it or not, Madam Minister, I still am on track here 

with what I'm trying to accomplish, and that is that the 

optometric association of Saskatchewan has said, these are the 

types of people that should be exempt from optometric fees.  

And I've gone through a list of them from the medical referrals 

to the diagnosed diseases to diabetics. 

 

And another concern that they have are the senior citizens.  

Why are they not exempt from these referrals?  We all know 

that part of the ageing process is reflected upon our vision and 

the impairments that result from ageing.  And you're asking 

now senior citizens . . . And the other day in question period I 

was telling you, look, Madam Minister, these folks have $200 

left at the end of the month after they've paid for the increase 

that you're creating for them as far as living in senior citizens' 

homes is concerned. 

 

But now what you're asking them to do is also to pay for their 

eyesight for their examinations, on top of all the other things 

that you're asking them to do.  So, Madam Minister, won't you 

give consideration to the seniors of our province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have had extensive discussions with 

the chiropractic association and over a period of some time 

there have been extensive discussions.  And with respect to 

senior citizens, if there is a senior that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm talking about optometric services, 

not chiropractic. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well you said chiropractic. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm sorry, that was a mistake.  I meant 

optometric. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There have been discussions with the 

optometric association as well, and I did mention that earlier 

when you were asking me questions.  And the caucuses met 

with them.  The department officials had a number of meetings 

with optometric representatives. 

 

With respect to senior citizens, the seniors who are on SIP are 

fully covered for these services.  Saskatchewan Income Plan 

people who cannot afford the service, in other words, will be 

covered. 

I also want to make the point that the senior citizens are 

prepared to help us in the budgetary restraint.  A number of 

them have indicated that to me.  I've quoted from an article that 

virtually states that, and I won't take up the time of this House 

to do that today. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, is seniors are prepared to pay their 

fair share.  And if a senior is in a very difficult financial 

situation, as I indicated earlier, there is assistance from the 

government. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I wish we could get off of 

your SIP, SAP, and FIP.  We know that.  We've identified the 

90,000 people that you're talking about.  I guess they're next 

perhaps on your hit list; I'm not quite sure.  But with the mode 

that you're in and the direction that you're going, I doubt even 

if that is sacrosanct, that they can sit back, resting assured that 

they are going to be covered. 

 

You say senior citizens are willing to pay their fair share.  Now 

I'm assuming now, Madam Minister, when you say that, you're 

talking about the rest of the senior citizens beyond the SIP 

program.  And you say that they're willing to pay their fair 

share, and you say it as if . . . well because if they're willing to 

pay their fair share, we don't have to be concerned about it any 

more.  It's a done deal. 

 

Again, the front line care givers, the front line care givers, the 

optometrists are telling me a completely different story.  They 

are the ones who are the front line and know what's going on.  

They are the ones that are getting the phone calls from the 

seniors. 

 

And the seniors will phone in and make an appointment to have 

their eye tested.  And you know what the optometrists are 

telling me, that when the seniors phone in, make an eye 

appointment, and find out that they're going to now get a $50 

bill, that they're cancelling the appointment.  They're cancelling 

the appointment. 

 

What do you say to these senior citizens, Madam Minister, that 

are forfeiting, which I think you would agree to, an important 

examination for the welfare of their being because they cannot 

afford to pay for it, or it's going to take a big bite.  They may be 

able to afford it, so let's get out of the SIP angle of it.  They 

may be able to afford it, but there comes to a point where they 

have to make choices.  And the choices of being able to buy 

their grandchild a present or going into an optometrist's office 

for an eye appointment and pay $50, they're not going to do 

that. 

 

You talk about universality, Madam Minister. How does this 

compute with universality?  How does this compute with equal 

accessibility?  Are you not creating a two-tiered health system, 

Madam Minister? 

 

The thing that you objected to so vehemently over the last five, 

six years -- is this not precisely what you're doing to the senior 

citizens, Madam Minister?  And are you not prepared to have a 

second look at this and take the advice of the front line care 

givers, the optometrists of this province, who are saying to you 

these folks should not have to pay for the deficit? 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to make this point, and that is that 

we will be looking at the situation as this develops.  The 

member opposite says optometrists are telling him seniors are 

cancelling their appointments.  And I think we have to look at . 

. . If that is indeed happening, we have to look at that and why 

they're cancelling and who they're cancelling and how many 

eye examinations they've had in the past.  And there's a whole 

range of information that would have to be reviewed in that 

regard. 

 

So this is the kind of feedback that we're hoping to receive 

from the public.  And we do have sympathy with people who 

are in low income brackets and feel that paying for optometric 

services puts a squeeze on their budget.  We understand the 

problems that that creates. 

 

I also want to point out to the member opposite that some 

seniors have also said to us that their dental needs are their 

greatest concern, and they now pay for those.  So I think it's 

important to note that there are other services that aren't insured 

-- not just optometric services -- in Saskatchewan and that the 

government is attempting to look at who is affected by the new 

changes, as well as who's affected by other services such as 

dental services that may not be offered free to people in the 

province. 

 

And we are reviewing the situation and reviewing the safety 

net to see what we can do to help people out and if there's 

anything further we can do to help people out.  That will be an 

ongoing process.  And there will be decisions made in that 

regard as we move into future budgets. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you indicated that . . . you 

acknowledged the fact that I told you that optometrists are 

telling me that senior citizens are actually cancelling 

appointments. 

 

And you say, well if that's what optometrists are telling me, if 

indeed that is the fact . . . well, Madam Minister have you taken 

no initiative yourself?  When you talk about monitoring the 

system, have you not picked up the telephone and called the 

optometric association and asked them what's going on?  How's 

it going?  What is the reaction?  What impact is it having? 

 

Two and half months after the implementation of this program, 

you sound to me as if you're surprised by the fact that 

optometrists are saying people are cancelling.  You sounded 

surprised.  You didn't know that.  I'm surprised at that.  Why 

would you not want to make contact with that organization on 

an ongoing basis to, as you were saying, to monitor? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to make this specific point -- that 

is, that we are having ongoing discussions with the optometric 

association.  And we will expect that they will be raising these 

concerns with us, and indeed they have raised a number of 

different concerns with us.  And we will be having these 

discussions with them. 

 

I think it's also important to note that I believe in some 

situations, that seniors are exercising their best judgement.  

And some people may very well not be taking on annual 

routine eye exams and may be asking themselves the question 

as to whether or not they actually 

need that particular eye exam on that date. 

 

So when I say that we have to review all the facts surrounding 

the circumstances, that's the kind of thing that I'm referring to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, another scenario that is 

being painted for me is that patients are going to their doctors 

and getting referrals to ophthalmologists.  They're going to 

their doctors, getting referrals to ophthalmologists, even though 

an optometrist could perform that function.  Is this true? Is this 

something that you're getting a feedback on?  And what's your 

reaction to it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member raises a good point, and the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone had also mentioned that.  

The routine eye exams are not insured with ophthalmologists, 

and any eye disease that they attend to is.  But the routine eye 

exams are not.  The medical profession is co-operating and 

monitoring the situation to ensure that the budget restraint is 

applied fairly with respect to ophthalmologists as well. 

 

So there is a situation where the medical association is working 

very closely to make sure that the new measures are not being 

overridden by going to ophthalmologists instead.  So there is a 

monitoring of that situation taking place.  And what has been 

de-insured for optometrists is de-insured for ophthalmologists. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me then, Madam 

Minister, is that the optometrists that are fearful that people 

will be going out of province to see ophthalmologists because 

of the longer waiting-lists and so on that are potentially there as 

far as ophthalmologists are concerned, that that is a totally 

unfounded fear that optometrists have.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am informed that ophthalmologists are 

very interested in treating eye disease and doing that type of 

treatment for patients in Saskatchewan.  They will be charging 

for refractions.  They will be charging for refractions, so there 

isn't any advantage in an individual going to an 

ophthalmologist for a refraction.  They will obviously then go 

to an optometrist for that refraction because I believe 

ophthalmologists are very busy in the province and their 

primary interest would be in treating eye disease. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well it's not necessarily what the prerequisites 

or the procedures that ophthalmologists are necessarily most 

interested in, but rather the effect that it's going to have on 

potential patients moving in that direction.  So they may be 

forced into a situation that might not be one of their druthers, 

but the reality of it will still be of that nature. 

 

I'm going to read a statement for you that I have from the 

ophthalmologists . . . pardon me, from the optometrists.  And 

it's kind of a recap of what we have been talking about over the 

last 10 or 15 minutes.  It's simply this.  "The number of patients 

. . . " 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

And this is what the optometrists are telling me: 

 

 The number of patients having eye exams has dropped 

significantly since the NDP made these decisions.  In keeping 

with the wellness model, the government will not be saving 

money in the long run.  This is because of the increases in 

refractions and glaucoma and so on that will not be detected 

in the early stages.  Thus (they conclude) the government 

picks up a larger tab in the end. 

 

Could you dissect that statement that I just read for you, and 

give me your impressions of the various components of that 

statement? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am informed that during the month of 

May that there was a very high number of refractions that were 

done, and that there was a substantial increase in the number of 

examinations.  And then of course they fell off in June.  This is 

what I'm . . . And it's understandable, because prior to the 

budget cuts coming in, people went and got . . . many people 

went and got their refractions done.  July and August are 

summer months, which are slower, I'm advised. 

 

And therefore the Department of Health advises that it's too 

early for us to make a determination as to whether or not there 

has been a huge decrease in the number of exams being done. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The month of May, you said, Madam 

Minister, there was a large increase in the number of 

refractions done.  Was this in anticipation of what was going to 

happen on June 1? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I believe that that arose as a result of the 

budget announcement and the anticipation that services would 

be de-insured as of June 1, that there was a very high increase 

in refractions in May. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, then you said, in June it fell 

off.  Now you're suggesting by that that anybody who had 

anticipated doing an eye exam got it over with in May to beat 

the deadline in June, so that therefore there was nothing left in 

June.  Is that right?  Or fewer left for June. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think that, first of all, the optometric 

association advises us there was a drop in June.  It's the 

optometric association that advises us of the drop in June.  We 

are not insuring the service, therefore we don't have data as to 

how many eye exams were done in June.  But from the 

information we've received from the optometric association, 

there was a drop in June. 

 

We have the information for May because it was insured, and 

therefore we would have been paying the bills, and so we'd 

have the information.  There was a very high increase in May.  

Optometric association says it dropped off in June.  And this is 

why it's important for us to have ongoing discussions with 

them. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you inform me then, from the 

information that you have, Madam Minister, would the 

drop-off in June and then what happened in . . . The drop-off in 

June, would that have been lower than in 

April, let's say?  In other words, we had in April, we had a 

steady, ongoing, I suppose a normal pattern, then in May there 

was that tremendous increase because of the anticipation of 

June 1.  And then in June there was a drop-off.  Was that June 

drop-off, how did that compare, let's say, to April? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The optometric association would have to 

compile that information for us and they have not given us the 

details.  They've given us a general statement that there was a 

substantial drop in June. 

 

We know from our data that there was a substantial increase in 

May.  We don't have the details from June because we haven't 

been given the details from the optometric association. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would you care 

to react to the rest of the statement?  That was the first sentence 

of my statement that I read to you.  Would you care to react to 

the rest of it, or would you want me to re-read it for you? 

 

All right, Madam Minister, I will re-read the significant 

portions of it.  It continued after the fact that there was a 

significant drop.  It continued: 

 

 . . . in keeping with the wellness model, the government will 

not be saving money in the long run.  This is because of the 

increase in refractions and glaucoma and other diseases that 

will not be detected in its early stages. 

 

And -- I'm paraphrasing now -- because people are not going to 

be able to come in and pay the cost that you're injecting upon 

them. 

 

So that in the long run it's not going to be cost saving.  It's 

going to be counter-productive and the government in the end 

will be picking up a larger tab.  That's my feeling. Those are 

not my words.  These are the words of the profession of 

optometrists. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, with respect to the drop 

in June, that does not mean that people  will not be receiving 

routine eye exams and optometric services.  What that says is 

that prior to the budget cuts coming in, that optometrists 

worked very hard and people made a point of going to their 

optometrists for their routine eye exam. That's what the May 

blip means. 

 

The June drop means that most of those people had it done in 

May that maybe were anticipating having it done in June.  So, 

you know, to base a statement on that one data is to jump to 

conclusions. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is we do not believe that people 

will be irresponsible about obtaining routine eye exams.  We 

think that people will still obtain their routine eye exams as 

they have done in the past.  That is our belief. 

 

And in those provinces, in those provinces . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not the fact. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well it is the fact.  The member says 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

it's not the fact.  I've just explained to him that the drop in June 

is as a result of people going in May instead of June because 

we have an increase in June.  And we usually in the past have 

had, in the summer months, a slow-down.  Now with respect to 

. . . So it's too early for us to make that assessment. 

 

And I want to say this.  People in provinces where optometric 

services are not insured I do not believe face any greater health 

risk to eyesight than people who have routine eye exams 

insured.  Now I say that because what I'm saying is I believe 

people will be responsible.  And I believe that people 

understand the need for a routine eye exam and that people will 

attend to have their eye examinations done on a regular basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well to the contrary, all indications are over 

the first few months that that's exactly not the case, that there's 

a great deal of risk.  And you're saying that you believe in the 

people of Saskatchewan.  Well I do as well. 

 

But, Madam Minister, you're forcing them into a position 

where they're going to have to priorize.  And what we're saying 

is there are going to be a significant number -- now I'm not 

prepared to put a number on it, and I don't think you would be 

either -- but there is the potential for a significant number of 

people to choose not to have that eye examination, not perhaps 

to pick up the glaucoma, for example, that may be setting in.  

That's going to have devastating effects down the road.  And 

we're saying that there will be a number.  I don't know how 

many.  Will it be 10 or will it be 1,000 in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  But I don't think the number is significant.  But 

for each of the individuals, for every one of those individuals 

that will be affected detrimentally this way, it is a significant 

thing. 

 

And what we're saying to you is, have another look at it.  We'll 

help you as an opposition if you have to save money and work 

on the deficit.  And we know the big numbers are in Health and 

Education.  We know that there has to be some things done 

there.  But let's do it in a coherent manner that is going to save 

money and not cost the health of the citizens. 

 

Now you're continually talking, you're continually talking 

about this being a deficit-driven wellness program.  You're 

continually talking about the fact that -- and she has brought it 

up continually this morning -- that we have a $15 billion 

deficit.  And that's confirmed.  All the members across the way 

are shouting, we do. 

 

So making that as a given, making that as a given that this is a 

deficit-driven initiative, a budgetary item, that it does not 

matter . . . and I'm getting that impression after this morning's 

discussion because you have not moved on one thing.  I've 

thrown a lot of scenarios at you.  I've thrown a lot of options at 

you. 

 

And I don't for a moment pretend that I know anything about 

health.  I am the Health critic, but I am speaking on behalf of 

the people.  I'm speaking on behalf of the care receivers and the 

care givers.  Those are the ones that I have a lot of confidence 

in and those are the words, poorly as I am, that I'm trying to 

convey to you.  That's what I'm trying to do here, Madam 

Minister. 

Now given your words that we have such a tremendous deficit 

and it's our fault -- that's what you say, so don't go through that; 

that'll be a given for the moment -- so we have a tremendous 

deficit that you have to contend with, budget restrictions that 

the Minister of Finance, sitting in the background giving you 

all of this kind of advice . . . and that is questionable, very 

questionable.  Given those facts, Madam Minister, given those 

facts can you tell me how much -- and I'm restricting it now to 

optometric services -- how much money are you going to save? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to state this: is that first of all, a lot 

of the problems that the member's talking about, as for them 

existing on a long-term basis, I want to point out once again 

that's it speculative.  I also want to point out that we will be 

evaluating it over time.  We are always reviewing our 

programs.  So we will be evaluating it, we will be talking to the 

optometric association.  But to say now that it creates this 

major problem and all of these diseases is totally speculative. 

 

It's also important to note that the department spoke to 

Newfoundland, who de-insured their services in 1991.  And 

Newfoundland did not identify any implications of the nature 

that the member opposite has been raising as being problems.  

So I think that's important.  And I say that in this vein, that it is 

too early right now to assess the situation and that we will be 

reviewing the program as on an ongoing basis. 

 

Now as to the cost savings with respect to de-insuring certain 

optometric services, it is 4.5 million in 1992-93 and 5.9 million 

annually thereafter. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You're saying 

that my comments this morning and the fears of the senior 

citizens and the other folks and the care givers that have 

contacted us are speculative.  We really don't know what we're 

talking about, is what you're saying.  We have no proof 

positive, is what you're saying.  And what else, Madam 

Minister, you are saying to the people of Saskatchewan is, I 

don't care, I'm willing to take that chance.  That's what you're 

saying:  we don't have any proof, it's speculative, but I'm 

willing . . . You're saying, as Minister of Health, I'm willing to 

take that chance with your health, because we have a deficit. 

 

Now that is a very cruel way of looking and thinking, I would 

suggest to you, Madam Minister.  Now do I have the figures 

right? -- 4.5, did you say, saving for '92-93 and 5.9 for 

succeeding years?  That's the cost saving, what you're telling 

me.  Now give me your calculations of the opposite side of the 

coin; because for every saving, there's a cost.  So in your 

calculations, what factors have you factored in of a higher cost 

-- higher-cost care, more disease because of fewer people 

accessing the program, and the other side of the coin?  So give 

me the down side now that you've given us the 4.5. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


