




















































Hansard: July 29, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1817 

 July 29, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have some more petitions here 

that relate to the feed grain assistance program that the 

government is doing away with.  It says that the provincial 

government FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) 

program has been an essential tool to the preservation of a 

competitive livestock feeding, slaughter, and packing industry 

in the province. 

 

And then there is also one that deals with the provincial 

livestock cash advance program, was vital in putting the 

Saskatchewan livestock industry on equal footing with the 

national grain sector. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have another 

petition here.  I'd like to read most of it to you, Mr. Speaker, 

and to this Assembly. 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 That the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 That the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 And that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two of the same and they're right full.  And 

they're probably from Churchill Downs because they're all 

Regina citizens.  I won't read the other one off but, Mr. 

Speaker, they look to me like they're all Churchill Downs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions regarded to health problems.  I'll just read the last 

paragraph as it's much similar to those read by my colleague: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withold consent from any government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

I have two copies of this petition fully filled.  They also appear 

to be from the Regina city, and hope that the members opposite 

will take note of that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions related to the chiropractic care.  And as my colleagues 

said, that these petitioners would like to see the government: 

 

 . . . reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage and 

universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withold consent from any government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

I would like to present these petitions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have some 

petitions dealing with chiropractic care in this province.  Mr. 

Speaker, I won't go into the petition.  There are a number of 

signatures fairly filled on these two, all from Regina.  Looks 

like Regina Lake Centre is the constituency that most of them 

are from.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to present these. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions regarding chiropractic care.  And it is the same 

concerns that other members have brought to this Assembly.  

They are primarily from Regina, but also people from Southey, 

Tyvan.  Looks like a pretty good cross-section of the city of 

Regina on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, and I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and are hereby read 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the livestock cash advance program; 

 

 And of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to restore the FeedGAP program. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding recent Korean-sponsored investments into hog 

operations in British Columbia: (1) Did Korean officials or 

investors inquire with any Saskatchewan government 

department about making similar investments into 

Saskatchewan's hog industry? (2) If so, why did the 

Government of Saskatchewan refuse this investment? (3) 

Have any other foreign investors made inquiries into making 

investments into the hog industry in Saskatchewan? (4) If so, 

who are these investors? (5) Have any agreed to invest in 

Saskatchewan's hog industry? (6) Have any stated that they 

refuse to invest as a result of the cancellation of the feed 

grains adjustment program? (7) What persons has your 

government approached for foreign investment into our hog 

industry? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

afternoon I'm very delighted to introduce to you and through 

you to members of this Assembly three very special people 

seated in your gallery.  Heather Howard who has been a 

lifelong friend of mine; and a special friend of hers, Michael 

Soroski; and her nephew Mark Howard, visiting from 

Chilliwack today. 

 

We've already spent some time together touring this building 

and I would ask all members here to join me in welcoming 

them to the building today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a great honour for me this 

afternoon to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Legislative Assembly, an esteemed delegation from the 

People's Republic of China.  They are representatives of the 

Chinese state-planning commission whose task is to work out 

the five- and ten-year plans for economic development in the 

People's Republic of China.  They also have the responsibility 

to determine the investment plan and the construction projects 

of various kinds, and the allocation of capital. 

 

They are here to study Canadian dry-land farming technology, 

to discuss and exchange views on policy development relative 

to agricultural policy and the evaluation of policy, and to study 

the effectiveness of a 

variety of economic development strategies, and to develop a 

relationship with Saskatchewan governmental and business 

organizations in order to maintain a liaison with us in their own 

development.  And we appreciate their presence here this 

afternoon.  Welcome. 

 

I'm planning to meet them this afternoon in my office, and 

welcome to Saskatchewan, to Canada, and we look forward to 

a good relationship with the members from the People's 

Republic. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to 

acknowledge the presence of the people here from China.  I 

want to do it for two reasons.  I recognize a constituent of mine 

who has been closely associated with the people from China.  

His name is Ross Korven and he's seated up in your gallery 

together with the members there, and I want to welcome him 

here. 

 

I also want to say to those people who are here from China that 

my nephew, who is a doctor in veterinary medicine, is going to 

be serving in Hohut in Inner Mongolia for next year, teaching 

animal science and range management, and he's going to be 

teaching that in English so that those people over there can 

learn to speak the English language.  And I too want to ask the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming these people here from 

China. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

a gentleman who's in your gallery today.  Jerry Reuhs is from 

Shaunavon, Saskatchewan; has been very active in the 4-H 

industry and the cattle industry in Saskatchewan; is a good 

friend and a very, I think, important person in the province of 

Saskatchewan for the work that he's contributed.  So I'd like 

everyone to welcome him here please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I to would like 

to thank Mr. Reuhs for coming and visiting us at the legislature 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 

Assembly an individual seated in the west gallery, Mr. Fred 

Sutter.  He has had a very long and distinguished career in 

municipal, urban, and rural governments in the province.  I had 

the privilege of working with him as administrator of the rural 

municipality of Corman Park which surrounds the city of 

Saskatoon, a position that he still holds.  And I'd like to ask you 

to join me in welcoming him to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

Government Policy on Gaming 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . That's correct, it's you. 

 

Nevada tickets are sold in hotels to support health care and 

supplement the income of our stricken hotel industry.  Some 

hotels use vending machines to dispense these tickets. 

 

After allowing the machines for four years, the Gaming 

Commission is now advising licensees to stop using these 

machines, saying that they are prohibited under the Criminal 

Code.  Many hoteliers are now being told that they must stop 

using machines that they purchased for $700 each, or have their 

licences to sell Nevada tickets revoked. 

 

I'm wondering if you would comment on the logic of this 

policy, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For the logic, the hon. member might 

want to check with the Manitoba Court of Appeal, from 

whence the decision comes.  It was a decision in Manitoba, the 

Keystone decision, which severely restricted the right of any 

one who isn't a registered charity to run gambling.  And that 

has meant a rethinking in a number of areas.  The commission 

has told the vendors that they will consider some form of 

compensation. 

 

As the member did not point out, but might have, some of the 

purchasers were given authority in writing from the former 

Gaming Commission to buy them.  And then they bought them 

and a couple years later it turns out the Manitoba Court of 

Appeal says they're illegal. 

 

The Gaming Commission is considering some form of 

compensation but that process has not been brought to a 

conclusion.  But it is being considered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), Mr. Minister, has advised 

hoteliers who sell Nevada tickets that these machines are 

allowed by the Department of Justice.  It says that the machines 

are not slot machines -- and if you look at definitions of slot 

machines, indeed they are not -- but that they are vending 

machines and are therefore legal in the eyes of the federal 

Justice department which is responsible for interpreting the 

section of the Criminal Code dealing with gambling.  And I 

shall table a letter for your reference. 

 

Since the machines have not changed since the RCMP have 

written this letter, and given that the Criminal Code has not 

changed, will you instruct the Gaming Commission to reverse 

its decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to say with respect to the last 

comment, the Gaming Commission is independent of 

government.  The gambling in this province involves an 

enormous amount of money and an enormous potential for ill, 

an enormous potential for patronage. 

My instructions to the Gaming Commission have been simple 

and straightforward.  We want the letter of the law obeyed 

without exception, and we want the thing run fairly and without 

any political interference.  That applies to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone as well as the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs. 

 

The Gaming Commission have determined, I think correctly, 

that the advice which was given to them earlier was incorrect.  

I said they are considering some form of compensation.  The 

Gaming Commission is not walking away from the problem.  

They are enforcing the law and will continue to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, there is 

absolute and utter chaos in this province regarding the gaming 

industry.  Recent media reports indicate confusion over the 

territory in which video lottery terminals will be allowed.  And 

I want you to explain to us what criteria are used for where 

these machines are placed and how the revenue will be split 

with government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The Gaming Commission, again an 

independent body, is making this determination without 

political interference by members from either side.  The criteria 

which I would expect they would adopt, but it will be their 

decision, will be ease of installation, maximizing revenue.  

This is a form of activity which has no really redeeming social 

value except that it provides money for the Crown.  And thus 

they are, I think, following those two objectives. 

 

I want to say again, unlike the situation prior to October 21, 

1991, when politics played a large role in the administration of 

gambling in this province, since October 21, '91, we have 

removed political interference.  There is none.  The instruction 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find it rather shocking that you would 

applaud that, and I will tell you why, Mr. Minister.  I am truly 

amazed that you are willing to tell this Assembly that you have, 

in essence, no gaming strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And listen, just listen for a moment.  There has 

been tremendous growth in North America in this particular 

industry, particularly when we're talking about native 

jurisdiction, which are exempt from state and provincial 

gaming laws. 

 

Now given that institutions like . . . whether we're talking about 

Saskatoon's Prairieland Exhibition, which derives almost all of 

its income from casinos, and which in turn, by the way, 

supports the horse racing industry . . . How do you intend to 

deal with the possibility of native gaming operations being 

established in Saskatchewan?  And given what you've 

answered to date, you'll just simply say, it's none of your 

responsibility, which it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- First of all, I've now got a copy of 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

the letter.  As I suspected, it's five years old.  The member 

might have said that when you tabled it.  The letter from the 

RCMP is five years old and is, they would admit, out of date.  

You asked a number of questions in your comment.  I guess 

there's no practical limit.  I'll pick the last question you asked, 

which was Indian gaming. 

 

We have been meeting with representatives of the Indian 

community in an attempt to work out a mutually acceptable 

approach to Indian gaming.  They have legitimate claims and 

legitimate concerns, and so do we.  We believe that both can be 

accommodated, and I think both sides have found the talks 

productive and we are both optimistic about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In our province 

we have non-profit groups in limbo over proposed changes to 

bingo rules and regulations.  We have a horse racing industry 

in limbo over the lack of a long-term plan.  We have exhibition 

boards and native groups soon to be at odds over casino 

gaming rights in this province, and you can't even decide 

whether a slot machine is a slot machine or is a vending 

machine for Nevada tickets. 

 

Now when is your government finally going to put forward a 

coherent gaming strategy, which is your responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have, Mr. Speaker, a coherent 

gambling policy.  The real question you asked is, when am I 

going to be able to communicate that to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone?  I despair of ever being able to do that. 

 

I say to the member from Saskatoon Greystone, we have a 

coherent strategy.  Prior to October 21, 1991, gambling in this 

province was run by and large with no regard for the law and 

with patronage the only real consideration.  That's been brought 

to an end.  I have outlined for the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone our approach.  It is to minimize social problems, 

maximize revenue, and run it in a fashion in which patronage 

plays no policy.  And that's our strategy. And by and large it's 

being accepted, although I agree, not well understood by at 

least one member of the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Closing of Echo Valley Conference Centre 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister, the minister responsible for SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation).  Mr. 

Minister, it's not bad enough that you have broken nearly every 

contract signed by the former government.  But now it appears, 

Mr. Minister, that you're shutting the door to any potential 

projects in the future -- projects that are supported by the 

private sector and by local communities. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table the SPMC documents that show 

the analysis that it is better and smarter to moth-ball the Echo 

Valley Conference Centre, thereby throwing 23 

people out of work, rather than allowing the private sector to 

develop this particular piece of property?  Would you do that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I've explained to others -- 

although perhaps not in the Assembly since the matter wasn't 

raised in the Estimates which were just concluded -- the Echo 

Valley Centre, we were . . . This government has been losing 

about a half a million dollars a year on the Echo Valley Centre.  

We deemed that to be an inappropriate expenditure when all 

we were getting was a convention centre.  In this day and age 

there are other more important priorities. 

 

We have had discussions with at least one private developer 

which have not been brought to a conclusion.  It is a 

complicated problem involving as well Indian land claims in 

the area and Indian land entitlement.  The discussions are 

ongoing.  All that is . . . the only alternative which I think 

we've rejected is to continue to operate this at an operating loss 

of half a million dollars a year.  In this day and age that's 

simply not an appropriate expenditure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

local people take issue with that statement.  It seems that the 

only motive visible to anyone in the area is that you're out to 

politically destroy anything that was connected with the former 

government even in a remote way. 

 

Mr. Minister, people in the community . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I've asked the 

government members to please not interfere.  Let the member 

have his turn to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, people in that community are 

convinced that the conference centre can become a tourism 

destination area.  Would the minister kindly indicate to the 

Assembly what process was followed in the nine months that 

this government has been power, what process has been place 

that has delayed the proponents of the project as put forward by 

the community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Before I was appointed, there was set 

up a committee to study this, composed of some members of 

the Assembly and some local community people.  I got their 

report.  It did not contain any recommended course of action, I 

think, because they had difficulty finding an acceptable 

solution to this problem. 

 

It is not acceptable to continue to operate that convention 

centre at that sort of a loss.  We are not opposed to private 

development, but I have pointed out to the private developer 

with whom I've met that the Indian land claims is an issue 

which they have to meet and cannot ignore.  And my 

information is the private developer is in fact pursuing that, 

contacting the Indian band involved, and there may be some 

agreement rising out of that; I don't know. 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you know full well that 

proponents of this project have talked to the aboriginal 

community as long as a year ago about that particular piece of 

property and that particular development.  That isn't a recent 

occurrence and you know it full well.  What your government 

has been doing is interfering and slow-walking as much as 

possible this process.  Don't blame it on the aboriginal 

community. 

 

Mr. Minister, your community advisory committee did not 

recommend anything because you asked them not to.  But they 

did put forward 14 options, and 12 of those 14 options 

suggested some type of private operation. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Minister, that you have refused to truly consult 

with the community and support the private sector, so it indeed 

could help the Government of Saskatchewan out in negotiating 

a reasonable settlement to this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is asking these questions 

because we did consult with the community.  I met with 

members of the community, outlined the problems and the 

options.  That resulted in the mayor of one of the communities 

making some comments at a town hall meeting.  You're here 

asking these questions because we have fully consulted.  I have 

met with everyone who ever asked for a meeting with respect 

to this.  We have consulted fully. 

 

The consultation though has not produced an acceptable 

solution.  We still look for one, but there is no simple solution 

to that centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, people in the local community 

out there are telling you that there are solutions and that they're 

tied to the private sector.  Mr. Minister, will you tell us who 

was on that advisory committee and will you table that 

committee's report in this legislature.  Will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm prepared to table the report.  I 

couldn't offhand recall the members of the committee.  There 

were eight or ten.  I couldn't do justice to them all.  But I'll 

certainly table the report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm glad you're going to do that, Mr. 

Minister, because what it will show to the Assembly is that the 

private citizens on that committee fully supported some type of 

private operation at Echo Valley. 

 

And is it not also true, Mr. Minister, that the three NDP (New 

Democratic Party) MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) that sat on your so-called advisory committee were 

the ones who recommended the government close the centre, 

throw people out of work, rather than allow private ownership?  

Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, when the facts finally 

catch up to the member from Thunder Creek, he will find that 

the report recommends no particular course of action because 

there isn't one that is simply and easily available.  And the 

private developer who we are talking about is as aware of that 

as we are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I find 

it odd that you can't remember the names of your own three 

colleagues that sat on the committee.  Is it any wonder that the 

people in those communities out there feel some apprehension 

with a minister that can't remember the names of his own 

colleagues on the committee, that can't remember that 12 of the 

14 options presented by that committee recommended 

privatization, recommended doing things to make the Echo 

Valley Centre a destination tourism possibility. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is why people out there are asking us to 

bring questions to this Assembly, because you seem to have 

selected memory loss when it has to deal with the private sector 

and developing that.  Mr. Minister, will you give the assurance 

to this Assembly today that the recommendations of your three 

NDP colleagues will not influence the options in this report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The opposite is true.  The 

recommendations of all of my caucus members are very 

important to me and every member of Executive Council.  The 

opposite is true; they'll be taken very seriously. 

 

I say to the member from Thunder Creek, when the facts catch 

up to you, when you finally have some inkling of what you're 

talking about, you're going to find out the report doesn't 

recommend what you think it does. 

 

So the member might want to save some of these devastating 

questions for the time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give us the names of those three people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- One of my colleagues was kind 

enough to pass me the names and I will now read them out if 

you prefer.  As I pointed out to you, there's more than just the 

three members of this Assembly on it.  There is the member 

from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden; the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood; the member from Melville; and Mayor 

William Schmidt of the town of Lipton; Hazel Jardine, Fort 

Qu'Appelle; Chief Wayne Goodwill, Standing Buffalo Band; 

Webb Palmer, Fort Qu'Appelle; Mayor Fran Hahn of the town 

of Fort Qu'Appelle; Frank Hinkson of Fort Qu'Appelle; Noel 

Starblanket from the Starblanket Band, are the members of the 

committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regional College Board Appointments 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

the Minister of Education's answers with respect to the NDP's 

political hirings and firings were not adequate.  The simple 

question to the Minister of Education -- and I remind her that 

she did indeed fire the chairman of the board for the North 

West Regional College at North Battleford because he was 

appointed by the previous administration --  Madam Minister, 

can you tell this Assembly, given your government's pledge 

that no hirings would be based on politics, can you tell us if 

any of those hired to that board have any significant positions 

with The Battlefords New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as I outlined yesterday, 

we found the state of the regional college boards in this 

province in a state of total disarray, displaying the previous 

administration's lack of commitment to rural education in this 

province.  We undertook to bring all of the membership in all 

of those nine boards that we are responsible for appointing, up 

to date. 

 

Out of some approximately 60-odd positions, we reappointed 

some people who were eligible for reappointment, Mr. 

Speaker.  There is a limitation -- it's two terms and then you're 

not eligible.  We reappointed some that had been appointed by 

the previous administration.  We paid attention to the region 

because they all represent large regions.  And we made sure 

that there was representative representation from throughout 

the region.  This was also the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it looks like 

you're more interested in political representation than regional 

representation.  Madam Minister, you know full well that the 

person you first appointed to that board is one of the member 

from The Battlefords' main political campaigners, Shannon 

Lindgren, who also happens to be the president of The 

Battlefords NDP association. 

 

Madam Minister, that's simply political patronage.  You and 

your Premier may think that you can hide behind what's going 

on with health care in the RMs (rural municipality) and nobody 

will notice, but the people of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I remind members that it's 

simply unacceptable to yell across the floor, and to please not 

to interfere if a member is trying to ask a question.  I don't 

know what the question is; I can't hear it.  I'll ask members, 

please, not to interfere, and that's on both sides.  He's getting 

interference from both sides. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the appointment of 

Shannon Lindgren -- how does the appointments of NDP 

presidents to boards and commissions square with your 

election promises and your Minister of Labour's pledge to 

curtail political hirings? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, appointments to regional 

college boards should not be interpreted as 

hirings and firings.  They are appointments to a board of 

directors which meets from time to time.  They are not 

full-time jobs, and they don't . . . people that are appointed to 

regional college boards don't get $1.3 million a year like 

George Hill did, either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you said you wouldn't 

do it, so how do you justify hiring Shannon Lindgren, the 

president of The Battlefords' NDP association, to this position, 

which is a job for which she is paid? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, might I remind the hon. 

member opposite that over 55 per cent of the voters in this 

province voted for the New Democratic Party. 

 

I would say that in trying to make random selections of 

interested, qualified people for various appointments to boards 

and commission, it would be almost impossible to miss the odd 

New Democrat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Could I make a suggestion that a question be 

directed from the Leader of the Opposition to the member from 

Quill Lakes, and maybe they could carry on with the question 

period? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have a question, Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question to the same minister.  Madam Minister, does that 

mean that when I had you on the board of Saskatchewan 

Research Council, that you automatically qualified as a Tory? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I can't speak for what 

was going through the mind of the minister of the day.  I will 

say that I much appreciated the appointment, and I much 

appreciated and enjoyed my association with the then minister 

on the board of Saskatchewan Research Council at the time. 

 

And I guess it just shows that maybe the Conservatives miss 

now and then, too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, you have just proved the 

point, Madam Minister, that governments do appoint people to 

boards and commissions because of some capability which I 

believe that you had, that's why you were there. 

 

The simple fact . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The simple fact, Madam Minister, that you 

have seen fit to break the commitments of your leader and your 

Premier, and commitments made in this House 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

by the Minister of Justice, in a blatant political appointment, I 

say, Madam Minister, sullies the reputation that you had. 

Madam Minister, sullies the reputation that you had, and able 

to come to my board as a Tory cabinet minister.  And what you 

have done is a pure hypocritical move, Madam Minister. 

 

And I ask you, take the opportunity to clean up your record and 

get rid of this NDP president. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that we have 

chosen a very balanced group of people from across the 

province.  No doubt some of them are members of other 

political parties, because they were chosen for their 

competence, interest, and the time that they would have 

available to give to this task.  They were chosen on the basis of 

their competence, not their political affiliations.  And we 

certainly do have . . . have appointed people who have been 

known activists in other political movements other than the 

NDP.  And we have appointed them for their competence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Pension Benefits 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Pension Benefits be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

introduce for consideration of the House, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act.  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan workers are not content to be 

passive observers in the economy of Saskatchewan, as 

unemployment and dislocation take their toll because of the 

fluctuation in the economy of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan workers are ready, willing, and able to be and 

play an active role in determining the work they do, the 

conditions they work under, and the type of enterprise they 

work in. 

 

Saskatchewan workers are among the most productive, the 

most dependable, and the most innovative in Saskatchewan.  

But thanks to the policies of the previous government, 

thousands upon thousands have had to leave their homes, their 

communities, and their province in search of meaningful work. 

 

Tragic is not too strong a word to use when one realizes 

the countless opportunities that have been missed, Mr. Speaker.  

Opportunities missed because of the preoccupation with huge 

investment or mega projects; projects that often provided more 

jobs to out-of-province specialists than to real Saskatchewan 

people.  Opportunities missed because there was insufficient 

attention to local initiatives that would have created jobs in 

Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan families.  Opportunities 

missed because of the failure to confront and deal with the 

ever-increasing deficit.  Mr. Speaker, opportunities missed 

because of an unwillingness to admit to the people of 

Saskatchewan the problem for our economy that the huge and 

massive $14 billion debt was creating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that $5 billion . . . $15 billion debt had been 

properly invested, that money could have created about 30,000 

construction jobs with the result, plants and equipment 

employing up to 25,000 people in productive, long-term jobs 

and employment here in the province of Saskatchewan.  These 

missed opportunities are heart-breaking to our friends and 

families who have had to leave the province.  Saskatchewan 

people working here deserve a chance, Mr. Speaker, to help 

create opportunities to live and work here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporation, or 

LSVCC program, will continue to give them that opportunity 

by encouraging Saskatchewan employees to make equity 

investment in Saskatchewan in small-based and medium-sized 

businesses. 

 

But the program needs to be given a higher priority and, Mr. 

Speaker, our government has done that.  The program had 

flaws inhibiting its effectiveness and our government is 

addressing those deficits.  This Bill will streamline the 

program, add compliance features, increase the maximum 

contribution limits, and maintain compatibility with the federal 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is in addition to the many other 

responsible measures we have already taken to stimulate 

economic development in the province, and those include 

measures for the small-business sector to reduce their tax 

burden; measures for the manufacturing sector to begin to 

phase out the E&H (education and health) tax on 

manufacturing and processing inputs to improve their 

competitive position in Canada; measures to improve the 

ability of tourism industry to attract tourists and entertainment 

dollars to the province of Saskatchewan; and finally, Mr. 

Speaker, measures to enhance the community bond program by 

strengthening the Community Bond Review Committee and 

eligibility criteria and making the program accessible to 

co-operatives here in the province. 

 

(1445) 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, my department has made available 

this year another $20 million in guarantees for the community 

bond program which will stimulate investment and jobs in 

small business at the grass roots level.  In response to the call 

to streamline government and reduce the number of agencies 

involved in economic development, we will be doing this in my 

department with fewer staff and a smaller budget.  This Bill is 

an 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

important part of our economic development plan here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The amendments the House will be considering flow from the 

same process that resulted in the first realistic provincial budget 

to be presented in this legislature in some 10 years.  That is, we 

looked, we listened, and then as a government, we acted.  We 

looked at the present legislation which requires a process that 

can be costly and often cumbersome; legislation that also 

contains inconsistencies between the provincial and federal 

legislation as a result of the federal amendments announced in 

their budget in 1992. 

 

We listened to the labour and business groups, various 

government departments and Treasury Board, as well as the 

federal government.  We acted with this legislation designed to 

address their concerns and strengthen the LSVCC program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporation Amendment Act increases the contribution limits 

per investor in provincially registered LSVCC from $3,500 to 

$5,000 as announced in the budget speech.  The Bill does not 

increase the limits for federally registered corporations.  We 

anticipate that this amendment will make the program even 

more attractive to Saskatchewan workers resulting in greater 

numbers participating. 

 

Another amendment allows for the registration fee to be 

charged.  This will help offset some of the cost of 

administering the program, part of our commitment to ease the 

burden on Saskatchewan taxpayers and reduce the provincial 

deficit. 

 

The Bill will enhance the ability of the LSVCC to raise equity 

capital for small and medium-sized businesses.  This will 

create or maintain jobs and allow corporations to diversify their 

activity.  In addition, an amendment adds compliance features 

to protect taxpayers' interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now present The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporation Amendment Act for second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister likes to 

speak in glowing terms about his record of economic 

development in the province and all of the great things that he's 

going to do.  Well maybe I'd like to just take a few minutes to 

review that record for the benefit of everyone here this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's start off with AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.).  

One of the first things that they did when they came to 

government was cancel that project, Mr. Speaker -- an 

opportunity for people in this province to have the benefits of 

nuclear energy, nuclear physics, nuclear medicine brought to 

the province, research jobs, all of that type of thing. 

 

And what did they do?  They threw it out of hand because 

they've got a few people in their caucus, a few people -- 

wing-nuts I like to refer to them as -- that have no respect 

for the nuclear energy industry and absolute . . . They're afraid 

of it.  That's basically what it comes down to.  They're afraid of 

it, absolutely afraid of it. 

 

The next thing that they did after they came to power, Mr. 

Speaker, after the budget was presented, some more real good 

initiatives for economic development were announced, Mr. 

Speaker: things like the cancellation of the FeedGAP program, 

the livestock cash advance.  That will do wonders for the cattle 

feeding industry and hog feeding industry in this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  It will totally devastate it; that's what it will do.  

That's the type of record that they have when it comes to 

economic development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition started a number of programs 

when they were in government.  The community bond program 

was an excellent example of Saskatchewan people investing in 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, there were share offerings in a 

number of corporations: Saskoil, Sask Potash Corporation, 

SaskPower.  And we think it is an excellent idea to have people 

in Saskatchewan investing their money into corporations in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But what are these folks over here doing now, Mr. Speaker?  

Every single opportunity that's been presented to this province 

over the last number of months, they are quashing them, 

outright destroying any initiatives that were put together by the 

former administration.  That's what their economic 

development record is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We find it appalling that they want to destroy deals like the 

AECL, absolutely appalling, destroying the feeding industry in 

this province, Mr. Speaker.  It's unfortunate that they think that 

that's the way for economic development.  It's incredible that 

they would think that.  But, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what 

they've done. 

 

This Bill, Bill 78, Mr. Speaker, allows people the opportunity 

to invest in Saskatchewan, and we support that, Mr. Speaker.  

We support that type of thing in this province and 

whole-heartedly agree with the initiative of having people in 

Saskatchewan invest in this province.  But we do not agree 

with the initiatives in a lot of other areas when it comes to 

economic development. 

 

And if he wants to take credit for the destruction of the AECL 

agreement, the FeedGAP, the livestock cash advance, things of 

that nature, it's up to him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

minister says, are we going to vote for him.  Well I'd like to 

remind the minister, Mr. Speaker, that his popularity and his 

party's popularity is plummeting like a stone these days. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I remind the member that we're on the 

Bill and not the popularity of members in this House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm aware of that, and 

I'm sure you're aware of their popularity too. 

 

The Bill sets forth the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for people in 

this province to invest in the province, and we support that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would ask some time, though, that we  



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

feel that it's necessary to go through all of the sections of the 

Bill to review it and consult with people about the various 

provisions within the Bill.  I think that it's important that we 

take the time to do that, so I would ask to adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- I wonder if I could have members' leave to make 

a very short statement? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm rising 

today to move second reading of a Bill to amend The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act as outlined in the May 7th 

provincial budget and subsequent announcements which have 

been made since that time. 

 

Repeated budget deficits during the past 10 years have forced 

the government to make some very difficult or very tough 

decisions.  This government is committed to putting an end to 

out-of-control spending.  If this is not done, Mr. Speaker, we 

will place an impossible burden on future generations.  Our 

children would pay a huge price for what would be our lack of 

will and, indeed, our failure. 

 

The government announced in the throne speech that it would 

demonstrate a new determination to control government 

spending.  This determination demanded that difficult budget 

decisions be made to restore the financial position of the 

province.  Common sense and competence need to prevail with 

respect to provincial finances, and we must be fiscally 

responsible. 

 

New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, are on record as supporting a 

pension plan for home-makers, part-time workers, small 

business, and farmers.  The sad truth, however, is that 

Saskatchewan has been burdened with the highest per capita 

debt in Canada.  We can no longer afford programs such as this 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan which is poorly targeted and 

doesn't deliver support to those who truly need it. 

 

Since its introduction in 1986, the government has paid 

sixty-six and a half million dollars into the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  Despite this, we learn that there is a further 

unfunded liability of $43.2 million at the end of 1991, an 

unfunded liability which was projected to reach $80 million by 

1995. 

 

Modifying the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is one of the ways 

we are taking control of this province's spending.  The people 

of Saskatchewan recognize the deplorable state of finances in 

this province.  They have also indicated that they want the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan to be left intact, even if 

government funding is unavailable. 

 

By amending The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, the 

government has been able to cut spending and still be 

responsive to this public demand.  The modified plan will 

provide Saskatchewan people the opportunity to contribute to a 

personal retirement savings plan and therefore make plans for 

their retirement.  This new plan will not be at the expense of 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill provides for the elimination of government matching 

contributions after May 7 of this year and elimination of the 

guaranteed minimum pension on the day that this Act is 

assented to.  Members will continue to get the benefit of their 

own contributions and government matches prior to May 7.  

What's being eliminated is the government subsidy to pay 

larger benefits.  The amendments to the Act will allow plan 

members and other residents of the province to contribute to a 

voluntary pension plan to supplement their retirement income. 

 

These amendments result in a plan substantially different from 

what members originally enrolled in.  And to be fair to people 

who believe that this plan is no longer in their best interest, all 

members will be given the option to withdraw their funds in 

their account.  A six-month withdrawal period will begin once 

this legislation is passed and the tax issues are resolved.  

Members will be notified when the six-month period 

commences. 

 

People already retired under the plan will have their pensions 

adjusted to reflect the elimination of the guaranteed minimum.  

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to also point out a very important 

decision the government has made related to this.  And that is 

that the government is committed to helping those seniors truly 

in need by increasing the Saskatchewan Income Plan benefits 

which was announced in the budget, which will be effective on 

October 1 of this year.  The option to withdraw from the 

program will also be extended to these retired members.  They 

may request a one-time, lump sum pay-out of their future 

pension excluding the government subsidy, as calculated by an 

actuary. 

 

In addition, these amendments incorporate some important 

aspects of The Pension Benefits Act which, except for the 

investment provisions, do not apply to this plan.  The Act will 

now empower provisions for the division of assets in cases of 

marital breakdown, identical to the nature to The Pension 

Benefits Act.  It will also provide for regulations allowing 

members to receive an optional pay-out of small pension 

amounts. 

 

Other amendments included in this Bill are of a housekeeping 

nature consistent with these announced measures and a 

provision authorizing the government to pay costs associated 

with these changes. 

 

What remains is a program members can contribute to at their 

own option, to build or supplement their retirement savings. 

 

This plan is the only tax-deferred savings plan available to 

members who don't qualify for an RRSP (registered retirement 

savings plan) because they don't have the necessary earned 

income as defined by Revenue Canada.  Members' money 

continues to be invested by 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

professional money managers and has generated a competitive 

rate of return averaging 9.15 per cent over the past six years.  

As before there are no minimum contributions or fixed 

payment schedules.  The money is protected from seizure claim 

or garnishee by creditors of any sort. 

 

These changes to the plan are part of a new era in government, 

an era of living within our means.  By instituting these changes 

now we are securing the future for our children and our 

grandchildren.  These changes have been made necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, for a number of reasons: one, because of the financial 

situation that this province faces, and two, because the plan as 

it was, Mr. Speaker, has not been very well targeted, has not 

served the people who are most needing it, and therefore needs 

some substantial changes. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, and those explanations, I am 

pleased to move second reading of the Bill to amend The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Regina Rosemont 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could ask members' 

leave to make a short statement.  I've discussed this with the 

members of the opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Sergeant-at-Arms Birthday Greetings 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to take this opportunity 

today to recognize an important day in the member of . . . 

officer of this Assembly.  It's an officer who serves often with 

the thankless task of trying to keep us in order and to keep us 

apart from our jousting on a daily basis. 

 

I refer of course to our Sergeant-at-Arms, Mr. Bill Goodhand.  

Today is Mr. Goodhand's birthday, Mr. Speaker, and I'd ask all 

members of the Assembly to recognize this, an important 

anniversary in the life of Mr. Goodhand, and also in 

recognition for his contribution to service in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We would also from 

the opposition like to extend congratulations to the 

Sergeant-at-Arms on his birthday as well. 

 

(1500) 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 (continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, we're dealing with the Bill to make 

changes in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And I think we 

should maybe review a little bit of the history of the pension 

plan over the last few months. 

Mr. Speaker, in the budget that came out in late April the 

Minister of Finance hacked and slashed his way through the 

economy of Saskatchewan and one of the casualties was the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And I think it's important that the 

people in Saskatchewan recognize how this came about.  I 

think it was a direct attack on the Kindersley constituency for 

not electing a member of the New Democratic Party, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think that was a large part of the motive of cutting 

off this program.  Had very, very little to do with the finances 

and a whole lot to do with revenge, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 

happened. 

 

And then what did they do when they outright cancelled the 

pension plan?  One day previous to the announcement of the 

budget, they sent out notice to the employees of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan there -- lay-off notices, Mr. 

Speaker.  One day previous to the announcement.  They were 

in the process, Mr. Speaker, of ordering new stationery and 

things of that nature, needs for the upcoming year, and then 

they were given their lay-off notices. 

 

Subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, there was a great deal, 

tremendous public opposition to the cancellation of the pension 

plan.  So, Mr. Speaker, what happened then was the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) issue really heated up in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and in an effort to try and deflect 

criticism on the government, they threw a bone back to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  They gave them back a skeleton of a 

program that once was an excellent program -- the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker.  They threw a bone 

back to the people of Saskatchewan and gave it back to them in 

a very, very unpopular fashion.  They gave it back to them 

minus the most important provisions within the pension plan, 

Mr. Speaker, which were the matching contributions as well as 

the minimum guaranteed pension, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance suggests that we 

recommended it.  We never did recommend that, Mr. Speaker.  

We suggested that the government could take a look at the 

matching contributions.  We suggested that they could take a 

look at other provisions within the program, but keep the 

program in place, Mr. Speaker.  That was what we 

recommended, and that's what the people of Saskatchewan 

recommended. 

 

They also suggested that if the government wanted to suspend 

the matching contribution for a very, very limited time, maybe 

that would be acceptable.  But they didn't suggest that they 

could do both -- cut off the minimum guaranteed pension as 

well as absolutely slash the matching contribution, Mr. 

Speaker.  That was never recommended by anyone, regardless 

of what the Finance minister suggests over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister suggests that the program 

was poorly targeted.  That's what he called it -- poorly targeted.  

Mr. Speaker, 54,000 people in Saskatchewan received benefits 

and contributed benefits, money, into the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  And I'm sure they'll be glad to hear that they are 

one of the ones that were, as the Finance minister suggests, 

people who were poorly targeted. 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

Eighty per cent of the people within the pension plan were 

women -- obviously poor targets, Mr. Speaker.  Sixty per cent 

of the people within the pension plan have an income of less 

than $16,000, I believe it is.  Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of the 

people have an income of less than $16,000 in this province.  

Mr. Speaker, another example of poorly targeted -- people with 

less than $16,000 income.  And the minister refers to them . . . 

as the program being poorly targeted. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister is wrong.  I think 

he's completely out of touch with what the needs and reality 

with respect to the pension plan in this province.  It was an 

excellent plan.  That was the reason why people contributed to 

the program.  That was the reason why there was tremendous 

opposition.  That was the reason why there was the opposition 

from your back benches towards you, Mr. Finance Minister, 

with respect to the changes in the program. 

 

You've been able to appease at least your caucus members by 

throwing back the pension plan in a skeletal fashion.  But you 

haven't been able to please the people of Saskatchewan with 

respect to this, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan -- and we have been receiving all kinds of calls 

and letters with respect to this -- they still feel that the program 

was an excellent program and should be reinstated. 

 

What I believe and what a lot of other people in this province 

believe, Mr. Speaker, is the pension plan will die a slow death 

as a result of the changes that they've made to it.  The reason 

why it'll die that slow death, Mr. Speaker, is because people 

will look at the benefits associated now with the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan -- the changes in the program -- they will look at 

those changes and they will say to themselves, I will compare 

the rate of return that I might expect from the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  I will compare it against all other options that I 

have for investing my money and if it isn't any better, then they 

will opt for another investment. 

 

The fact that there isn't a government contribution any longer 

will contribute to that feeling within people that they should 

compare various investment opportunities rather than continue 

with the pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the minister suggests: what's wrong with 

that?  Well, Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with that is that people 

will not be contributing to a pension plan; they'll be 

contributing to an investment fund or they'll be contributing to 

some other vehicle of investment opportunity that will not 

provide benefits for their retirement.  It will provide short-term 

benefits, not like the pension plan that provided benefits for 

people in their retirement years. 

 

I think everyone in the province, except perhaps the Minister of 

Finance, recognizes that their retirement, to have income set 

away for your retirement, is an important thing, Mr. Speaker.  

He has . . . the Finance minister has money in a retirement fund 

put away for himself.  I suspect he thinks that that's a very good 

and useful thing for himself.  He has over a million dollars in 

his pension plan, Mr. Speaker.  Nice little tidy sum -- over a 

million dollars in his own personal pension plan. 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, 54,000 people in this province are 

poorly targeted.  Mr. Speaker, $1 million in his own pension 

plan, I suggest, is poorly targeted, very poorly targeted to one 

individual.  One individual with a million dollars in his pension 

plan is poorly targeted; 40-some million dollars in a pension 

plan for 54,000 people of this province, I suggest, is not poorly 

targeted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it is targeted right where the need is, the needs of the 

people of Saskatchewan and not the personal needs of the 

Finance minister of this province, Mr. Speaker.  And I think a 

lot of people in Saskatchewan, the vast majority of people in 

Saskatchewan, would agree with me whole-heartedly that he 

doesn't need that kind of pension; they need a pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to voice our concerns about the 

changes in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And I'm sure the 

people of Saskatchewan will continue to voice their opposition 

to the changes in the pension plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would now like to adjourn debate on 

this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Repeal Act.  In May of this year I announced a 

new strategy which will provide a comprehensive, 

province-wide response by the criminal justice system to 

victims of crime. 

 

This new approach will respond to the changing needs of 

victims and the growing demand by victims for immediate and 

effective services to help them deal with the effects of 

victimization. 

 

Until now, resources for victims in this province have been 

focused on providing some limited compensation for victims of 

violent crime through the criminal injuries compensation 

program.  However, this approach has served less than 10 per 

cent of victims of violent crime.  Compensation awarded some 

significant amount of time after the violent event has generally 

been small. 

 

I believe it is time to shift the focus of victims' programs and 

expenditures away from this formalized and delayed response 

and concentrate instead on serving the immediate needs of 

victims. 

 

Part of this refocusing of victim services includes making the 

criminal injuries compensation program more effective and 

more accessible and responsive to victims.  To this end, The 

Criminal Injuries Compensation Act will be repealed.  With the 

repeal of the Act, the operations of the Crimes Compensation 

Board will be ended.  However, there will be a transition period 

during which the board will be able to deal with applications 

received by it before April 1, 1992. 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

The criminal injuries compensation program will continue in 

an administrative form.  Applications received after April 1 

will be dealt with under The Victims of Crime Amendment 

Act, 1992, which I am also introducing today.  We are taking 

this step despite the fact that the federal government has 

withdrawn any cost sharing of criminal injuries compensation 

as of March 31, 1992. 

 

This withdrawal of funding has provided further impetus to 

rethink the present structure of the criminal injuries 

compensation program to ensure that we provide the most 

effective services possible.  Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of an Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We are going to 

take a look at your observations, Mr. Minister, and deal with 

this.  And when the critic is here we will be involving him in 

the discussion.  There are definitely some questions that we 

want to raise in relation to this, and that might be his 

observations, but we want to take the time to look at it a little 

bit more closely, and therefore I adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Victims of Crime Amendment 

Act, 1992, which I referred to a few moments ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments are part of a larger strategy 

which was announced in May of this year.  This province-wide 

strategy will provide a broader range of services to more 

victims of crime across the province.  This approach responds 

to the changing needs of victims and the growing demands by 

victims for immediate and effective services. 

 

The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1992, will consolidate 

all victim service provisions under one piece of legislation.  A 

broad range of victims' programs will be authorized under part 

2 of this Act, while criminal injuries compensation will be dealt 

with under part 3. 

 

Until now, the province's resources for victims have been, as I 

have mentioned earlier, focused on providing some limited 

compensation to victims of violent crime through funding of 

the Crimes Compensation Board.  In our estimation, this 

approach has served less than 10 per cent of victims.  Awards 

have been small and they have been received some significant 

amount of time after the fact.  And there has been no way to 

ensure that the money paid out has been used to deal with the 

trauma and the injury resulting from a violent crime. 

 

It is time, Mr. Speaker, to shift the focus of victims' programs 

and expenditures away from the formalized, delayed response 

inherent in the present criminal injuries compensation program.  

And as I mentioned earlier, the withdrawal of federal funding 

for criminal injuries compensation means that we must review 

how effectively we use the limited amount of money available 

for victims, responding directly to their needs. 

 

As part of the refocusing of criminal injuries compensation, I 

am introducing today The Criminal Injuries Compensation 

Repeal Act, and I have just spoken to that.  With the repeal of 

that Act, the Crimes Compensation Board will be abolished.  

Amendments to this Act, The Victims of Crime Act, will set up 

an administrative process that will allow the Minister of Justice 

to provide compensation to victims of crime.  Similar programs 

already exist in some jurisdictions and are being considered by 

others. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Crimes Compensation Board will complete its work with 

respect to applications received by it before April 1 of this 

year.  Applications received after that date will be dealt with 

through the new process.  The Minister of Justice will continue 

payment of ongoing awards ordered by the Crimes 

Compensation Board.  And the minister will be able to review 

and vary such awards where that is appropriate. 

 

Under the criminal injuries compensation provisions of The 

Victims of Crime Amendment Act, which I am speaking to 

now, the minister will provide compensation for monetary 

losses.  These will include such things as medical, dental, and 

other services provided by health care professionals, funeral 

costs, lost earnings, personal property loss or damage, and 

maintenance of dependants. 

 

The minister will not, as a general rule, pay compensation for 

pain and suffering.  This is not to say that the trauma of 

victimization will not be addressed.  It will simply not be 

addressed in the previous way by the payment of money. 

 

Under part II of the Act, the emphasis will now be on programs 

providing initial crisis intervention to deal with the 

psychological injuries suffered by victims of crime.  We 

believe that this will be more effective than the after-the 

_fact, pain-and-suffering awards made by the Crimes 

Compensation Board. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, there was no way under that system to 

ensure that the money was used to deal with the trauma 

suffered by a victim.  Under the new system, victims will get 

the immediate services they need through crisis-intervention 

programs designed to assist victims of crime. 

 

There will also be some ability, under part III of the Act, to 

assist in the provision of counselling services to victims of 

crime.  Up to $1,000 per individual may be provided by the 

minister pursuant to the provisions dealing with criminal 

injuries compensation. 

 

The new province-wide victim strategy, while designed to 

serve all victims of crime, will give particular attention to the 

needs of women, children, and aboriginal people.  The strategy 

will be focused on developing immediate crisis-intervention 

services, enhancing justice services by creating facilities such 

as victim and witness rooms in the court-houses, and providing 

general support services to victims such as the refocused 

criminal injuries 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

compensation program that I have just described. 

 

The money for the operations of the victim strategy will come 

out of the victims fund, which was established by The Victims 

of Crime Act in 1989 and is made up of surcharges on fines for 

criminal offences.  It will not be a drain on the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 

Victims of Crime Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to just 

make a few remarks. 

 

I know that this is a very important framework to be 

discussing.  It's a relative benefit to the society we live in 

because many times compensation is not made to those people 

who are victims of crime.  In some cases it's financial and in 

some cases it's, as you suggested, Mr. Minister, it's 

psychological; sometimes it's a medical compensation that 

needs to be made. 

 

In all of this there has to be a way to determine whether, in 

fact, there is a bench-mark of monetary loss in relation to this.  

And in compensation, in insurance, and in various areas similar 

to that where compensation is paid for accidental loss or 

accidental death on the part of, let's say something like SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) . . . I'm familiar with 

that because my father was a part of that and died in a car 

accident and so we have . . . I understand that there is a certain 

degree of impact when that happens.  And in compensating the 

victim and the victims of this kind of a loss, we have to take 

seriously those people who are hurt by the victims of crime, the 

victims of circumstances that are not criminal.  And I think that 

needs to be addressed. 

 

We're going to take a look at all of the aspects.  We probably 

have some significant questions in relation to this.  We want to 

deal with that. And therefore, Mr. Chairman, I move the debate 

be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, to request leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce my brother-in-law, who is in your gallery, 

sir, Craig Gordon.  Craig is from Alberta.  He has his roots in 

Saskatchewan.  He's holidaying in Kenosee Lake. Carnduff is 

his home town and my home town originally.  And Craig is in 

Regina on business for the day. 
 

Craig is in the water resource management business in Alberta.  

He's the general manager of the western irrigation district.  And 

he previously was the manager with the eastern irrigation 

district in Alberta.  So he spent many years in the irrigation 

business.  In fact, he's one of 

the key players in Alberta in the irrigation field. 

 

So I would like to extend my welcome to Craig and ask 

members to join me in extending our welcome to the House.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me 

today is Susan Amrud, a Crown solicitor with the Department 

of Justice; and Ted Madill who is the Rentalsman. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a few questions that I'd like to pose to you today in 

committee on this.  They're not too lengthy.  And I guess if we 

get the appropriate answers, we can probably move right along 

on this particular item. 

 

Why, Mr. Minister, did you find it necessary to eliminate the 

Rent Appeal Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

prime consideration here was cost savings, was efficiencies.  

And we have attempted to revamp the program in such a way 

that we can continue to provide the service that we think is 

essential while cutting all the costs that we could. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I fully understand the necessity 

to establish budgets, be on track with the fiscal reality of the 

day.  And I'm sure that either later today or tomorrow 

sometime, the Minister of Finance will be back before this 

Assembly with another interim supply Bill -- the third or fourth 

since this Assembly came together -- and he will be telling us 

about his measures to stay on the budget. 

 

There's a lot of criticism starting to mount, Mr. Minister, that 

your government's single focus on fiscal matters is to the 

detriment of some areas in society.  Certainly the whole area of 

the Rent Appeal Commission and the things that have gone 

with it -- and I believe that was even established under a former 

NDP government in the 1970s if I'm not wrong -- was that 

there needed to be some monitoring service that would give 

assurances to individuals, particularly in rapid inflationary and 

price-rising times, that there would be some stability. 

 

And I would like the minister to outline the process of 

monitoring a little more for the committee so that we would 

feel more assurance that budget management isn't poor 

people-management. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the changes to the Act, 

as I have already said, are meant to streamline the operations of 

the office and thereby to achieve cost savings while trying to 

maintain the main elements of the program, that is, the 

elements that are most needed by 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

and in demand by the tenants and the landlords of this 

province. 

 

We have, among other things in the Bill, attempted to simplify 

the procedure for resolving security deposit disputes.  We have 

removed the requirement for a Rentalsman officer to 

investigate every complaint.  Instead we will have a hearing 

within the commission in respect of such cases.  The Rent 

Appeal Commission has been eliminated, as the member has 

already noted.  And appeals from orders made following these 

hearings that I've described will go to the courts. 

 

We're comfortable with that because under the previous 

procedure, the order of the Rentalsman was made after an 

investigation, and if one of the parties wasn't satisfied to it, they 

could then go the Rent Appeal Commission which did hold a 

hearing.  The difference here is that the hearing is held at the 

first stage.  So the order that is made following that hearing is 

of a different order than previously, where the order was made 

following an investigation rather than a hearing.  So we've kind 

of combined those two ideas into one process. 

 

(1530) 

 

However all of that's subject to an appeal to the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  All of the rent review and the rent control 

provisions are repealed.  That is certainly a significant change 

in the Act.  At the time -- and the member's quite right -- these 

provisions were enacted in the 1970s.  They were enacted, the 

member may recall, as part of the national anti-inflation 

program at the time and at a time when rents were leaping 

ahead and where there was quite a demand for apartment space.  

And as part of the attempts to control inflation at the time, rents 

were controlled on a nation-wide basis, and Saskatchewan was 

required to participate and do its share. 

 

That situation has not been with us for some time.  Rents are 

stable; in some areas they've even fallen.  And the supply of 

apartments and other rental living accommodation is 

favourable.  There's lots of space for rent and there's no need to 

have this kind of rent review and rent control in the present 

economy. 

 

Who knows what tomorrow may bring.  The situation may 

change and if that's the case, some future legislature may 

decide to respond to it. 

 

I might mention that the landlords and the tenants who have 

disputes have the alternative of taking their disputes directly to 

the Court of Queen's Bench rather than to the Rentalsman's 

office.  And in addition to that there are a number of 

housekeeping amendments in the Act. 

 

But that generally describes the new regime that is being 

proposed to the legislature in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you and I both agree that 

the prudent monetary moves of the present federal Tory 

government are far sounder that what we had under a Liberal 

government in the '70s, but be as it may, you and I won't argue 

that point any further. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many jobs will be lost as a result of the 

elimination of the Rent Appeal Commission and staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

changes to the program will enable us to eliminate 14.5 

positions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, will the Office of the 

Rentalsman now require additional staff to handle the shift of 

responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, there will be . . . this 

will leave us with nine employees in the program and that will 

be enough to perform the job that has to be done here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, would you explain to the 

Assembly the reason behind a base-rent figure and the fact that 

it will no longer be there -- how that will impact, say, on the 

rental market in the city of Regina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have had very few applications or 

complaints with respect to the level of the rent.  The 

commission hasn't been asked to review rents or rent increases 

in many cases at all.  The vacancy rate is relatively high all 

across the province and the rents, as I mentioned earlier, are 

stable.  In fact in some areas they've actually decreased, and so 

there's just no pressure on that side of the program at all, and it 

hasn't been necessary for the commission to intervene and, in 

effect, set any base rents.  The market is setting the rent and 

there are no complaints and the commission just hasn't had to 

intervene and deal with it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, just for clarification, 

what was the last base-rent figure that was used in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

While you're at it, Mr. Minister, I think there's a couple more 

officials that must belong to you that are in the back of the 

House.  I'm not sure.  If they're not yours, then they shouldn't 

be here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, with the leave or 

concurrence of the House, these are officials who are present 

for the next two Bills that will be heard.  So if there's no 

objection, they could stay.  They are all officials of the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Now as to your question, just give me a moment to consult 

with my official.  There is no number of general applications 

that applies on the rental market for the reason that the rental 

for apartments varies widely from neighbourhood to 

neighbourhood and block to block and apartment to apartment 

depending upon the size of the apartment and the quality of the 

rental accommodation and the location and that sort of factor.  

So that we don't have a number we can give to the hon. 

member in . . . as a base-rent figure. 

 

Where these cases arise, it is . . . there would normally have 

been a rent increase which the tenant does not feel is justified, 

and in those circumstances the office would do an investigation 

and do a survey of the market -- the market with respect to that 

particular kind of apartment -- or try and find the close parallels 

and determine what is the norm; or perhaps to use the member's 

term, what is 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

the base rent in those circumstances, although that's not a term 

that I would use, but that doesn't mean much. 

 

The fact is, as I've told the member, that there hasn't been much 

activity in this area at all in recent years because of the housing 

market and the availability of rental accommodation.  So in 

short, I can't answer the member's question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we'll take you at your 

word on that. 

 

Mr. Minister, why was the 12-month rate increase period taken 

out of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I believe the member is referring to the 

provisions that have to do with rent control.  My information is 

that the rent control provisions were actually suspended.  Their 

operation was suspended in 1983 and the office moved to the 

system of rent review that I have been referring to.  So we 

haven't been using the concept. 

 

It is relevant, though, in the sense that rent increases have 

occurred every 12 months . . . or not more than once every 12 

months.  So that figure has retained some relevance under the 

legislation as it presently stands.  As I said earlier, we are in 

this Bill just simply repealing all of the rent control provisions 

and the rent review provisions and we'll just allow the market 

to set the level of the rents. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So in other words, Mr. Minister, the same 

reason would apply then.  There was a provision in the Bill that 

had a maximum amount of rent increase that was there.  And 

you're saying that that also would be included then with the 

12-month proviso and they'd all be taken out with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the way I read this, and I'm not 

the individual responsible for this particular critic position as 

you can appreciate, but it seems to me upon looking at this, that 

there will be a one-month time lapse after the time of 

proclamation where an appeal won't be allowed.  And I find 

that strange that that time lag would be in there where 

something in 30 days after proclamation could really happen to 

somebody and they won't have an appeal process in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That is a very good point, Mr. 

Chairman.  And the department saw that point after the Bill 

was printed.  And the way in which we're going to resolve that 

is to proclaim the appeal part of the Bill immediately, and that 

will be the way around the problem. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So you don't . . . What you're saying, Mr. 

Minister, you don't need a House amendment of any kind to 

cover off the legalities.  You can stagger proclamation of 

various clauses in the Bill and get by with that.  That's what 

you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right.  It's not a perfect solution 

but it'll work.  So that's what we'll be doing. 

The Chair: -- Can members agree to proceed through the Bill 

on page-by-page basis?  Agreed. 

 

Page 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would just like 

to thank the minister and his officials for their answers in this 

particular area, and hope that everything goes well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I also would like to thank the officials 

for coming today and assisting me and the House in this 

process. 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce the officials that 

are with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce 

Andrea Seale, a Crown solicitor with the Department of 

Justice, who will be assisting me today. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

reviewing this particular Bill, one thing that has come to light 

that I think is an important matter for the Assembly to deal 

with is the question of how the Ombudsman's total impartiality 

is dealt with by this legislature. 

 

And one thing that was very evident to me sitting on the 

government side, was that whenever this topic of the 

Ombudsman came up in the past that the then NDP opposition 

always had a lot to say about the Ombudsman and his role in 

society and government and his independence from the 

government -- that it simply wasn't strong enough, that we 

should look at ways and alternatives to further that. 

 

I noticed in your first stab at the Ombudsman's role in 

relationship to this Assembly and how he governs himself, that 

there is one thing that I would have assumed would have been 

there, and that was the ability of the Assembly to set the 

Ombudsman's budget rather than a particular minister.  That it 

would be this legislative body here that would be the sole 

determining factor as to how much money and staff and time 

and all those things that the Ombudsman would have in order 

to perform his duties properly; that that true independence, if 

you will, that I often heard spoken about by New Democrats, 

would have been in this Bill.  And I don't find it there. 

 

I would like the minister to sort of give me some reasons, given 

all of the rhetoric over the years, why this is absent from this 

particular piece of legislation. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, this 

is a very important question and a serious one, and one that we 

discussed and debated for quite some time as we were 

preparing this legislation and as we were  



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

discussing it through the various steps in the process internal to 

government.  And the question is the broader question than the 

Ombudsman, because there are other agencies in respect of 

which much the same argument can be made. 

 

There are very forceful arguments that can be made in support 

of the member's suggestion and I acknowledge that.  And for 

the time being we have decided to leave it where it has been 

but not for any particularly cogent reasons either, Mr. 

Chairman.  Rather we are, I think, a bit uncertain about how 

these can be worked, and I think we're in need of some more 

work and probably some consultation with members opposite 

to work out a format or a process for setting budgets. 

 

Having said that, I realize that the Assembly has experience in 

setting budgets for officers and functions that now fall within 

the purview of the legislature and where the budgets are set 

outside the normal government process.  And we're conscious 

of that.  But just at this point we didn't feel ready to make the 

step.  And we'd like to have some time to reflect on it and to do 

some more work on it and, as I mentioned, some consultations 

with members opposite and determine whether we are all 

agreed that this would be a good step to take or not. 

 

We also want to have that discussion, as I mentioned earlier, in 

a wider context involving other agencies where the arguments 

that the hon. member has in support of this position could be 

made with equal force. 

 

So what I'm saying to the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, is that 

we regard this as a proper subject for further discussion and 

consultation, and we'll be following up on that in the months to 

come. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 

consultative mood.  I can assure you that the 10 members of the 

official opposition have consulted amongst themselves.  And as 

you will now see by the House amendment given to your 

official, we have felt strongly enough about it that we've 

deemed it appropriate on this particular piece of legislation to 

bring in a House amendment, check with the legislative Law 

Clerk, make sure that we had everything in order. 

 

And I have checked with some of the Hansard from the past, 

and there are enough New Democrats sitting in the Chamber 

today who have voiced concern in the past about this that if 

they added their votes to the 10 votes of the members of the 

official opposition, I'm sure this House amendment would pass, 

at least reading from the record of their past comments in this 

particular area.  And I give the assurance to the minister that 

with the passage of this amendment you would see the official 

opposition being very diligent and co-operative with the 

minister in setting the budgetary process. Perhaps we would set 

some precedents that these other areas of contention that the 

minister referred to could also be solved. 

 

I know there are some legislative things that the auditor would 

like to have handled that would change his role in life a little 

bit, and we're more than prepared to discuss those along with 

other areas of officers of the Assembly.  I'm sure the minister, 

he may want to point out to me, why 

this sudden change in your views?  Well I quite frankly never 

made any on the record.  I made sure I checked that before I 

came into this Assembly and talked about this. 

 

But one thing is true. None of us can deny the public 

expectation and public perception of how this place operates 

has changed fairly dramatically in the last few years.  And, Mr. 

Minister, this whole idea of co-operation and consultation with 

the opposition is great, but we've unfortunately just gone 

through a stage in this Assembly where the rules of this 

Assembly were changed unilaterally for the very first time in 

our history. 

 

And that doesn't bode well for your commitment to me that on 

this particular item you're going to sort of seek a lot of opinion 

on how things are going to be done because all I've got to go on 

is some past experiences that I find rather bitter recently, and 

that doesn't give me a lot of assurance. And that's why I am 

bringing forward today this particular House amendment that 

seems to me to cover off comments of members of this 

Assembly for at least the last half-dozen years in a fairly strong 

way.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, this is a darn good place 

to start. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only say to the 

member that when I say that I would like to consult with the 

opposition, that means that I would like to consult with the 

opposition, and I will consult.  And there's just no question or 

two ways about that. 

 

I am conscious as I have this discussion across the floor with 

the member, that our own democratic reform paper was quite 

clear on the matter, and the member has captured the essence 

of that in his proposed House amendment.  I tried to indicate to 

the member that it was a close call as far as we were concerned 

and that we had considerable discussions about it and just felt 

that we weren't in a position to make the plunge.  Probably that 

expresses the move too strongly, Mr. Chairman, but we just 

weren't prepared to take the step. 

 

And if the member requires a response to the amendment right 

now, then I would be bound by the decision that we had 

already made not to take this step at this time, but rather to 

refuse the House amendment at the moment, but make it clear 

to the member that this is not an open subject and that we want 

to consider it further, and we want to have a direct and 

meaningful discussion with the opposition with respect to how 

this kind of a system would work. 

 

Now if the member is prepared to accept that assurance and not 

put the House amendment, we can proceed.  If the member 

would prefer to do it though, we could adjourn the House's 

consideration of this Bill while we, on our side, review the 

amendment, which I have just seen now for the first time, and 

come back to this at another day. 

 

So can I toss the ball back to the member, Mr. Chairman, and 

see how he would like to handle this. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I appreciate the spot that you're in.  And I am more 

than willing to say, why don't we set this particular piece of 

legislation aside to let sober second thought take 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

place and maybe we can move forward in a manner that is 

appropriate to all sides and we get on with this. 

 

I think of all the areas, Mr. Minister, where we have this 

particular type of decision to make that this one is probably the 

easiest to bring about, rather than some of the other ones which 

have larger budgetary ramifications tied to them and are 

tougher points to deal with than this one would be.  So I'm 

quite willing to adjourn this one until a future date, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll just recap what I 

understand has passed between the member and I.  The 

member has proffered a House amendment, which I have 

danced around about and volunteered to the member that we 

would be prepared to defer further consideration of this Bill by 

committee until another day to give the government an 

opportunity to consider the House amendment which he has 

just put. 

 

Now as to how one accomplishes that within the rules of the 

House, I'm unclear.  But I am prepared to do whatever is 

necessary to accommodate the understanding that he and I have 

just reached. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, would the 

Clerk inform the chairman and then provide for us an answer to 

the question that the minister raised and we'll proceed in that 

fashion. 

 

The Chair: -- Well if that's the case, then the minister can 

simply move that the committee report progress on the Bill. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials that are with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again I 

have with me Susan Amrud, a Crown solicitor with the 

Department of Justice; and Greg Hebert, the manager of 

administration in the property registration branch in the 

department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would the minister please 

advise the Assembly about the context of the Bill, and then I 

will see whether I have some questions about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. The amendments 

will eliminate the requirement that the Land Titles officers 

ensure compliance with The Homesteads Act.  Now the Act 

will still continue to operate and still be in full force and effect 

but it will be up to the people preparing the documents, to the 

vendors, to ensure that the consent of the non-owning spouse 

and that the certificates are properly completed, and the onus 

will fall on them and it will no longer be a requirement that 

Land Titles Office officials analyse these documents and 

ensure compliance. 

 

Along with those provisions, the member will have noticed that 

in the event that anything goes wrong, the parties have access 

to the assurance fund under The Land Titles Act, and their right 

to take action is also clarified in the Bill. 

 

But at the heart of the matter is the simple change where 

officials in the Land Titles Office will not have to check every 

document for compliance with The Homesteads Act.  That will 

become a private obligation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have just one question.  I know that in 

dealing with a number of issues as it relates to The Homesteads 

Act, there were a number of concerns raised by lenders in the 

fact that the Farm Ownership Board had . . . or maybe it's the 

Farm Land Security Board.  I'll tell you what the problem is 

and then you maybe identify whether it's in here.  If it's not, 

that's fine. 

 

It deals with the capacity of individuals to assign after the fact 

a new homestead under The Homesteads Act, and that has 

created a problem of some significance.  And the various kinds 

of lenders have approached me as I was a minister and also as a 

member, that it causes a great deal of problems in two areas, 

probably one where the credit unions are involved and the 

other one where Ag Credit is involved.  And I was wondering 

if the minister would respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The situation that the member refers to, 

Mr. Chairman, is not dealt with in this Bill.  It will be dealt 

with in another Bill that will be before the House in this 

session. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Bill can 

proceed then. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, on my own behalf and 

on behalf of the Assembly, I'd like to thank the officials for 

coming to help us today. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to 

introduce on my left the deputy minister of Education, Arlene 

Hynd, and seated directly behind her is Michael Littlewood. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if 

the minister would mind explaining to the House just what the 

purpose for these amendments to The Education Act are. 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the 

amendments before the House today will be to clarify the 

provisions that are required to be followed by school boards in 

the event of the closure of a school, a whole school, or the 

discontinuance of a grade or grades. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, does not the Act also 

apply to copyright? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, sorry.  There's a second 

aspect which applies to the copyright provisions, and they are 

designed to bring our provincial legislation in line with some 

new federal legislation in this respect which is designed to 

assure that compensation is paid to the authors and publishers 

of copyright material. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Who have 

you been receiving requests from to make these changes to The 

Education Act? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in respect of the 

copyright, this is a serious concern in that the school boards in 

the province and individual schools and teachers know that 

there is a requirement under the federal copyright legislation to 

provide for licensing, and it's very cumbersome for each 

individual or each board to enter into those agreements on their 

own.  So the intent of the legislation is for the province to 

provide an umbrella agreement on behalf of boards and 

teachers and users of copyright material in the education 

system. 

 

So we are being requested by those interested groups to amend 

our legislation to fall in line with the federal requirements. 

 

In the case of the provisions relating to school closures, we 

have a number of examples where cases have gone before the 

courts.  In fact the court last year, when they issued an 

injunction in the Govan situation, made it temporary and 

reserved their decision until early in 1992 and stated that the 

reason they had difficulty rendering a decision was because of 

lack of clarity in the Act -- which certainly made it incumbent 

upon us as legislators to amend the Act to provide the clarity 

that the court would need and the clarity that the education 

community, school boards, parents, and students would require 

so that it would be perfectly clear what the role of each should 

be in this kind of a decision. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Who have 

you consulted with concerning both of these portions to your 

amendments -- the copyright part and the school closures? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there have been 

extensive consultations with the school trustees association, 

with the teachers' federation, with the league of administrators 

and directors of the school system, and we have assurance that 

they all support the provisions of the copyright section. 

 

And as I noted when I spoke to the Bill on second reading, 

there are some diversity of opinions with respect to the school 

closure provisions, but we feel that we have found a middle 

ground which is practical, reasonable, and clear. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On the 

copyright section of the amendments, how exactly will that 

work?  Will the schools, the institutions in question, send their 

money for that copyright to the person who receives the 

copyright, or will it go to the department and then on to you?  

You will send that on to whomever. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the mechanics of this 

process would be that the institution or the board would keep 

track of those materials that are used that would be subject to 

the fee.  They would report that amount to us.  We would pay it 

on their behalf to Can Copy, and then we would take that 

amount, with their agreement, off the top of the third-party 

funding when the granting is done. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Is there any requirement at the present 

time for keeping track of what copyrighted materials they have 

used and report to the department? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, that is a reason for this legislation, is that really no 

one is supposed to make use of or duplicate copyright material 

without meeting the express terms of the copyright.  So 

technically now there hasn't been a reason to do it because it 

was the responsibility of the user. 

 

What we want to do is to make sure that the users in the 

education system do provide the compensation to the author or 

publisher wherever it's appropriate, which Can Copy will 

determine.  But that it be simplified in that it be done under a 

single, licensed agreement with the Department of Education 

acting as an agent, which would save a great deal of 

administrative effort at local levels. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How do 

you determine at each individual school, institution, university, 

how much has been used of copyright material and how much 

is owing?  Do they have to keep a very extensive list of each 

author, or is there some other mechanism? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't know 

the answer to that because there hasn't been a monitoring 

system because it was incumbent upon each individual or each 

institution to take care of these arrangements, and we were not 

an agent.  But now the new legislation will make the users 

party to an agreement, and we estimate it to be about half a 

million dollars a year -- and that's an estimate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, this will then be an 

additional cost burden to the entire school system, universities, 

colleges.  Will there be any remunerations from the provincial 

government to make up for that additional cost to the education 

system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it will certainly be a 

saving in the long run because that is the reason that 

individuals and institutions copy material, is so that they won't 

have to buy the originals.  So copying -- and even 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

though there is a cost to meeting the terms of the copyright -- 

will be cheaper than buying original materials, which is 

technically what they should have done up until now if they 

weren't compensating . . . fulfilling the requirements of the 

copyright. 

 

With respect to will we . . . I guess what your question is, if I 

can interpret it is, is will the province increase third-party 

grants to that extent?  And I guess the reply to that is that we 

recognize the importance of education, but we will have to, 

within the fiscal requirements we have, we will fund them to 

the extent reasonably possible, but we also have to obey the 

law. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I agree that it's 

very important that people with intellectual property rights 

receive their fair due when that property is used on the behalf 

of others.  And so we will support that part of your amendment.  

However, I do have a concern that when it comes to the actual 

costs, I'm sure that most of these institutions have indeed been 

using originals, but in some cases perhaps that has not been the 

case. 

 

So in those cases there will be an additional cost to the 

institution involved.  And if they have to take the money out of 

some other part of their budget to pay for that, that's going to 

mean there's going to be harm caused in some other area, either 

something less for students or less teachers or less educational 

material. 

 

So I would hope, Madam Minister, that you would give some 

due consideration to the fact that there would be a need there 

for perhaps some additional funding once this Bill comes into 

enforcement. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, all I can 

say is that we will certainly attempt, within the fiscal realities 

that we face, to fund education to the greatest extent possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'd like to move on 

now to clause 4 of the Bill relating to school closures.  And I 

have a concern with (b), section (u) or subsection (u) in this 

where it talks about the closures of schools or discontinuance 

of grades that are not in school districts.  And who would have 

the authority therefore to close that school or to discontinue 

grades in that school?  And when it comes time to discuss with 

the people of the area, who would you talk with? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

question about what would happen in the case of a school that 

was not part of a school district, there are not, in proportion, a 

great number of examples of this situation.  But the Act does 

not apply to those schools now.  It always has applied, these 

provisions have always applied, only to where there is a board. 

 

What would happen in the case of a school situated outside of a 

district would be that there would be . . . there might be an 

advisory board.  If failing an elected board that represents that 

school entity, there would be the same requirement to go to the 

electors of the district. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you have 

any examples of that kind of a school?  I can't think of 

any personally. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't think of any 

other examples except the large urban school boards.  If there 

are some that the hon. member has in particular that he would 

like to bring to my attention, I could address those. 

 

But I think in general it would apply to the urban school 

boards.  And they do have, although they don't fall under these 

provisions of the Act, they have policy statements developed 

by their boards that outline the procedures that they would 

follow, which usually would include such things as public 

meetings and consultations within the community. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, thank you, Madam Minister.  That 

clears it up in my own mind, just what kind of schools you're 

talking about here. 

 

In part (u.1)(i) of the amendments here, you talk of boards of 

trustees or local advisory committees to school districts.  Just 

what types of boards are you talking about here?  Are you 

talking the local small school district as you would find out in 

the rural areas, as opposed to a school division board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, yes.  We're saying that 

when we talk about the board of trustees, we're talking about 

the division board, or the local school advisory committee, or 

the local board of the trustees -- however you would want to 

define that.  And I think that is the definition that you're 

looking for. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, there are a number of 

schools around the province that are already in the process of 

closing and their communities are attempting to keep those 

schools open.  What effects will these amendments have on 

that process? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, what we have done 

here, or attempted to do, as I outlined in my remarks on second 

reading, was in the old legislation . . . Let's look at the existing 

legislation.  It requires six months notice from the time of 

action.  And what the court found was, that action was not 

really defined. 

 

So what happened, what could happen potentially, is that a 

division board could meet and make a decision to close a 

school, notify the people affected by registered letter, giving 

them six months notice.  That placed that people who were 

affected in a defensive position because the decision had 

already been taken. 

 

So what we hope to do in this legislation . . . And in most cases 

school division boards are very responsible, and they do 

consult throughout the community.  And when there's a notice 

given, a formal notice of closure, it's usually not a total 

surprise.  And it's very hard to provide legislation to cover a 

situation that might arise when most boards are very 

responsible. 

 

But in the event that a school board did not consult, then it 

placed the people that were affected in a difficult position.  We 

wanted to create a situation where the consultation would take 

place before the decision so that 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

if there were alternatives that could be sought that would be 

more acceptable to the community than the closing of the 

school or discontinuing of the grade, that that could be looked 

at in a consultative process before the decision. 

 

So now what we have is a situation proposed in our amendment 

that would require notice to be given at a public meeting.  

There is about, well, 10 days notice of the meeting.  At the 

meeting the school board would tell to the electors, would tell 

the electors in the affected area, that they were contemplating 

this decision.  So it's assumed that the consultations and the 

consideration of viable alternatives would start to happen then. 

 

At least three months then would have to elapse between the 

holding of that meeting and the actual decision being taken.  

Then following the decision, another three months would have 

to elapse before the school was really closed or the grade was 

discontinued.  So the total time frame is really still six months, 

as provided for in the existing legislation -- or a little longer 

than six months actually because of the notice that has to be 

given of the meeting first. 

 

And I think what we do have to bear in mind is that in all cases 

these are minimums.  It is to be hoped that school boards would 

have a much longer time frame for their planning than these 

minimums.  But at least with this amendment in place, it would 

be clear to everyone exactly what the minimums were and what 

actions have to be taken.  And the consultation would happen 

prior to the decision. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I guess 

the question of responsibility or being responsible depends on 

which side of the fence you're sitting when it comes to a school 

closure.  I can think of a number of school closures that 

occurred in our area where the school board made the decisions 

and came and informed the local electorate.  And yet the local 

electorate, even though they had the six months warning -- they 

had a number of meetings -- did not feel that the unit board was 

being responsible in the closing of their school.  So it's all a 

matter of where you're sitting on it. 

 

In the Act, is there anything in there that allows the electorate, 

the public affected, to have any influence or any effect on the 

decisions of the unit board? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the only 

provision . . . it's a self-regulating provision, if you like, 

because the directors of a school board are duly elected by the 

people that they represent. 

 

Just take the scenario where they have this public meeting that 

the electors have been notified of, the people who would be 

affected by any decision that the school board might take.  And 

the school board, being duly elected members facing their 

voters, would tell those people that this was a decision they 

were contemplating -- to close their school or discontinue a 

grade. 

 

If those electors then could suggest reasonable, viable 

alternatives like alterations to a school, like a willingness 

to do something different, and if they told the school board that 

they thought the action that they were contemplating was 

unreasonable or irresponsible, then surely those board 

members, as being responsible and in recognition of their 

responsibility to the people that elected them, would take those 

remarks and those suggestions into account and perhaps their 

final decision -- and that's certainly the intent of the legislation 

-- that their final decision would be taken in light of those 

comments and representations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, we are in a political 

arena here, but politics is not limited to the legislature and 

politics plays a large part also on school boards.  I know of a 

number of concerned communities where they have had 

meetings with their local school board, and you've mentioned 

that if the local school boards go against the wishes of that 

local electorate they have the opportunity to replace that school 

board -- the unit board.  But in the cases of some small 

communities, they do not have enough political clout to in fact 

do that. 

 

Therefore what happens is that a division board, for purposes 

of its own which may not have anything to do in fact with 

financial but rather with political considerations and with 

opportunities for their communities, will close a school, a small 

school, when that community does not wish it to happen.  And 

they have in some cases some very good reasons why it should 

not happen.  Yet it does happen because of the politics 

involved in the situation. 

 

I know of five or six schools around the province right now 

that have contacted me with concerns because either they're 

closing their school or they're losing grades out of their 

schools.  The people in the community feel that there is 

absolutely no reason for that to happen, that their school is well 

maintained, that it has the structure capable to do that; whereas 

the school that they are going to perhaps does not have the 

proper facilities.  And yet because of some political 

considerations by some boards and some board members, those 

schools will be closed or those grades will be lost. 

 

So under this Act, those communities do not have an 

opportunity of any redress.  Their only opportunity comes three 

years down the road when you have your general elections for 

the school boards, for your local division board.  If those 

communities do not have the political clout, they can't do 

anything about it.  So you continue to amalgamate schools, 

small schools into a larger community, to the detriment of 

those smaller communities.  And they have a real concern 

about that. 

 

I've received representations from the Qu'Appelle School in the 

Indian Head-Wolseley school division.  I've received 

representations from the Westmor School up near Prince 

Albert, from Quill Lakes, from Elbow.  All of these schools 

feel that they have a right to continue to exist.  They do not feel 

that they are receiving proper hearings from their division 

boards. 

 

And yet in this Act, while you may have a meeting and you 

may have a two-, three-month period in there, there is still 

nothing at the end of the day to give those local electorates a 

real say in what happens to their schools. 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

They can go to a meeting and say all they want and complain 

and point out all their alternatives and point out the finances, 

that it's cheaper to maintain their school than it is to build on to 

another one, but at the end of the day, if that unit board wants 

to close their school for whatever reason, it will happen.  And 

the local electorate does not have an opportunity to have a 

direct say in whether or not their school stays open.  And I 

believe some place in this Act that opportunity should be given. 

 

If the electorate wants to keep that school open in that school 

district, then perhaps they should also be willing to pay extra to 

do so.  I talked to one of my RM (rural municipality) 

administrators and asked, is it possible for a school division or 

for an RM to collect funds for a particular school district within 

that division?  And he said yes, it is.  All they would have to do 

on their tax ledgers is designate it as another division within 

their RM. 

 

So you could take school district A within division A, and you 

could collect a separate fee for that tax block represented by 

that school district.  So it is possible to do so.  It would take 

some legislation perhaps, but it is physically possible to make 

that collection if it was so desired. 

 

If the electorate in that school district where a school was going 

to be closed wished to maintain their school, wished to pay for 

it, then I think the opportunity should be provided for them to 

do so.  They could still operate within the division.  They could 

still receive the funding that they would normally receive from 

the division to maintain that school and that student population, 

but the additional funds necessary to keep that school open 

could be raised locally from the local electorate as they have 

voted in some type of election. 

 

And let the local electorate make the decision.  Do I want to 

keep my school open?  Do I want to pay extra to do so?  Have 

you given any consideration to that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

process that we're outlining in the amendment provides 

opportunity for that in terms of the public meeting which is 

required to be held before the decision is taken.  And I am 

aware of some instances where there is a special levy that is 

collected.  This isn't something that we would encourage 

because there are two corner-stones really in our education 

system.  One is equality of opportunity for all children no 

matter where they live, and one is equity in taxation within 

those parameters. 

 

So if there were to be a large number of cases where . . . for 

instance, the public meeting that was contemplated in the 

amendment would be held, and the school board would 

indicate to the electors that they were contemplating closing the 

school.  And the electors said, well look, if it's a financial 

consideration, we're willing to pay a special levy within this 

particular school district, which will be collected as a tax, in 

order to keep this school open. 

 

That's possible.  The mechanics are there for it to be done.  But 

if that was a very widespread practice, you would very soon 

find those districts that were able to sustain an additional tax 

load versus those who had the same desire 

but not the same capacity to pay.  And we would be getting 

away from the equity and taxation that is the corner-stone of 

our system. 

 

But I think we are providing in the amendments an enhanced 

opportunity for those kind of discussions to take place prior to 

the decision.  Because the way it is now, if the board takes a 

decision without consultation . . . and I certainly hope that 

being responsible elected people that most of them don't; most 

of them do consult with people and they don't rely on the 

minimum time frames.  But in the event that they do and then 

someone comes up with a good alternative, it means that the 

board has to reverse their decision, which is difficult 

politically. 

 

So we want to turn the process around, make sure that there's 

adequate provision for consultation before the fact, before the 

decision is taken.  And that's the change that this amendment 

contemplates. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you've 

mentioned that there will be a requirement for public meetings 

in this amendment.  Well public meetings are needed and are 

very good, but public meetings are not consultation if the 

board, the unit board, arrives with a closed mind.  Rather 

they're simply there going through the motions to meet the 

requirements of the Act.  And that does happen on the rare 

occasion where a board has made a determination that they are 

going to close school X and that's all there is to it. 

 

Your public meetings, the people can come and express 

themselves.  They can have input, but if nobody is listening, it 

means nothing.  And if at the end of that meeting they have no 

mechanism by which to tell the board that they do not want 

their school to close or they do not want their grades to be 

eliminated, there's no mechanism there by which they can put 

any pressure on the division board to reconsider their decision.  

Their only pressure is that of the ballot box three years down 

the road.  And in a lot of cases, with the smaller communities 

and these small schools, their power of the ballot box is very, 

very limited. 

 

I believe, Madam Minister, that there needs to be some other 

mechanism in there that will allow the small school districts to 

have some direct influence on the unit board decisions.  And 

the one mechanism that is there is allow that school district to 

have a vote, to have a say on what they wish to happen in their 

school.  And not all of that electorate is going to say, keep my 

school open. 

 

Because I look at what's happening in my own area.  There are 

parents in that area that look at the quality of the education they 

are going to receive in a smaller school and they say, no, I want 

something better for my child.  So they're prepared to accept 

the fact that their school may close and their students will be 

bused some place else.  There are other parents who say, no, 

under any circumstances I do not want my school to close. 

 

But at the end of the day if those parents and that electorate had 

the opportunity to express themselves in the democratic 

manner, and then whoever presented the most influential 

arguments will win in the end.  And the community can say, 

we had a voice in it; we had a  



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

choice.  We made the choice and this is what it is.  If the choice 

is to close the school, well fine.  If the choice is to keep the 

school open, then they should also, when they make their vote, 

cast their ballot, be making the choice that we are prepared to 

fund the additional amount necessary over and above what the 

division is already supplying for us. 

 

You talk of equality of opportunity for students.  Well if it's the 

parents' choice that they do not want to expand the opportunity 

of choice to their students, that they feel that the opportunity of 

choice in their current situation is what they want, then why are 

they not allowed to continue with that choice? 

 

And the same with the equality of taxation.  If those electorate, 

the people who pay the taxes, vote to pay a higher amount of 

taxes, that's their decision.  They're paying their original 

taxation levels into the division, the same as everybody else in 

the whole division is doing so, but they have agreed to pay an 

additional amount to provide for their school in the manner that 

they wish.  And I don't see that as eliminating equalities of 

either opportunities or taxation because those parents have 

made that particular decision. 

 

Now in some communities, they may have a larger tax base by 

which to finance that.  But that larger tax base is already 

financing that school to a comparable degree.  So I believe 

there is a real need here, Madam Minister, to take a serious 

look at this.  And I would hope that you can explain why you 

wouldn't want to, if that is in fact the case. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

special levy or the raising of an extraordinary fund directed at 

keeping a certain school open, there is no need to make 

amendments to provide for that, because those mechanisms are 

already there.  And I'm aware of some instances where those 

kind of special levies within a portion of a school division have 

been raised and collected by the municipality on behalf of the 

school division and turned over to them for a specific purpose.  

So the mechanics of that procedure are already there.  So if that 

was the desire of any school board or part of the electors in part 

of a division, it's not necessary to address that in The Education 

Act because the provisions already provide for that. 

 

I think we have to bear in mind at all times when considering 

this legislation that these provisions are only meant to prevail 

where there is not consent.  There are many schools that are 

closed and many grades that are discontinued or moved with 

the consent of the people that are affected, because responsible 

boards will look at the situation of how to deliver education in 

their area in the best way with the best outcome for the 

students.  They will normally consult with the people that are 

affected, take into consideration their views, and consent can 

be obtained for taking all different kinds of actions to suit the 

situation. 

 

This legislation is meant to be a safety net, if you like, where 

consent has not been able to be obtained, but to 

provide for a consultation that, if not voluntary, according to 

the current Act, doesn't have to take place until after this 

decision is taken.  So I think that's one of the reasons why so 

many of these situations that have developed have become so 

emotional. 

 

And it is emotional.  The small school in our school district 

closed in 1966, and it was bought as a community centre.  And 

I still get a lump in my throat every time I drive by it.  I mean 

there is just something about a small school.  And a great many 

of the small schools do a really good job.  We're not a 

proponent of bigger is better and we're not a proponent of 

closing schools.  What we do want to provide for is to make 

sure that there is a consultative mechanism that provides . . . 

that the people that are affected by the way education is 

delivered will have a say.  And in the amendment we do 

provide for that. 

 

It's not in the current legislation, not really.  It says that after 

this decision is taken that the board should use the intervening 

six months to talk to the people that are affected about alternate 

arrangements.  But that's all after the decision is taken.  So you 

can see where people react when they get the notice and they 

say, well it's too late now, the decision's already been taken. 

 

After the public meeting that's required by the amendment, 

people have all the recourses that normally they do, like public 

meetings, petitions, representations to their school board 

representative.  But all this can now take place, with the 

amendment to the Act, take place before the decision is made 

and influence and affect the decision, rather than taking place 

after the decision has been formally taken and communicated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

agree that there needs to be a process by which the parents and 

the communities involved have an opportunity to have a say in 

what is going to happen to their local school, be it the closure 

or the discontinuation of some grades.  I agree 100 per cent.  I 

support that.  I've gone through that and it is a very 

heart-wrenching circumstance when a school is closed.  It 

really divides a community and it divides a school division 

when that happens.  And there needs to be a process by which 

people can have some input. 

 

But at the end of the day, when you've consulted, but the 

community has no means to prevent it from going ahead if they 

do not wish it to proceed, if the unit board is bound and 

determined that they are going to close that school, then that 

community needs some other mechanism to prevent that if they 

so wish.  If they consent to close the school, fine.  There's no 

arguments there, and so things can proceed. 

 

But where there is not consent, where the school is closed 

against the wishes of the community, then there needs to be 

some mechanism in there for that community to say we want to 

do something different, and here's what we want to do. 

 

And your amendments do not provide that.  They do provide 

for the consultation.  That's very good; that needs to be there.  

But at the end of the day, the six months plus 10 days is still in 

effect if the school board wants to close 



July 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

that school.  And those communities do not have . . . they may 

have said all the words.  They may have done all the studies.  

They may have presented all the arguments that are valid to 

keep that school open.  But at the end of the day if the division 

is bound and determined to close the school, it will happen 

because the community has nothing to stop it.  And if the 

community is prepared to pay, I see no reason why they should 

not be allowed to keep their school open and allow it to 

proceed as it is. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat that 

in the event that finance is the consideration and in the event 

that a part of a school division wants to raise money for any 

reason -- whether it's to keep a school open, whether it's to 

build a new one, whether it's to provide some kind of 

equipment or some kind of access to education that's not 

provided for across the division -- those mechanisms are there.  

And they are being used from time to time.  So we don't have 

to provide that in the Act because that provision is already 

there; the mechanisms are there for people to do that if they 

want to. 

 

And I think that . . . I look back on my history as a municipal 

representative, as a reeve.  If, for example, there was an issue, a 

zoning bylaw, which would have to be advertised, for instance, 

then there would be public hearings.  As a responsible elected 

official for a number of years at that level we would listen 

carefully to the representations that would be made by our 

constituents in terms of appearances, telephone calls, personal 

representations, letters, petitions.  And if we felt that we were 

not . . . that what we had contemplated was not acceptable, it 

wouldn't be done. 

 

So I think that we have to keep in mind that school boards and 

the directors are duly elected by the people they serve; that 

with democracy comes responsibility so that people, the 

electors, must select, when they go to the ballot box, their 

representatives with care and try to make sure that elected 

boards are made up of people that will be responsive to their 

views; that can't always do what they want, but that will 

provide them with explanations.  And in this case, provide the 

rationale so that consent can be obtained for the actions that the 

board is contemplating or an alternative that might be presented 

by someone else, by another elector or group of electors. 

 

And in those cases, this legislation -- the either what's in place 

under 92(u) or the amendments that we're contemplating and 

proposing -- would never have to be used.  This is only a safety 

net in the event that a good and satisfactory conclusion for all 

parties cannot be reached voluntarily. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, this has been quite an interesting debate that's been 

going on from our critic to yourself about school closures.  And 

we won't have time for what I want to discuss with you, 

Madam Minister, in the short time we got left because it's quite 

important. 

 

The last time you and I discussed our school problem in my 

constituency concerning the Elbow-Loreburn 

area, someone from the . . . a member from the legislature -- I 

believe it was the Leader of the Liberal Party -- sent out a copy 

of Hansard to some of the people in the Loreburn area and 

tried to cause me quite a bit of problem. 

 

But I want it on the record that anything that we're discussing 

in this here House now, I'll be sending a copy out, about 700 

copies of Hansard, and they're going to be very interesting to 

hear in the area when . . . more interested . . . maybe her 

interference in the Loreburn area, sticking up for the Loreburn 

School there and then turning around in Estimates here the 

other day saying that she's asking questions for keeping the 

Elbow School open. 

 

Maybe they'll be more interesting to know when Hansard gets 

out there that every time she votes in this House -- not every 

time, but almost every time she votes -- it's the NDP.  So that'll 

show you and the public out there that she's right in the alliance 

with the NDP-Liberal alliance.  That's what . . . they're going to 

be interested.  And she finds out that that's not the kind of thing 

that people do in this House, to send Hansards out to try to 

cause people a problem. 

 

Anyway, Madam Minister, I agree that this is a very, very 

serious situation we got in Elbow-Loreburn.  And I do believe, 

Madam Minister, the only way we're going to solve it, we're 

going to have to ask help from the department.  And I believe 

you're a co-operative minister.  And we have . . . And I agree 

with what you said here a few moments ago that when you 

drive by the little school that closed years ago that you get a 

lump in your throat.  Well I'm the same way.  When I drive by 

my little town of Aylesbury just where I was born and raised in 

that community . . . and it was sad when they closed the 

Aylesbury School to go to Craik School but Aylesbury was a 

town under a hundred; Craik was about 600 and I could see it 

happening. 

 

The same thing happened when they closed Girvin School and 

moved to Davidson.  And it is sad.  Those are sad situations. 

 

We've got a sad situation just in the Davidson school unit right 

now where they were building a new school in Kenaston.  It's 

being built now.  And they're contemplating closing the 

Hawarden School and they'll be all going to Kenaston.  

Hawarden's on the same line, Madam Minister, as I think 

you're familiar, as Elbow, Loreburn, Strongfield, and then 

Hawarden, Glenside, and then Outlook.  But Hawarden 

somehow or other it goes into the Davidson school unit and the 

rest of the towns are all under the Outlook school unit. 

 

Now Hawarden, I was quite proud of the people there.  The 

Hawarden people, they went to their division representative 

and they just . . . it was almost a year's process.  And the school 

board, the local school board, went to the division board and 

they had meeting after meeting after meeting and I think there 

was some . . . because this happened last fall, Madam Minister, 

where the school unit division board made a vote, had a vote, 

and decided to keep the Hawarden school open for another 

year. 

 

So this is coming up next year, either they'll be closing that 

school or else they'll have to make some arrangements for 

another year.  They're even talking, 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard July 29, 1992 

Madam Minister, that perhaps Hawarden should go into the 

Outlook School Division and then in that case if they done 

something like that then the Strongfield students could be 

going to Hawarden.  There's a real good school in Hawarden 

and they could perhaps go there and not have this disruption 

down the line.  Because this is a very rare situation that we 

have there.  Usually what we're doing is closing schools to save 

money. 

 

But closing the Elbow School, which I understand from the 

documents that I have and that you have, that it'll be closing on 

June 30, 1993, and that gives them one more year.  And, 

Madam Minister, it doesn't seem right to be closing a larger 

school with the largest population, to spend money to close a 

school.  In this case we're going to spend money to close the 

school. 

 

I understand from you and I have your note right here, that it's 

been passed for $438,000, I believe it was -- I might be a little 

out -- to put a roof on the Loreburn School and two 

relocateable class-rooms.  I understand that's been passed. 

 

And everybody wanted that.  Loreburn people wanted that.  I 

was pushing for that over the last year, to repair that roof. 

 

And we knew that the time come when Strongfield School 

would have to be closed and perhaps moved down to Loreburn.  

But nobody, nobody ever thought that the time would come 

when down another seven miles, that the Elbow School, which 

has a population, the town, of about 375 people, and Loreburn, 

170, and 60-some in Strongfield, we never thought that we'd 

have to fight to keep the Loreburn School open and repair the 

roof, and do all these things to keep the Loreburn School in 

good shape.  But we never thought we'd have to do it at the 

expense of the Elbow School. 

 

I'm not blaming anyone in the department at all, except we're 

going to have the department people . . . we have to have them 

look into this situation or we're going to have the 400 people 

that signed a petition -- 400-plus -- and I tabled in this 

legislature here some couple of weeks ago, we're going to have 

a lot of very unhappy people. 

 

And something, Madam Minister, I guess they're looking . . . I 

didn't realize that the time was here, so I haven't left you much 

. . . any time to answer.  I didn't realize it was almost 5 o'clock. 

 

But I thought I'd give you the outline, Madam Minister, that 

when we come back onto this Bill and further in Estimates, that 

we have to really get into the details, because there's some real 

details that you, Madam Minister, need to understand.  And I'm 

sure you'll be willing to listen and help us out.  Because I do 

believe that when you get a scrap that's going on in the 

community . . . And it's sad that the town of Loreburn, 

Strongfield, and Elbow, they're fighting among one another.  

And they're all related and it's sad, and I don't like to see this. 

 

So sometime an outside body like the Department of 

Education, that's what they're for.  We're going to have to have 

your help for this. 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 


