




















































Hansard: June 01, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 757 

 June 1, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- The following petitions are hereby presented and laid 

on the Table being petitions for private Bills: 

 

 By Mr. Solomon of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit 

Society Limited and the Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited both of the city of Regina in the 

Province of Saskatchewan; and 

 

 By Mr. Swenson of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It gives me pleasure to introduce to you and to the Assembly 

65 adult students who are studying at the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

campus at R.J. Davidson school. 

 

I trust these adults will enjoy the question period, and I shall be 

meeting with them afterwards to get their comments. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me today to introduce to you, and through you to all members 

of the Assembly, 13 grade 12 students from the Central Butte 

High School in Central Butte.  They are accompanied today by 

their teacher, Mr. Ron Wostradowski, and bus driver, Brenda 

Berry. 

 

They are doing a tour of the legislature today, and I will be 

meeting with them afterwards to discuss what they see here in 

the Chamber during question period and any other concerns 

that they might have. 

 

It's always nice to see the school from Central Butte, and they 

come every year and have a very active interest in the politics 

of this province.  Would all members please help me welcome 

the students from Central Butte. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

House, I would like to introduce to the Assembly 29 grade 8 

students who are in the west side.  They're from the Turtleford 

School.  They're here for a tour of the legislature.  I hope that 

they find the afternoon, the time they spend here this afternoon 

educational. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Colleen Roper and 

Jaccee Gerwing; two chaperons, Sheila Taves and Judy 

Wilkinson; and the bus driver, Margaret Rookes.  I will be 

meeting with them later for pictures and some refreshments to 

follow and answer the questions that they may have. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to 

rise today, Mr. Speaker, to extend through this Assembly a 

congratulatory message to the executive and participants of the 

national Short Film & Video Festival that concluded its 

screenings and awards in Yorkton this past weekend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event represents the longest running film 

festival in Canada, this being its 44th year.  This year's festival 

included 397 entries from all across Canada, from which 110 

productions, 38 awards were chosen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's entry entitled, the Marsh, was 

classified as the best documentary film produced.  The film 

was produced in the Balgonie area.  The overall major award 

winner was a film about the biography of Elizabeth Smart, 

directed by Maya Gallus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival is a 

major event in the film industry in this country, bringing 

together and recognizing independent filmmakers from across 

Canada. 

 

On behalf of this Assembly, congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to 

all of the Golden Sheaf winners this year.  And a special thanks 

to the people of Yorkton and the executive committee for 

hosting yet another prestigious event for the community of 

Yorkton and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, Mr. Speaker, 

I'd like to talk about transportation and in particular about the 

CNR (Canadian National Railway Company).  Mr. Speaker, 

there has been a constant conflict between the workers and CN 

about the hours and duties as it relates to their mandatory rest 

period. 

 

After the Hinton train wreck, Mr. Speaker, a federal inquiry 

recommended that there must a mandatory rest period for train 

crews after they've been on duty for a certain period of time.  

Well the conflict arose around the company's refusal of the 

acknowledge of the preparation time as extra duty time for 

their work as on duty.  And a great deal of these duties are a 

direct result of staff reductions over the years. 

 

The underlying agenda, Mr. Speaker, is to justify train 

movements between greater distances by the same crews.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, would not only result in a loss of jobs in 

Melville and Saskatchewan as a whole, but would dramatically 

compromise safety.  We do not want to see another disaster 

such as the Hinton wreck. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to announce that on Friday, CN issued 

a bulletin stating that all time will be recognized as time on 

duty.  So that, Mr. Speaker, is one small battle won that will 

show up on the CN's attempt to rationalize the system. 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

But, Mr. Speaker, the issue still remains.  The CN would like to 

run two divisions . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to report 

to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the Assembly that this 

week the Agricultural Employment Services of Canada will be 

holding their national conference in Saskatoon.  As a member 

of one of the local agricultural employment boards at Swift 

Current, I will be attending this conference. 

 

The purpose of the service of course is to bring people 

together, first of all those who want jobs with those people who 

have work to be done in the agricultural sector.  And this 

ranges all the way from British Columbia where you may be 

picking cherries, to Saskatchewan where you would be doing 

grain farming, all the way to tobacco production in Ontario, 

and potatoes in Prince Edward Island. 

 

The purpose of the national conference is to bring people 

together from all across Canada to share ideas, experiences, 

and to plan for the future.  And I'll be happy to let you know 

how the conference turns out at the end of the week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate 

Saskatchewan's entry in the Canadian fine food show in 

Toronto.  This show is the largest of its kind in Canada and has 

international appeal as well as international competition.  The 

Saskatchewan display, sponsored by Saskatchewan Economic 

Diversification and Trade, won the award of excellence as best 

large display. 

 

Seven Saskatchewan food processors participated in 

Saskatchewan's entry.  These participants were from all parts of 

Saskatchewan including Classic Promotions, Saskatoon; 

Riverbend Plantation, Saskatoon; Gramma Bep's Gourmet 

Foods, Swift Current; Harvest Pie/Owl's Nest, Pangman; 

Riese's Canadian Lake Wild Rice, La Ronge; the Bonny 

Garden, Wynyard; and Wapos, Swift Current. 

 

The Saskatchewan company I am most familiar with, as it's in 

my constituency of Bengough-Milestone, is Owl's Nest, a 

home-based food company started in 1986 by Peter and 

Candace Sotropa of the Pangman district.  Their business, like 

many others in this province, started small with one product but 

has now successfully expanded and diversified into production 

and marketing of jams, jellies, pie fillings and varieties of 

mustard. 

 

Congratulations to Peter and Candace Sotropa and to all of the 

participants in the show.  Saskatchewan's quality of food 

products is becoming recognized nationally and internationally, 

and this type of co-operative marketing has increased sales for 

Saskatchewan products.  This is proof that Saskatchewan 

entrepreneurs can compete with the best.  Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

have more good news from Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- On Thursday, May 28, I spoke of more than one 

and a half million dollars saved by cleaning up and managing 

the existing computer instead of buying a new computer. 

 

Today I'm pleased to report a further savings of $448,000, Mr. 

Speaker.  A new Saskatchewan Transportation Company head 

office was in the works on October 20, 1991.  The reason was 

to house the new computer, to provide more room for some 

staff, and as an incidental, it was intended it might improve the 

staff morale. 

 

When the significant change happened on October 20, Mr. 

Speaker, staff was then consulted and asked: do you want a 

new head office?  Is it needed?  The response was no.  What 

we need is to provide a black bottom-line for STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company).  We don't need a 

new head office. 

 

As a result, the new head office was shelved, so to speak.  

Thanks to the dedicated staff at STC and their efforts, they 

have got their statements out on time now.  They're operating 

out of their existing wholly owned head office building.  And 

for the coming year, the savings . . . the debt will be reduced to 

4.7 million instead of 6.1 million as projected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

acknowledge the people from the Norquay and district.  

Norquay is a community in the northern part of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

About three years ago a group of farmers, small-business 

people, and representatives from the two Indian bands from the 

reserves of Cote and The Key formed a group which is called 

Norquay Alfalfa Processors Ltd.  I acknowledge these people 

for having the foresight and desire to maintain their community 

through local industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this group has gone out and over the last 

three years sold over a million dollars worth of shares to local 

people.  And the funding for this project all came together 

January when they were able to receive a $1.8 million loan 

from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity this weekend of touring part 

of the facilities.  The facilities are three-quarters to 90 per cent 

built, and the committee tells me that they will be in position to 

start harvesting alfalfa on June 25. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular project will not only be of 

economic benefit to the farmers of my constituency, but it 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

will also create 13 to 15 full-time jobs as well as additional 30 

part-time jobs.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Cancellation of FeedGAP Program 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, one farmer who 

phoned my office said that your decision to scrap the FeedGAP 

(feed grain adjustment program) program not only forced him 

to discard plans for expanding his enterprise by 25 per cent, but 

also forced him to find an additional $27,000 to replace money 

that he's going to lose as a result of the cancellation of this 

program. 

 

Will you tell this Assembly the results of the study that you 

must have done to result in the effect of your decision on hog 

farmers, individual hog and beef livestock producers in this 

province in their communities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I was meeting with the 

livestock industry this morning.  And while they continue to 

have concerns about that issue, they respect the difficulty the 

province is in and are willing to work with us in seeking 

solutions that will result in the healthiest industry here. 

 

Farmers, whether they are ranchers or hog producers, are 

amongst the most rational, business-minded people on earth 

and they know that a province cannot go on affording to pay 

subsidies to input costs for ever.  And they know that they are 

willing to make the adjustments necessary to produce livestock 

in this province that are based on our competitive advantage 

and our ability to produce better than anywhere else in the 

world, and our farmers will work with us in continuing to 

expand the industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- To the same minister, let's just talk about 

what your decisions have really meant, okay?  In a business 

where profits are based on pennies per pound, your decision, 

sir, to price hog and beef producers out of the market-place by 

as much as 5 cents on a pound on beef, $4 a head on hogs, is 

going to be able to kill the entire market in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Just exactly what happened in Manitoba when 

they did exactly the same thing, not to support their producers. 

 

Now how can you justify creating a gap so large as to risk the 

destruction of the whole feeder cattle industry and the hog 

industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the comments of the 

member opposite interesting in the light of her otherwise stated 

position that we haven't done enough cuts, we should reduce 

taxes, we should . . . that our deficit is still too high. 

 

The fact is that the livestock producers and farmers in this 

province know the tough circumstances we're in.  They have . . 

. they are willing to struggle with the reality that's 

here.  The fact is that our livestock producers are amongst the 

best in the world, and they will deal with these realities and we 

will continue to work with them in establishing a continuing, 

sound base for agricultural policy here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You're 

absolutely correct, member opposite, when you talk about what 

my interests are as far as economic development for the 

province are concerned, regarding tax reform, regarding the 

things that are required for true economic development. 

 

A national agriculture reporter for The Western Producer 

stated that the people of Saskatchewan elected an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government for ideas and not for their 

ability to point their index fingers east.  Now will your 

government quit blaming everyone else and finally show and 

table today your strategic plan for agriculture for the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I can find it acceptable for 

other members who have to rely on other people's background 

statements for their follow-up questions, but I didn't recall 

actually pointing any fingers this morning . . . or this afternoon.  

The fact is that what I have said often, and continue to know, is 

that our livestock sector and our farmers in Saskatchewan are 

competitive, adaptable, ambitious, and willing to take the 

difficult with the good.  And they will work with us in 

designing a continuing, healthy agricultural base to our 

economy here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the Minister 

of Agriculture.  You know Moose Jaw isn't all that far from 

Regina and whether you're there this morning, what you say 

there can actually be heard in Regina. 

 

If the minister cares about the future of livestock and 

processing industries in this province I want you to tell me your 

logic.  You explain the following: on the one hand, you 

publicly support the Crow method of payment which 

discourages Saskatchewan value added, and then you go and 

remove the FeedGAP program, which encourages value added 

by keeping our livestock at home.  Where do you get your 

advice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- May I ask the member opposite what 

position she has on the Crow if she in fact has one?  The fact is 

that the farmers across Saskatchewan have spoken out very 

strongly in favour of maintaining the method of payment on 

this historic question for national policy, and until someone 

displaces that stability with another stability, they will continue 

to stand behind that kind of position. 

 

The fact is that the livestock sector has followed normal 

business cycles in Saskatchewan over the whole time that Crow 

policy has been in place.  And they have done very well in this 

province over the years and they continue to be willing to 

adjust to the realities that are here.  And sometime when we 

have a little time, maybe we can get 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

into a little more depth and the Speaker might permit this 

discussion to carry on a little longer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

most interesting when we look at your decisions about the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program which in all 

intents and purposes was definitely flawed, but you made your 

decision absolutely apart from what was going on in Alberta 

and Manitoba, okay? 

 

And what resulted is, now that we have people who are our 

competition in Europe and the United States, we now have our 

neighbouring province as our competition, which is exactly 

what you've done here with the FeedGAP program.  I want to 

know how many more meat packing plants are going to have to 

close besides the one that already has since you've come into 

power.  All the things that are happening since you've come 

into power, when are you going to start co-operating with your 

counterparts in Alberta and otherwise, so they don't become 

our competition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite needs 

to decide which rationale she wants to use for the policy she's 

describing.  Is it the Crow benefit or is it the game playing in 

neighbouring provinces with respect to buying business for 

their province in a country where we have a national policy, 

which suggests maybe we should try and have a level 

playing-field. 

 

The fact is that the Alberta government is now beginning to 

indulge in the folly that the members beside you and opposite 

began in the early '80s.  This year they're going into debt 

between 2.1 and $2.3 billion.  Next year they're intending to go 

into debt about $3.1 billion. Maybe the Alberta people ought to 

be coming to Saskatchewan, find out what the pain is like when 

you try to deal with the irresponsibility after the fun is over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Downgrading of Provincial Credit Rating 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, once again your credit 

rating has been down-rated.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, your . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Let everybody have their 

laugh and then we'll let the member ask his question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister's defence that, for credit rating drops all the time is 

that the agencies didn't know what the state of the province's 

finances were.  Therefore, Mr. Minister, you're either saying 

that Donald Gass is incompetent or made a false report to you, 

or you're claiming that Standard and Poor's are incompetent 

and too stupid to know their own business. 

 

And I quote to you, Mr. Minister, as I've done many times 

in this chamber, from CKCK-TV of February 18, '92 where 

Mr. Gass said the books were open all along to credit agencies 

or anyone else who was interested. 

 

Mr. Minister, if your defence is based on the fact that the 

finances were unknown, would you have us believe that Don 

Gass, Standard and Poor's or anyone else that has commented . 

. . Or is it simply the fact that we have a minister who doesn't 

look after his job that is the real reason -- is the real reason, sir 

-- for the downgrade in the province's finances today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me make 

something very clear.  The only group that's incompetent in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, is the members opposite . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The members opposite whose 

record of mismanagement and waste in the 10 years have 

brought about the credit rating drop to a EEE plus by the 

Standard and Poor's credit rating agency which is an indictment 

-- an indictment.  This rating drop is an indictment of what this 

former government, the member from Estevan, did in 

Saskatchewan when he was in the premier's chair for the last 10 

years creating a debt in Saskatchewan greater than any other 

province in all of Canada.  That's why we're here today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, you spent so much time running 

around this province tearing down what came before that I 

think you're failing to recognize some real truths here. 

 

Mr. Minister, you had a choice to proceed with nuclear 

agreements in this province.  You chose to avoid the future.  

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could we have both sides 

please settle down.  Yes, both sides. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

had a choice of whether or not to issue shares in TransGas.  

You had that choice and you decided to avoid the future.  Mr. 

Minister, you had a choice of whether to not to seek equity 

investments in SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance).  

Instead you chose to avoid the future and used taxpayers' 

money instead. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've had dozens of choices presented to you in 

the last seven months, clear choices of how to secure the future 

of this province.  Instead you quickly run back to the past, back 

to the '70s. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you not accept any responsibility for the 

choices you have made, and continue to make, that have 

resulted in this assault on Saskatchewan's credit rating?  Will 

you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me quote for the 

member opposite what Standard and Poor's said in their release 

today: 

 

 The adjustment reflects the province's high debt burden, 

budgetary pressures stemming in part from past unsuccessful 

off-budget investment projects . . . 

 

And on and on and on, Mr. Speaker.  And in spite of that, the 

member opposite says the way to solve this problem is borrow 

another billion dollars, and so does the Liberal member seated 

over there say that. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is not responsible.  That is the approach that 

those members opposite took in the last 10 years.  That is why 

our credit rating has dropped to a BBB plus, Mr. Speaker.  And 

also I might add the measures that this government has taken is 

addressing that, and Standard and Poor's recognize and 

acknowledge that in their statement today.  And it's time that 

the members opposite began to realize the mistakes they've 

made in the past and quit trying to urge this government to 

make the same mistakes as they did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  Mr. Minister, it's exactly that attitude, your 

refusal to look at the future, by concentrating so much on your 

narrow, political, mean agenda, that is causing this province the 

problems it experiences today.  You've added hundreds of 

millions of dollars in paper write-downs to the province of 

Saskatchewan's general debt.  You could have left those 

write-downs and managed them in different manners, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you believe that the credit agencies will 

accept a write-up?  When the economy turns around and it's 

politically expedient for you to do so, will they allow you to 

magically upgrade as they have magically allowed you to 

downgrade in this province?  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a strange and 

almost unbelievable defence by the member opposite of the 

mismanagement of that group of Tories when they were on the 

government side of the House. 

 

I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, in response to the member 

opposite, what Standard and Poor's said about the steps this 

government has taken.  They said that:  

 

  . . . the New Democratic Party (NDP) government is strongly 

committed to deficit reduction, as evidenced by the measures 

taken in the current budget year . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the approach that's necessary today to 

bring the financial crisis, which those members opposite 

created, under control in Saskatchewan.  That is what this 

government is committed to doing.  Everybody in 

Saskatchewan supports that.  And everybody in 

Saskatchewan is growing angrier by the day about what those 

members left for them when they were turfed out of office in 

October 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, you know absolutely that there 

was no cash involved in the paper write-downs associated with 

the Potash Corporation and Cameco.  In fact the last time you 

were Minister of Finance in this Assembly you had attached 

unrealistic numbers to those two corporations to hide the fact 

from Saskatchewan people that there was no Heritage Fund in 

this province.  No cash at all, Mr. Minister. 

 

Regarding SPMC's (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) debt, your own minister, your associate toy 

minister over here, said the actual cash-in costs were only 4.5 

million, not the hundreds of millions that you have said 

publicly.  You also know, Mr. Minister, that you gave up $200 

million in harmonization.  In fact the chamber of commerce 

have written you again and said, harmonize. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people know the truth on these matters.  Mr. 

Minister, is it not true that the private sector each and every day 

are urging you to change the line that you put down in the 

budget of Saskatchewan and go back to some tried methods? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member is 

asking whether we're prepared to go to the tried methods of the 

members opposite when they were in the government, I can say 

the answer is an absolute, uncategorical no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The tried method that the member 

from Thunder Creek talks about has brought about what 

Standard and Poor's says the "debt that must be serviced by the 

province now totals almost 180% of annual budget revenues." 

 

I say to the member opposite: show a little shame; show a little 

humility; admit to your mistakes and don't try to convince 

anybody that your tried methods are the methods that are 

necessary in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to 

the same minister. 

 

This lecture from a minister who runs around the province of 

Saskatchewan giving inflated deficit numbers, mixing and 

matching his accounting numbers to satisfy his political whims, 

taking paper write-offs that he knows full well were inflated in 

the first place into the Consolidated Fund, it's no wonder that 

this minister is being given a failing grade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He's got a political agenda; there's no question about that.  He 

broke every last promise made to Saskatchewan 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

voters a short seven months ago.  He has a political agenda. 

 

Will the minister now admit that his political meddling in the 

books of Saskatchewan have resulted in a further downgrade of 

Saskatchewan's credit rating and a real hardship for all 

Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is right.  I 

have been the minister of Finance before.  And the last time 

that I stood up as the minister of Finance in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, and spoke to the credit rating agencies, the credit 

rating agencies raised our credit rating to an AA plus, the 

second highest in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That was, Mr. Speaker, because of 

good management. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the Leader of the Opposition 

have a question?  I'll recognize you when you get up on your 

feet.  I recognize the Minister of Finance now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That was because, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Is the member from Moosomin 

questioning my decision?  I've called the Leader of the 

Opposition to order and asked him if he has a question to get 

up on his feet and I'll recognize him.  I've recognized the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, that was the last time 

we had a AA plus rating, the second-highest rating in Canada, 

and that was because of good, wise management by a New 

Democratic government at that time. 

 

But I can tell the House, Mr. Speaker, that that is exactly what 

we intend to do during this term and in the years ahead in order 

to begin to restore the credit rating of this province and rebuild 

the province from the destruction that those members opposite 

brought about during their term of office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say to the member finally, this:  everybody has confirmed 

what the debt of this province is -- the Gass Commission, Ernst 

& Young, and now Standard and Poor's.  And for him to stand 

up and try to pretend that this debt which they've created 

doesn't exist is the best evidence I can think of of why we got 

here in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Alice just fell down 

the rabbit hole.  We have the Minister of Finance claiming that 

international commodity prices of the '70s were all his doing.  

Well if the member from Regina Dewdney is so good at raising 

international commodity prices, why don't you go poof and do 

it again, sir? 

Mr. Minister, the Conference Board of Canada, Standard and 

Poor's, rating agencies all around who rated the province last 

year, who knew what the province's books were last year 

because Donald Gass says they do, all gave better projections, 

sir, for this province than what they give today after your 

disastrous budget.  The numbers are there.  Everyone knows 

them. 

 

Will you not do the right thing now, sir?  Listen to the people 

in the private sector, listen to those around our province that 

are giving you sound advice and follow the directions as set 

down and change these ways.  Put your political rhetoric to bed 

and get on with governing this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this time the member 

opposite is correct.  The numbers are there.  The numbers are 

there, Mr. Speaker, and the numbers as S&P has said are that 

the debt that must be serviced by the province now totals 

almost 180 per cent of annual budget revenues.  Those are the 

numbers, Mr. Speaker.  They are not good numbers.  Our debt 

in this province is too high, and the debt that this province has 

was created by the member from Thunder Creek and the 

member from Estevan.  And we are not going to follow the 

same kind of approach that they did.  We're going to fix this 

mess and we're going to restore confidence and hope for the 

people of Saskatchewan into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Minister of Finance.  And I will say to the minister, I talked to 

the Saskatchewan Stock Growers this morning and I also 

listened.  And they clearly say, Mr. Minister, if they had any 

idea of the kind of policies that you were going to implement, 

you wouldn't have been elected.  And that's a fact. 

 

All the things that you're doing; you have the chamber of 

commerce and the boards of trade in the province of 

Saskatchewan saying, harmonize because it stimulates 

economic activity and helps you balance the budget.  You've 

got SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) almost unanimously pass due energy 

agreements and create economic growth.  You've got 

pensioners who are saying, protect women.  You have farmers 

across the province that say, don't do the GRIP thing, give us 

some protection. On and on and on people are saying, do it this 

way. 

 

My question to the Minister of Finance: your political ratings 

are following the credit rating institution's view of you.  

They're falling down and down and down and down.  Why do 

you think you're smarter than the farmers, the chamber of 

commerce, SUMA, SARM, pensioners, and people right across 

the province?  Why don't you admit the responsibility for this 

BBB credit rating is now in your lap because of your choices 

and your lack of vision in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to try to 

answer the question of the former premier, and I do so, Mr. 

Speaker, by reading directly from the Standard and Poor's 

report which says the following: 

 

 . . . debt that must be serviced by the province now totals 

almost 180% of annual budget revenues (180 per cent of 

annual budget revenues, they say). This burden is 

substantially higher than for other Canadian provinces and is 

a function of large budgetary deficits in recent years as well 

as sizeable provincial investments in several projects 

intended to diversify the economy. 

 

When the Leader of the Opposition says, what do we say with 

respect to the demands of the pensioners and the farmers and 

the other people that are involved, I say that when 180 per cent 

of the annual revenues are to service the debt collected and 

raised by that former premier, he is the one responsible.  The 

budget we had to implement reflects the fact that Standard and 

Poor's says you bankrupted this province, sir.  Shame on you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm really happy that the Premier 

decided that he'd get into this because obviously he has bearing 

some of the responsibility for the view the rest of the world has 

on the NDP administration. 

 

Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, as well, this morning I find out 

that when the NDP Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of 

Finance, and the Premier tried to take credit for the 1970s, it 

doesn't wash.  The price of wheat and the price of oil and the 

price of beef and the price of potash that put billions in the 

Heritage Fund in Alberta and pittance here wasn't the cause . . . 

or it's something that the Minister of Finance did.  And, Mr. 

Minister, and Mr. Premier, you know when wheat's $2 and 

there's drought and you've got 18 or 20 per cent interest rates, 

somebody had to help. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: Mr. Premier, the people of 

Saskatchewan said you have choices to deal with this.  You can 

harmonize.  You can replace debt with equity.  You can 

encourage investment.  Why do you think you're smarter than 

the chamber of commerce, the farm organizations, SARM, 

SUMA, pensioners, and everybody else in the province who 

said you're wrong-headed; you have a political agenda.  In fact 

if you'd followed that agenda, you wouldn't have been elected.  

Why don't you listen to the people, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have answered this 

question many times before, and I'll answer it one more time or 

other times as required to the former premier.  We campaigned 

on a document that said let's do it the Saskatchewan way.  And 

we said at the very beginning: first things first, open the books, 

review all the PC (Progressive Conservative) privatization 

deals, and then work to a balanced budget in the four years.  

That's what we said.  And then we said, new directions as funds 

become available. 

Now the member opposite said, why don't you listen.  And if 

we listened to him and if we listened to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, we'd have this kind of economic policy:  we'd 

have no tax increases because they're attacking us for that.  

We'd have no deficit reductions because they don't want some 

of the programs cut back, the expenditure reductions. 

 

In fact the Leader of the Liberal Party in her question today 

wants us not to do anything with respect to FeedGAP.  If we 

listen to the Liberal leader and to the PC leader, we'd spend 

over $1.2 billion on a new CANDU 3 (Canadian deuterium 

uranium) at the same time and to balance the deficit. 

 

I say if there is anything more cockeyed and more ridiculous -- 

and the people of Saskatchewan know it -- it's that prescription 

of economic folly.  That's why we're not doing it, because the 

people elected us to get the finances of this province in order, 

and by golly, sir, we're going to do it . . . (inaudible) . . . hope 

and freedom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the . . . order.  Order.  Why is 

the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- I beg leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of question 

period, we have been joined by a number of very special guests 

and very special students from the SIAST Palliser campus in 

Moose Jaw -- 10 students.  They've sat in through question 

period.  They have, I hope, enjoyed a tour of the Legislative 

Assembly.  And I and hopefully the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser look forward to meeting them in a few moments on the 

steps and then later for questions and pictures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students today are accompanied by Verna 

Nicholl, Paula Green and Bonnie Kuntz.  I would ask all 

members to join these special guests who are in the west 

gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise and ask 

all members of this Assembly to recognize the occasion, the 

importance of Environment Week, June 1-7.  Throughout 

Saskatchewan, community groups, schools, non 

_profit organizations, businesses, and governments at all levels 

are undertaking new activities to protect their environment and 

to strengthen our interest in and knowledge about the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to recognize just a few of these groups.  

I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating them for their initiative and their 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

leadership. 

 

This week, for example, the Saskatchewan Waste Reduction 

Council begins a corporate challenge among four Zellers stores 

in Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, and Prince Albert to see who 

can reduce the waste the most this week.  Residents of 

McLean, Denare Beach, and Elbow start reducing waste going 

to landfills this week by using their town's new recycling bins. 

 

Rosetown's Central High School Environment Group is giving 

a presentation on the greenhouse effect this week.  Transit 

authorities in Regina and Moose Jaw are offering special 

Enviropasses for bus transportation this week. 

 

There are environment fairs in Maple Creek and Milestone this 

week.  And Prince Albert National Park is offering a week of 

special interpretive events, tours, and presentations. 

 

Once again volunteers are holding the Regina Environment 

Walkabout, including tours of composting demonstrations, 

recycling facilities, and nature spots. 

 

Saskatoon's Meewasin Valley Authority is hosting a whole 

week of activities, including nature workshops and tours.  

Moose Jaw's local nine green line and students of Central 

Collegiate are collecting plastic bags for recycling.  In Indian 

Head and Humboldt local environmental groups, Environment 

Canada, and my department, Environment and Public Safety, 

are sponsoring workshops for municipalities and community 

groups that would like to set up household hazardous waste 

collection depots. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, these are only a few of the many special 

events and activities Saskatchewan people are undertaking this 

week to protect, create awareness of, and to celebrate the 

wonders of our environment.  On behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan I commend and congratulate them all for their 

efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government too finds Environment Week an 

appropriate time to demonstrate its leadership and commitment 

to the environment.  My department has recently published a 

new education and environment poster series, the first of its 

kind ever in Saskatchewan.  The posters will be distributed to 

every school in the province and to key stakeholders during 

this week. 

 

(1415) 

 

It is also fitting, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Round 

Table on the Environment and the Economy will release its 

conservation strategy for the province.  I'll be speaking more 

about this later this week.  Also during Environment Week, Mr. 

Speaker, I'll be introducing the charter of environmental rights 

and responsibilities for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the months ahead this government will 

continue to take positive steps to protect our environment.  

Right now I would like to join all members in the spirit of 

Environment Week and take personal action, personal 

commitment to help all Saskatchewan to a healthier 

environment.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the minister in supporting Environment Week in this 

province, and I would also like to compliment all those groups 

that are working to reduce waste in our environment. 

 

It's also appropriate this week, that being Environment Week, 

that we recognize that an environmental conference is taking 

place in Rio de Janeiro, the earth's summit conference, 

sponsored by the UN (United Nations).  I join with the minister 

in supporting Environment Week.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Parks Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Products 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

the Pest Control Products (Saskatchewan) Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Act and to 

enact a consequential amendment related to the enactment 

of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Pest Control Act and to enact the consequential 

amendment related to the enactment of this Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Highway Traffic Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The business before the committee is 

interim supply and the motion of the minister: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $469,935,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

that display we had in question period was the most disgraceful 

display I've ever heard . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It's got a 

lot to do with it.  And the first question I want to ask you, Mr. 

Minister, on October 21, 1991, what was the credit rating given 

to this Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll respond to the 

member.  I don't think this has got anything to do with interim 

supply, but for the benefit of the member opposite, I can say 

that Standard and Poor's, on October 31, credit rating was an A 

minus -- or an A -- as a result of the fact that the former 

government misled the credit rating agencies and misled the 

public and said that the deficit was going to be $265 million, 

and it ended up being $960 million. 

 

The credit rating agency, Standard and Poor, lowered the credit 

rating to an A minus and put us on credit watch, and now have 

lowered it to a AA plus.  And the reasons they outline in their 

statement, if the member were to read it, was because of the 

huge debt burden that was created in Saskatchewan in the last 

10 years. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What was your answer, an A or a minus A?  

I didn't catch it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, and you just finished saying that 

now you're at a AAA.  Did you mean a BBB, I'm sure, did 

you? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, B plus. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- B plus, all right.  And you say that what's 

this got to do with interim supply?  Well I'll tell you that we'll 

decide over here what the questions are.  You won't decide.  

And don't go laughing, because I happen to be around here for 

quite a few years and listened to the questions you used to ask 

and we answered every detail, everything you wanted to know. 

 

What was the credit rating in November 21, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just to save the member the time, 

Mr. Chairman, I will give him the whole scenario. 

In 1976 the credit rating by Standard and Poor's in 

Saskatchewan was AA.  In 1981, after five years of an NDP 

government, the credit rating was an AA plus.  Now in 1982 

there was the unfortunate election of a Conservative 

government, so that in 1986 in January the credit rating was 

then reduced to AA, after the deception of the 1986 deficit 

which was said to be $365 million and ended up being $1.2 

billion because those members opposite misled the 

Saskatchewan public. 

 

Then in 1987 the deficit was again reduced to a AA minus; in 

1990 it was an A; in 1991 it was an A minus; and now it is a 

BB plus, Mr. Speaker.  And Standard and Poor gave very clear 

reasons why it was reduced to a AA plus.  They said that: 

 

 The adjustment reflects the province's high debt burden, 

budgetary pressures stemming in part from the past 

unsuccessful off-budget investment projects, and the 

difficulties inherent in adhering to a deficit reduction plan in 

a resource-dependent economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why we are at a BBB plus, because of the 

legacy that was left here by the members opposite when they 

were the government.  And I should remember the member 

from Arm River, he was part of that.  He was on the treasury 

benches during that time when they wasted money on 

GigaText, when they wasted money on Supercart, when they 

wasted money on all kinds of politically motivated initiatives 

which created the highest per capita debt in Canada.  And it's 

because of that highest per capita debt in Canada that the credit 

rating has been reduced to a BBB plus. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you're saying that in October 

of '91 that this government misrepresented the officials, or 

whatever that does the credit rating, that they absolutely 

misrepresented.  Now tell me how they could do that.  You're 

Minister of Finance, tell me how that could happen.  How 

come that you would know more than they would know.  Just 

explain to me that, Mr. Minister.  How that they would ever 

know that and you know more than they do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me read 

from Standard and Poor's.  They talk about the misspent . . . or 

bad judgements made by the government opposite in some of 

the investments they made in certain megaprojects. 

 

And here is what they said, and I quote: 

 

 While Standard and Poor has never viewed these 

megaprojects as self-supporting, the province's recent 

financial review has made clear that there are virtually no 

revenues supporting several of them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, anyone who meets with these people or 

talks to financial institutions around this country, it does not 

take long to understand that they have been, in the last 10 

years, surprised on a number of occasions because the PC 

government that sat on this side of the House would say one 

thing at budget time and bring 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

about something different before that fiscal year was out.  It got 

to the point, Mr. Chairman, where the members opposite were 

no longer believed.  Not only by people outside of this 

province, they were no longer believed by the people in this 

province. 

 

And that's why on October 21 there was probably the most 

devastating defeat of any government in this province in any 

election because of the kind of deception and misleading that 

took place which brought us to the position where we faced the 

kind of debt that we have today.  What the PC government did, 

Mr. Chairman, was brought this province to the cliff, the edge 

of the cliff of bankruptcy.  That has created the financial crisis 

that we face. 

 

But I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, that is not . . . although that 

is in some ways reason to be angry -- and I am angry about it 

on behalf of my children and their friends and the children of 

this province into the future -- I think the fact that the people of 

Saskatchewan in their wisdom brought about a change in 

government is also a reason to be optimistic because we now 

have a government which is being recognized for being 

prepared to make the hard decisions and the right choices to 

begin to turn this thing around and bring a promising future for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, you stand 

there and you make these accusations that this is the way the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan looked at the political 

scene in Saskatchewan in October 1991.  Let it be so.  Now, 

let's take a look at what the people are saying today out there.  

If you want to talk politics instead of interim supply, we'll talk 

a little politics.  You made it so broad; we can talk about 

anything now. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think in your wisdom, that you're . . . 

well, do you think -- now I'm going to be fair, Mr. Minister -- 

do you think that the things you've done to hurt people in this 

province in this last budget, do you think that you're not hurting 

people more than I've ever seen hurt since I've been born and 

raised in this province, ever in history, since the '30s?  The only 

group of people, Mr. Minister, that you haven't hurt is the 

group you haven't met yet.  That's the only people you didn't 

turn off. 

 

You going to tell me that I can talk to NDP people right in my 

towns and cities and on the streets, and they're disgusted with 

you.  The premier, or the past premier brought it up in question 

period today, Mr. Minister.  He brought it up today that you've 

turned off every group, and you sit there and you laughed.  You 

have.  You're not listening to these people. 

 

And you can say, how can I tie this into the interim supply?  

When you're asking for half a billion dollars and you haven't 

got a clue where you're going to put it, and we're going to get 

into a series of questions where this half a billion dollars is 

really going and why and why.  Well the Minister of 

Agriculture shouldn't do any chirping from his seat because 

there isn't a farmer, a farmer in this province, that would vote 

for him today. 

 

(1430) 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- He wouldn't even get his . . . the Minister of 

Agriculture wouldn't even get his deposit back in 

Rosetown-Elrose today. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister of Finance, let's face the facts: you said that 

in October 21 that we were rated an A, the credit ratings rated 

an A, and that the people that do the credit rating didn't know 

the facts at that time.  Well then, what's different -- you never 

really answer my questions -- what's different that they know 

now that they didn't know then? 

 

Are you telling me that the past minister of Finance and the 

same people that are in Finance -- who are sitting right around 

you today, some of those advisors are right there -- are you 

telling me that your advisors sitting with you today, and some 

of them they're the same, whether they're with you or they're 

still in that department, that they lied to the, that they lied to 

the, that they lied to the group . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Aw, Mr Chairman, nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman.  My 

point of order is that it is quite inappropriate, and I think it says 

a lot about the low level of the member opposite and his 

approach and the kind of shame that they face because of what 

they created to this province, that he would talk about officials 

who are unable to defend themselves, Mr. Chairman.  I ask you 

to address that and I ask you to get the member to withdraw his 

comments and make an apology to this House for that. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to address the 

point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- Go ahead.  Proceed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the 

outburst that we just witnessed by the Minister of Finance 

proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that not only does he not 

know how to run the Department of Finance, but he would also 

not make a very good House Leader. 

 

He would not make a very good House Leader, Mr. Chairman, 

because obviously the rules of this legislature prohibits 

members from this legislature from using terminology 

addressed to fellow MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), and as such of course all MLAs must be held as 

being honourable gentlemen and treated as such. 

 

The member, my colleague here, was not making reference to 

any member within this legislature at all, and so therefore 

obviously the terminology and the point of order raised by the 

Minister of Finance is not well taken. 

 

The Chair: -- I've listened to the members and it's the opinion 

of the Chair that the member for Arm River should retract the 

words that he used and be careful in his use of language. 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

This is a place to ask questions, to obtain answers, and we 

should avoid the use of words which create more heat than 

light, and therefore I encourage the member now to retract the 

word that he used. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, until I get a clarification, I'm 

not prepared just . . . because I did not call anybody a liar, I 

said: did they lie?  And he didn't have to go into a outburst, Mr. 

Chairman.  My words: did they lie? 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order, order, order, order.  Again I 

ask the member to . . . the member used the word "lied", and I 

ask the member to retract that word.  It's not a word that suits 

us in debates in these proceedings and I ask the member to 

retract.  I ask the member to retract that word. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, can I ask a question to you, 

Mr. Chairman?  Is the word "lied" never allowed to be used in 

this House? 

 

The Chair: -- The member indicated that some people had 

lied, and I asked the member to retract that word. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask you before you make a 

ruling to read the Hansard because I did not indicate anybody 

lied.  I said: did they lie?  I said: did they lie? 

 

The Chair: -- The member has indicated that he's not prepared 

to retract.  I heard the member say that officials had lied.  If 

there's any concern about that then we'll check the verbatim on 

that and come back with a subsequent ruling.  But having said 

that, I ask the members to choose carefully the words that they 

use in debate in these chambers.  We should not seek to throw 

confusion and heat, we should look for light.  And so we'll 

check the verbatims on this before coming down with a further 

ruling. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Clean up your act. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Nobody better be saying to me to clean up 

my act with the things that's been happening in this province in 

the last six months.  Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. we'll know for sure what I said when we read the verbatim, 

but I'll change it around a little bit and said, are you saying that 

people in the department that's working for you now, that were 

working for us, that someone in that department misrepresented 

the people that do the credit rating for this province?  Are you 

saying that that happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask the Chair -- I 

will respond to the member opposite -- but I ask the Chair and I 

ask the officials of the Legislative Assembly Office to check 

the rules and see whether it is appropriate for members of this 

House to make those kinds of accusations or insinuations about 

officials who come here to provide information to ministers.  

You may take some time to do that, Mr. Chairman, but I ask 

the Chair to look into that. 

And I want to now respond to the member opposite.  Mr. 

Chairman, officials don't speak for the government.  Officials 

of the departments never speak for the government.  Cabinet 

ministers speak for the government. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, the former minister of Finance of the Tory 

government said the deficit was going to be $265 million.  That 

was his speech.  That was his speech delivered on behalf of the 

PC government of the day.  It turned out, Mr. Chairman, that 

that was not correct what he said.  It was a misleading 

statement, the statement that the deficit was $265 million.  It 

turned out that the deficit was indeed $960 million. 

 

That was not a statement of any officials, Mr. Chairman.  That 

was a statement of the minister of Finance of the former 

Progressive Conservative government who misled the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I'll go further, Mr. Chairman.  In 1986 there was another 

cabinet minister. His name was Mr. Lane.  He's now a judge, 

appointed by himself to the judgeship.  And at that time that 

minister of Finance on behalf of the Progressive Conservative 

government said that the deficit was $365 million just before 

an election.  And it so turned out that that deficit was $1.2 

billion. 

 

Those were not statements of officials, who never make those 

kind of statements.  Those were statements by the Conservative 

politicians, ministers of the cabinet who deliberately misled the 

public of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member said opposite, who's getting hurt?  I want to tell 

you, Mr. Chairman, about hurt.  Who hurt the people of 

Saskatchewan?  The former PC government has hurt the people 

of Saskatchewan by their mismanagement which accumulated 

a debt that is hurting the people of Saskatchewan.  A debt that 

is so huge that it is the highest per capita debt of any province 

in Canada and has caused the Standard and Poor's credit rating 

agency to reduce the rating for the province of Saskatchewan to 

a BBB plus. 

 

It is the PC government's legacy that is hurting the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman.  And it is the leadership of this 

government, this new New Democratic Party government, that 

is beginning to address that hurt and is beginning to restore the 

hope that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to have for the 

future of this province -- restore the hope because we're dealing 

with that devastating debt, Mr. Member from Rosthern, which 

you helped to create and which you misled the people of 

Saskatchewan about. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister goes on to all 

his figures and all his accusations about people outside this 

House, Mr. Lane and everybody deliberately misleading this 

here province.  You're just trying to get me off the questions 

that I asked. 
 

Did you, Mr. Minister, then, do you solely give all the figures 

and put them all together that gives the figures to whoever does 

the rating?  Do you solely do that?  And if you solely did it, 

then maybe Mr. Hepworth and Mr. Lane did.  Who does it?  

Who gives you your advice?  Or do you sit down and do all the 

figuring yourself and give the figures that gives us the credit 

rating in this province? 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we had a process 

which we promised to do during the election campaign.  We 

said to the people of Saskatchewan that as soon as we were 

elected, if they chose to elect us as the government, that we 

would open the books, and we did. 

 

And we opened the books so that the people of this province 

for the first time in 10 years could know exactly what the 

financial state of this province was, Mr. Speaker.  And we 

consulted the Department of Finance.  And we appointed an 

independent Financial Management Review Commission 

totally removed from the government, the Gass Commission, 

which confirmed what we found and in fact found more than 

what we had found because of its independence.  And we also 

had an independent review of the Crown Investment 

Corporation which found that there the members opposite had 

hidden a debt of $2.9 billion. 

 

That's where we got our advice, Mr. Chairman, from 

independent sources which made it very clear, when they 

opened the books of Saskatchewan, how bad the 

mismanagement by the members opposite had been which has 

brought us to the verge of financial crisis which we as a 

government are having to deal with today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we'll be dealing with some of 

the tracks that you tried to lead me off to.  I asked you a 

question.  Who sits down and does all the figuring to give the 

statements to whoever does the credit rating?  You, Mr. 

Minister of Finance, or the people in your department?  Don't 

try to lead me off that statement because you've got a great 

habit, Mr. Minister, of never answering questions.  You're a 

good politician.  You know how to skate around the questions. 

 

I remember when you were the minister of Finance back in 

1982 when you brought in a deficit budget when that 

government went flying out the window.  So now see if you 

can stand at your feet now, when you've been appointed the 

new Minister of Finance, and answer me that question without 

any grandstanding around.  Who puts the figures together and 

gives them to whoever does the credit rating in this province -- 

you or the department? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, these are the 

Estimates and this is the budget speech with all the supporting 

documents.  All of the information that's in here is provided to 

the people of Saskatchewan so they know where they're at.  

This is provided to anybody else who is interested, including 

the members opposite.  This is complied by the economists and 

other people in the Government of Saskatchewan.  But we also, 

in order to come forward with this open and honest budget for 

the first time in 10 years, Mr. Chairman, consulted independent 

sources such as the Gass Commission, Ernst & Young, and 

others, to make sure that we had a balanced and independent 

view. 

 

I am proud of the officials of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, who advise us, because they are good people.  

They know what they say.  If only the 

members opposite had done the same and paid attention to 

some of the advice that they got, we wouldn't be in the situation 

that we face today, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And if I find it, I want to give you an example of how the 

members opposite ignored the advice that they got.  And the 

member from Arm River might want to respond to this.  This 

comes from the Gass Commission report, page 81, and it says 

the following.  It's with regard to the sales of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan where, I might add, the 

government opposite lost $442 million for which there are no 

assets left because they sold off the corporation -- $442 million 

of debt that the taxpayer has to pay.  Well was it a logical, well 

planned, good economic decision, Mr. Chairman, and did they 

follow the advice that was given to them?  Well let's see.  

Here's the quote: 

 

 The timing of the sale of the Province's shares in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was contrary to advice 

provided by the Crown Management Board's external 

advisors (whose evaluation used an earnings-capitalization 

methodology).  Unless an argument is mounted that the assets 

of the company were overstated, we have concluded that the 

timing of the issue resulted in a loss to the Province. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, do you know why the members opposite 

engaged an outside consultant to give them the advice?  

Because their own advisors in the Crown Management Board 

and the Department of Finance had advised them that it was the 

wrong thing to do. 

 

Rather than accepting that advice, Mr. Chair, they engaged an 

outside consultant, hoping that that would give them the 

message and the advice that they wanted.  But because they 

engaged a responsible consultant, they were advised the same 

thing as their internal advisors had given them.  They chose to 

ignore it.  They chose to mismanage.  They chose to waste.  

And they sold off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan for 

straight ideological reasons, and lost the people of 

Saskatchewan $442 million, which today is part of the 

accumulated debt which they have to pay the interest on and 

eventually will have to pay off to the bond dealers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

you give all these figures about the losses and whatnot and 

profits and losses in the Potash Corporation, and will you table 

the documents you had in your hand plus all other documents 

to prove that statement?  Because I do believe, Mr. Minister, 

that you're misleading -- that you're giving misleading 

statements to this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I tell the member 

opposite to take a look at the Gass Commission report, page 

81; that's where I was quoting from.  He's got that report.  It's 

been around for months and all he has to do is take the trouble, 

for the first time read it, and it may teach him something about 

how badly his colleagues and he mismanaged this province in 

the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't know 

what you're reading from.  You're just saying that.  So if that's a 

fact that you're reading from that certain page 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

-- page 81 in the Gass report -- then table it so I can see that, 

and other documents proving all that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'll do better than that, Mr. 

Chairman.  In case the member from Arm River hasn't yet had 

the opportunity to look at the Gass Commission report, I will 

give him that opportunity today, remind him that he should 

look at page 81.  He can read it for himself. 

 

I won't only give him a copy of the page, I'll give him the 

whole report for his benefit.  I will table it, please. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister is just playing 

games when he says, have I read the Gass Report.  I probably 

read it as soon as you did. 

 

Mr. Minister, what we've done is you've led it off track again.  

I'm going back.  And you've never even come close to 

answering the question: who puts the figures together for you 

as Minister of Finance, for Mr. Hepworth as minister of 

Finance, and Mr. Lane as minister of Finance -- who puts all 

the figures together that goes to the personnel that gives the 

credit rating to the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the numbers that are 

put together in the budget are put together by the Department 

of Finance and by the Crown Management Board and by all of 

the departments of government who present their submissions 

for the budget.  In the final analysis, the Minister of Finance 

presents the budget.  And I take full responsibility for that 

budget and I take full responsibility for the numbers that are in 

that budget, Mr. Chairman, prepared by the officials in the 

Department of Finance. 

 

And I want to further add, Mr. Chairman, that when the credit 

agencies in the last seven months have wanted to speak to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, they do not only speak to the 

officials who give them the correct information; they also 

speak to the minister. 

 

The problem in the past, Mr. Chairman, is this -- if the member 

from Arm River would pay attention -- the problem in the past 

has been that the government under the PC administration 

would provide the numbers and table a budget.  But at the end 

of the fiscal year none of that would come out the way that it 

was originally tabled because they would make decisions 

mid-year and make so many changes that you couldn't possibly 

meet the numbers that were displayed in the budget in the first 

place. 

 

The responsibility for the deception that was created for the 

people of Saskatchewan rests with the cabinet, with the 

politicians, and with the premier, the former premier, the 

member from Estevan, who year after year and time after time 

did not carry out any of the commitments that he made with 

respect to the budget or the deficit, and that's why we have a 

debt of almost $15 billion in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

highest per capita debt in Canada of any province today. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you said now, the statement 

you made when you were up there before you got into the 

rhetoric at the end, but the very beginning you 

said that the personnel in Department of Finance are the people 

that put these figures together.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister?  Is 

that what you said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The budget is printed in the 

Department of Finance, of course. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I didn't say the budget, Mr. Speaker; you 

said that.  My question was . . . that prepares the figures that go 

to the people that does the credit rating. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Finance is interviewed by these credit rating agencies, as is the 

Minister of Finance, and we present them . . . and the 

Department of Finance presents them the numbers.  And the 

credit rating agencies have also had access to the Gass 

Commission report.  They were very interested in it.  They 

have also had the information provided in the Ernst & Young 

report, and they've also had access to the history of the last 10 

years. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell me in 

the department how many personnel would be involved in 

Department of Finance in any type of these figures 

whatsoever?  How many people involved that supply these here 

figures and information to the credit rating personnel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Directly, probably about 10 people 

would be involved in dealing with the credit rating agencies or 

financial institutions.  Indirectly, probably about 100. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you.  

You're saying approximately 100.  Could you tell me, of that 

100 people, how many of that 100 would be working for 

government in October 21, 1991, and how many changes since 

that date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Ninety-nine were working for the 

government.  There's been one change, which comes to the 

100. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's very interesting, Mr. Minister, 

because that's exactly what caused you and I to get into a little 

bit of an argument for this last almost three-quarters of an hour 

that we shouldn't have.  Because you went off on a tangent 

blaming everybody but . . . You were trying to blame it onto 

Lorne Hepworth, blame it onto Gary Lane, you want to blame 

it onto . . . and you want to blame it onto yourselves? 

 

Now you just finished . . . And I said are you saying -- and 

that's what I'm going to come back again, but we're going to 

use the word misrepresent -- are you saying these 99 out of 100 

people misrepresented the people, the personnel that done the 

credit rating for the province of Saskatchewan?  Did they give 

them misleading statements back up until October 21, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer, Mr. Chairman, no they 

did not.  The officials of the Department of Finance provided 

the factual information.  The government of the day made 

decisions irrespective of the recommendations and the advice 

of the Department of Finance on many occasions -- 

irrespective, as I pointed out on page 81 of 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

the Gass Commission Report, of any advice that they got; 

never consulted the officials. 

 

And the politicians, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Member from Arm 

River, again and again and again misled the people of 

Saskatchewan with the numbers that they provided for them, 

basing them more on their political needs than rather the advice 

which they received during that time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you know now 

that I have backed you into a corner and I'm not going to let 

you out because this all started in the first place, Mr. Minister, 

is you were blaming the improper information as to why we 

even had an A or an A plus whatever on October 21, because 

that was my first question. 

 

So you're believing, the same as I believe, Mr. Minister, that 

the department officials will be giving the correct information 

because I believe that.  But because that commotion and we got 

into points of orders with the Chairman and whatnot is what I 

said, do you -- I'm going to use the word mislead -- do you 

believe that they misled? 

 

So now we're getting some place.  It's not the Minister. It's not 

Mr. Lane.  It's not Mr. Hepworth and it's not yourself, you just 

admitted, that the people, the 99 people or 100, they give the 

information.  The Minister is not . . . you're not capable of it 

and neither is Mr. Lane and neither is Mr. Hepworth to sit 

down without some advisors.  You're not capable of it, Mr. 

Minister.  Why should you be?  You have to have your 

financial experts to put the figures together which the 

Department of Finance must have did prior to October 21, 

1991. 

 

And so what I'm saying to you, that the credit rating at October 

21 was a right and proper credit rating, and you tried to get me 

off blaming it was improper then.  So if you're saying it's an 

improper credit rating on October 21, 1991, then you're saying 

that the hundred officials gave the wrong information.  Now 

will you explain that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just 

remind the member opposite what the true events were.  And 

first of all, let me say to the member opposite, please don't put 

me into the same category as former Finance ministers of the 

former PC administration.  You can speak for them, but I can 

tell you that although you may think that they were not able to 

know what the facts were, I think that this Minister of Finance 

knows what the facts are better than they ever wanted to 

pretend that they knew, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now, Mr. Member from Arm River, the credit rating on 

October 21 or prior to that was one thing, but what happened 

since the budget was introduced late in 1991, Mr. Chairman, is 

a lot of intervening things which the members opposite did not 

tell the people of Saskatchewan they would do.  And so the 

credit rating was based on the budget. 

 

But then what happened?  During the middle of an election 

campaign, scorched earth policy, the members opposite sold 

PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Inc.) shares at a loss.  During the election campaign the former 

Conservative government sold Cameco shares at a loss since 

that credit rating that he talks about was put into place. 

 

During the period of time from when the Tory's last budget was 

introduced there were all kinds of questionable political 

projects that were funded under something called the 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, a secret corporation 

in which the member from Estevan and the member from 

Thunder Creek were members of the board.  Never told 

anybody in Saskatchewan that this even existed, but gave 

monies and spent millions of dollars without informing the 

people of Saskatchewan what they were spending on. 

 

There were losses in SEDCO that occurred because of 

commitments that the members opposite approved for political 

reasons rather than good economic reasons.  All of those things 

became public after the election, after the Tory budget, which 

they never passed. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, there has been a long debate about why 

the former government opposite never passed that budget.  

Well the member from Arm River reminds us all now why they 

never passed that budget.  They never passed that budget or 

allowed this legislature to scrutinize it because they knew that 

they could never defend that budget because of all of these 

things which they weren't saying publicly to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  After the election the books were opened and 

all of this became public knowledge. 

 

And therefore then, Mr. Chairman, there was a reconsideration 

of the credit rating because of the mismanagement and . . . I 

won't use some harsher words, but they would apply here, and 

there are certain charges being laid in Saskatchewan today 

because of that.  But because of that mismanagement which has 

become public and has been revealed as it should be in a 

democratic system of government, we are where we are today. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, how many budgets have you 

brought down in your career as a politician?  You stand at your 

place here and you've said you are so much smarter, Mr. 

Minister.  You won't put yourself in the same category as Mr. 

Lane and Mr. Hepworth and Mr. Andrew.  You won't put 

yourself in the same category.  No, you don't want to be.  But 

how many deficit budgets did Mr. Andrew bring down, how 

many deficit budgets did Mr. Lane bring down, and how many 

did you bring down? 

 

And you keep saying, oh, we never passed the budget and we 

were scared to pass the budget in 1991.  Did you pass your 

budget, Mr. Smart Minister, in 1982?  You brought a budget 

down in April, 1982 and you didn't pass it.  You went to the 

people on it.  And you lost. 

 

Your budget couldn't have been so bright.  You couldn't have 

been the smartest man in the world, Mr. Minister, because you 

were the Minister of Finance that replaced Mr. Smishek who 

brought down so many leaky budgets that Mr. Blakeney had to 

get rid of him.  And they brought 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

in the smart minister of Finance who I have got a lot of respect 

for -- and I say this with great respect.  As an individual I have 

a lot of respect for you, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I do, as an individual.  And I do. 

 

But I want you to be honest and honourable, Mr. Minister, and 

not blow yourself up too much because you make accusations 

for the people in viewers' land to listen to this here, the terrible 

budget the Tories bring down in 1991 and we didn't pass it.  

But you . . . Did you or did you not, Mr. Minister, bring down 

your budget in 1982?  Did you or did you not get it passed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

from Arm River should stop and contemplate for a moment 

what he is saying.  In 1982 there was a budget and there was 

immediately an election.  That's quite appropriate to have the 

people pass judgement.  They passed judgement and they 

elected a different government.  That's democracy. 

 

In 1991, Mr. Chairman, there was a budget -- there was no 

election.  The government could have continued the legislative 

session and members in the opposition, who were then New 

Democratic Party members, could have asked the government 

questions about that budget.  The government chose to abdicate 

its responsibility, to go into retreat because the house leader of 

the day, the member from Melfort, resigned out of disgust with 

the kind of shenanigans that that former government was 

carrying out.  They ran away from this House.  And they didn't 

call an election -- they adjourned this House in June without 

consideration of the Estimates and did not call an election until 

October 21. 

 

That's the difference, Mr. Chairman, and that's the difference, 

Mr. Member from Arm River.  You ran from this legislature 

and you ran from the public of Saskatchewan.  You would not 

be accountable, not even during through the process of an 

election campaign, and that's what made your approach wrong 

and undemocratic. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Member from Arm River, you are only 

one of 10 lonely souls who are over there from what used to be 

the government of the day prior to that election campaign. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I understand 

what you're saying.  And I knew that's what you'd come back 

with; that when Mr. Blakeney called the election 1982, 

prorogued the House and called an election just shortly after 

the budget came down; I understand that. 

 

And that we brought a budget down, and two or three months 

later we adjourned the House because many people on that side 

of the House, you said you were going to make this your 

province ungovernable, that you would not let it be governed. 

 

You used to ring bells and you used to stall the House.  And if 

you think for one minute that we're going to do over here on 

interim supply Bill -- hold this up for days and days and days 

and weeks like you did over here -- 

we're not going to do that.  We're going to be responsible to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, and when we get 

some reasonable answers we'll be letting this go, because we're 

not going to do what you people did. 

 

And this is what you did:  you stalled and you stalled and you 

stalled and we couldn't even table our last legislation because it 

was unmanageable.  And you said you would make it 

unmanageable.  So it was an entire different situation. 

 

And you said you went out to the people and you did go out to 

the people and you won, but you won by misleading every 

person and individual in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And don't tell me you didn't mislead them because where was 

the promises from you, Mr. Minister, and from everyone on 

that front row, that we will balance the budgets, lower the 

taxes, create jobs, save all the farmers, go to Ottawa and get the 

money? 

 

And you broke every one, because your Premier also at the end 

of those speeches in Outlook, Saskatchewan and I think it's 

been recorded 22, 23 different places in the province of 

Saskatchewan, after he made those speeches he was asked, the 

Tories' essential services are too high and what are you going 

to do about it, Mr. Premier?  And in every single case . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm not the Premier, by the way. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank goodness. 

 

Mr. Minister, in every single case where the now Premier was 

asked about the essential services, he said: my promise will be 

to hold or to lower.  Now if that isn't the most blatant breaking 

of a promise I've ever heard in my life, in my political career or 

prior, that every essential services -- SaskPower, SaskTel, 

Energy, SGI, and deterrent fees in Health -- you broke them all.  

You said you wouldn't do it. 

 

You don't want to even look me in the face when I'm saying 

this to you, because you can't.  You cannot look, you cannot 

look your own people in the face out there when you've broke 

every promise.  I've never seen a government that broke 

promises as fast as you can. 

 

When the member from Estevan as the new premier in 1982 

said at midnight tonight we will drop the gas tax in this 

province, he did it.  And at least he kept it there for seven years 

when conditions in the economy . . . he had to put it back on.  

You guys couldn't keep your promises for 24 hours -- for 24 

hours. 

 

Now Mr. Chairman must be wondering why we aren't leading 

this to interim supply.  I admit, Mr. Minister, that we've lost an 

hour over what we've been talking about. And what, I've come 

to the conclusion, that you have admitted, you have admitted, is 

exactly what I wanted you to admit and hoped you would and 

knew you would have to, if you were going to be half 

honourable at all.  You stalled and stalled for a long time.  That 

is, the hundred people in the Department of Finance that does 

the advising for all the figures.  And so that means that my 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

point was right in the first place, that that information would be 

given to the personnel who does the credit rating in October 

'91, and also do it in June 1992.  So don't tell me that our 

government was a BBB in October; this government is. 

 

And I will not believe and I will not have you go around this 

province and mislead.  And I'm saying, you are misleading the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan when you're saying it's 

all the Tories' fault.  It's all the Tories' fault.  And I told you 

when I spoke here a while ago in the budget speech that I am 

sick and tired of this here being the Tories' fault. 

 

We're going to get into it later on, maybe around 8 or 9 or 10 

o'clock tonight we'll get into the Gass Commission and his 

report.  We'll talk about it all right.  And you'll find out what 

the member from Arm River knows about it, and he knows 

lots.  Because I think he digested it better than you.  All you've 

done, Mr. Minister, is believe what you wanted to believe out 

of that report. 

 

And I will admit there's many things in that report, Mr. 

Minister, that I wasn't real proud of that the past government 

did, but I'll admit we made mistakes.  But I also, saying that, 

believe what our then premier said: that my treasury will be on 

the line for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

that is farmers and agriculture.  And he did it and he did it with 

his heart.  And he believed it. 

 

But you people are not doing that.  You're going to spend a half 

a billion dollars.  You're asking this House to approve a half a 

billion dollars -- almost a half a billion.  And I think when 

you're as loose as a goose with your money, the way you've 

been this last while, and you don't know what you're doing . . . 

you cut back on farmers here, and you said you were going to 

save them.  You've had deterrent fees on health care.  You've 

hit people.  I don't know who you haven't hit.  As I said a while 

ago, the only group of people you haven't hurt is the group you 

haven't met yet.  You've hurt everybody. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I have some questions, and this is 

important.  Because these accusations . . . We don't have many 

chances to get the facts from you.  Because we get into 

Estimates, we'll go on and on for weeks and we won't get 

nothing out of you.  We'll just be grandstanding around. 

 

So you must know this -- and being the minister of Finance in 

1982, you should be able to jump to your feet without even 

asking your officials -- what was the deficit in 1982 of the 

departments and the Crowns and the departments and Crowns 

together?  What was the total deficit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you for asking that question.  

Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the member opposite, first of all 

before I respond to his question, a number of things.  That yes, 

his premier, the member from Estevan, the Conservative 

premier for 10 years, did a number of things, politically 

motivated, never thinking about the financial impact of what he 

did would have on the future of this province and on the future 

of our children and their grandchildren. 

What motivated him, Mr. Chairman, was . . . And I remember 

and the people of Saskatchewan will remember for generations 

to come, his statement to the investors and the business 

community in New York in about 1983 or 1984, when that 

former premier said to them: this province has so much going 

for it that you can mismanage it and still break even.  And then 

he took it upon himself to mismanage this province to the point 

where he did not break even.  He brought it to the verge of 

financial bankruptcy. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, he may have governed by his heart.  It's 

too bad he forgot to use his head and make the kind of 

decisions that were important for the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite asks, the member opposite . . . yes, the 

member from Regina says: what kind of a heart was that?  It 

doesn't take much of a heart to create the kind of financial 

crisis which this province faces today because of 

mismanagement and waste and corruption which is causing 

now the decisions that have to be made, which in fact create 

some difficulty for people.  It didn't take much of a heart to do 

that; it took bad judgement.  It took bad judgement, it took 

political blindness, to do those kinds of things. 

 

And so that, Mr. Member from Arm River, Mr. Chairman, 

when the member from Arm River found that he had to move 

to the other side of the House, he found that he -- and he should 

not be proud of it -- was part of a government that left this 

province with a debt accumulated of almost $15 billion, left 

this province so that this year, in this budget, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have to pay $760 million in interest charges 

alone that's going out of the province of Saskatchewan and can 

help nobody in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's the 

legacy that the member from Arm River has left behind, and if 

he can stand up in this House and say that he can be proud of 

that, I challenge him to do that today. 

 

I am proud of the legacy we left behind in 1982.  And the 

member can say if I said . . . if the member from Arm River 

will stand up and say if I say what we left behind on the deficit, 

then somehow it's not accurate so I won't say.  I won't say it.  I 

won't use statements and documents that have been audited, 

that were presented in this legislature by one Hon. Gary Lane, 

minister of Finance, in July, 1986. 

 

What did he say about the member's question?  What did he 

say about the deficit that was left behind in 1982?  Well he 

said, Mr. Chairman, that there wasn't a deficit in 1982.  He said 

in fact, that for the year ended March 31, 1982 there was a 

surplus of $139.288 million -- the last time there was a surplus 

or a balanced budget in 1982. 

 

Not my figures, not my statements, but the audited statement of 

a former Progressive Conservative cabinet minister who found 

that when he had to face the auditors, he had to tell the honest 

truth, and he did, and the surplus was $139 million, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Just as we went through this round for 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

an hour before, you still would not answer the question -- what 

the total deficit was in the department, in the Crowns, and any 

liabilities, and the total of all three together. 

 

You are just great, Mr. Minister, to stand up and just say that . . 

. make these big speeches.  But we're not going to get any place 

if you . . . we'll just be that much longer passing interim supply 

if you're going to make these long speeches. 

 

I'm asking you direct questions and you, as Minister of 

Finance, shouldn't have to even ask anybody because if I was 

minister of Finance and put a budget together in 1982 and the 

government falls on it, I would have dreamt those figures for at 

least the next four years.  I would never would have forgot 

them.  I'll remember until I would die.  You should know right 

to the penny . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can give it to you right now.  Mr. 

Chairman, for the information of the member opposite: 1982, 

the total Crown corporations' debt, self-liquidating, not in any 

way a burden on the Saskatchewan taxpayer because the 

Crown corporations' earned income . . . They charge power 

rates and telephone rates and they paid the loans that were 

provided to them.  But the Crown corporation debt was $3.397 

billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, on the Consolidated Fund, which is the 

government side, taxpayer supported debt, do you know what it 

was, Mr. Chairman?  A hundred and ninety million dollars -- 

$190 million.  Do you know what it is today, Mr. Chairman?  

It's almost $9 billion after 10 years of the good and wise 

management of the member from Arm River. 

 

All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided, and the member will know what that's all about, the 

gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was $3.5 

billion.  The interest on the public debt, Mr. Chairman, was far 

less than it was today.  Three point five billion dollars was the 

gross debt.  Today the gross debt, if you calculate into that the 

guaranteed debt, is $15 billion.  And most of it now is not on 

the Crown side and self-liquidating; most of it is on the 

Consolidated Fund and has to be supported by taxes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, how could you 

stand there and say that Mr. Lane said that there was a balanced 

budget in 1982 and then turn around and tell us now that there 

is a $3.5 billion that was the debt? 

 

Now if you're good at figures, Mr. Minister, take $3.5 billion 

deficit in 1982, let's just go back and take . . . and see if you 

had a thousand dollars debt in your personal . . . your own 

personal debt was a thousand dollars in 1982, and see what it 

would be today if you -- in 1992 -- with not paying any of it 

off.  What would it be?  It would be accumulated a lot; it would 

have turned over at least twice. 

 

That money would have to be $15 billion; 3.5 billion 

today would be a total of your $15 billion.  If you had $3.5 

billion in 1982, it would turn over twice in those 10 years. 

 

But you've said the figure today of $13 billion, $15 billion.  

Can you tell me now because what I'm trying to do is get 

exactly from you . . . And we've got it -- 3.5 billion; it's very 

clear.  That's the total deficit in this province.  And where do 

we get the figures?  Why are we told in 1982 when the election 

was on that there's no debt in this province?  Why did you 

misrepresent, as Minister of Finance, why did you misrepresent 

and leave a legacy of $3.5 billion? 

 

You have now admitted . . . My colleagues and everyone in this 

legislature, you've heard the Minister of Finance say that he left 

us a deficit, total deficit of the departments and the Crowns and 

liabilities of 3.5 billion.  And I take his word that that has to be 

correct.  Now you're saying there's 15 billion today.  What was 

the deficit on October 21, 1991, a total of the Crowns, 

departments, and liabilities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite should read some of the budget documents from 1982.  

He will find that the total debt of the province in 1982 was 

published.  There was nothing secret about it; there was 

nothing hidden about it; the public knew where they stood.  

The total debt of the province was $3.5 billion, and almost all 

of that was self-liquidating.  It had assets that paid for the debt 

in the Crown corporations.  That was the debt of 1982, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The debt today is not $3.5 billion.  It's $15 billion if you 

assume into that the guaranteed debt which exists.  And the 

guaranteed debt is a potential liability.  That's the difference 

between 1982 and 1992, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The member can look at this year's budget.  He will find that in 

this year's budget on page 43 there is a clear statement of the 

debt in 1982, documents that can be supported.  The Provincial 

Auditor will be looking at them, and he will see that in 1982 

the total debt was $3.5 billion and that in 1993 it's $14.98 

billion or almost $15 billion. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not a finance man; you 

know that.  I never was a minister of Finance.  I never would 

be and I never had the capabilities of being one. 

 

But I've got some pretty good knowledge in my head.  And I 

don't care where the debt is, whether it's in the Crowns or the 

department or wherever it is. If any business has got a debt, if 

any business has got a debt, you take your total debt and that's 

what your total debt was -- $3.5 billion.  Now that's a figure 

that people in the province of Saskatchewan didn't know was 

there. 

 

You misled the people in the province of Saskatchewan in 

1982 and you're saying we misled in 1991, but we did not.  

Because . . . I'm going to ask you the question now:  did or did 

not the Gass Commission report state very clearly that the 

leader, the now Premier, and yourself knew exactly what the 

debt was?  Does the commission say that or does it not say 

that? 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Chairman, the Gass 

Commission does not say that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What did Mr. Gass say about it?  What did 

Mr. Gass say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I've tabled the report 

of the Gass Commission for the benefit of the member 

opposite.  He can read it and find out what's there. 

 

The Gass Commission opened the books, said a lot about the 

bad deals that were made, put the bottom line of what the 

deficit was to October 31, 1991.  It is very clear.  It speaks for 

itself.  All the member has to do is read it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you just don't want to admit, 

but you know that the Gass Commission said it very clearly.  It 

came from the Gass Commission.  It's been on television.  Mr. 

Gass has been on, and he said that the NDP knew what the 

deficit was. 

 

Now you know that he knew it.  You knew the books were 

open.  He said the books were open.  The commission said the 

books were open to the public of Saskatchewan.  And you've 

tried to mislead the people in the province of Saskatchewan for 

all these months, for close to a year now, about this hidden 

deficit.  Open the books. 

 

And you talk about all this extravagant spending.  Well 

certainly there was spending done.  But let's talk about real 

spending.  Let's go back into this 1970s when you spent $600 

million on uranium development for goodness sakes.  Talk 

about . . . You spent money like drunken sailors, you people 

did over there, when money should have been saved. 

 

Alberta put a war chest together.  You didn't.  We didn't inherit 

a war chest from you in 1982.  You know we didn't.  But you 

know that you've been playing politics with the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan by standing and saying continually . 

. . Now will you stand up as minister and say under oath, that 

you have to in this here Chamber, and say that you did not 

know the finances of the province of Saskatchewan in October 

21, 1982, that you had no idea that things were so bad, that you 

didn't know the figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I may have missed the member's 

question.  But if the member is asking did the public and did 

the NDP opposition know the full extent of the debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the answer is a categorical no.  No 

one knew.  No one knew except the PC politicians on the 

Treasury Board benches of the government. 

 

Now it so happened that the member from Arm River had, by 

that time, been turfed out of the cabinet and was no longer on 

the Treasury Board benches.  And that's why he is asking these 

questions because he probably didn't even know, rather than 

two or three of the members opposite who were on the treasury 

benches and knew and could not stand in this House and say 

otherwise. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you know that is not correct.  

You know that it was made very clearly that . . . 

Since last October till now, you've been talking about opening 

the books and how bad the situation is.  The books got opened.  

It is nothing different than we all knew.  I knew.  You knew. 

 

And my question to you:  did you know personally . . . Because 

it's easy for you to say that blanket answer like you as a 

politician always give.  Yes the NDP caucus and the NDP 

people and the people of Saskatchewan knew.  I asked you, as 

minister under oath, did you know the figures of the debt of 

this province including the departments, the Crowns, and the 

liabilities in October 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Answer to the question, Mr. 

Chairman: no, we did not know.  And no, I did not know.  And 

all the evidence is there to be able to tell the member opposite.  

The Provincial Auditor has said time and time again that he 

could only report on 50 per cent of the expenditures of the 

former government because the former government would not 

give him the information on the other 50 per cent.  There is no 

way anybody could have known, Mr. Chairman.  And it is 

beyond me why the member continues to pursue that line of 

questioning.  He knows that the former government hid 

information.  The Provincial Auditor, a servant of this 

legislature, made that very clear. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan were so suspicious that they 

changed the government in 1991 and elected a government that 

made a very important commitment, made the commitment to 

open, honest, accountable government.  That's what they're 

getting in 1992, and that's what they're going to get for many, 

many, more years to come. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, okay, you've said that you 

didn't know.  But maybe you didn't want to know so you could 

stand here and say this.  Because the Gass Commission does 

say it very clearly, that you knew and the books were open. 

 

But we're going to have to get off of this.  We'll get back onto it 

and some of my colleagues will get back onto it later today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you some questions in the 

Department of Agriculture.  This is very important -- that your 

interim supply is for half a billion dollars.  And I want to know 

. . . firstly, your department must know how many farmers 

there are in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the member is now 

getting into specific questions related to the Department of 

Agriculture.  That's a general question which almost anybody 

in Saskatchewan knows, but there's approximately 65,000 

farmers in Saskatchewan and the member from Arm River, I'm 

sure, is aware of that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I know it's getting into the departments a 

little bit, but it's important, Mr. Minister.  How many 

businesses, total businesses -- and that's not a department -- 

that's total businesses in the province of Saskatchewan? 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- About 35,000. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So we're talking about approximately 

100,000 between farmers and businesses. And of those 35,000 

businesses, how many would be directly connected, or 

connected with rural agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There's no way we would know 

that in an interim supply Bill, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, I appreciate that.  I can understand 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government decided -- and I said before in 

this House, I think, on three different occasions -- that you, Mr. 

Minister of Finance, and your colleagues in the front row, the 

upper echelon of your party, has directed the Minister of 

Agriculture to change the GRIP program in this province.  And 

it could be no other reason than this, and I'm going to explain 

to you, Mr. Minister.  Under the last year's GRIP program they 

were guaranteed on an average crop $3.2 billion. 

 

Mr. Minister, under the GRIP program in 1991, the farmers 

were guaranteed 3.2 or three -- I might be a little out on the 

million -- but it was $3-point-some billion, around 2 to 4 

million, three point million.  That's an average crop and wheat 

at a low price. 

 

Now there was an excellent crop in the province, Mr. Minister, 

an excellent crop, above average.  The price of wheat went up a 

little bit, and I understand it's around . . . I've been told from 

Crop Insurance it's about that 8 or $900 million perhaps that 

GRIP will be paying out last year.  But the farmers get the 

guarantee with their wheat and the GRIP together, of that 

3-point-some billion. 

 

But if we had have had a 1988 crop -- a poor crop, one of the 

poorest crops we've had since the '30s, in 1988 -- that would 

have cost this province . . . that would have cost GRIP, I'm 

saying, Mr. Minister, in that 2 to $3 billion range.  And I am 

sure, Mr. Minister, what you said in your cabinet room and in 

your caucus room and to your Minister of Agriculture, that 

program's too rich; we can't afford it because I've promised out 

there I'm going to balance the budget over the next four or five 

years.  I'm going to balance it. 

 

(1530) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is that bad? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, it's not bad, but you're going to do it on 

the backs of whom?  He's almost admitting it from his seat, Mr. 

Chairman.  Is that bad?  Of course it's bad if you have to do it 

on the backs of the farmers because under the new GRIP 

program you wanted to protect yourself.  The farmers will be 

covered for X amount of dollars and cents this year under the 

GRIP.  Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, can you tell me, Mr. 

Minister, what the saving to this government is going to be 

from the 1992 GRIP program compared to the 1991 GRIP 

program? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that is a very 

specific question dealing with the Department of Agriculture.  I 

have not the specific knowledge there. 

We're dealing with an interim supply Bill.  I think the member 

will be much better served and will get much more accurate 

information if he questions the Minister of Agriculture when 

that Estimates comes to this Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, you're not going to get away 

that easy with that because that's a very important thing.  That's 

the biggest step this government's ever made since they've been 

in government.  One of the biggest things that they've done is 

bring in two things under this government is a six-year lease 

program and change the GRIP.  That's all they've done for 

farmers.  And they haven't done it yet. 

 

And if you're going to take a half a billion dollars and be 

approved here and you don't have any idea what the GRIP 

program is going to cost you . . . because some of that half 

billion dollars may have to be going to farmers tomorrow.  

Farmers that are hailed out tomorrow, that are completely 

hailed out or destroyed or their crop don't come up, will be 

putting in for claims to Crop Insurance.  And there has to be 

some work done.  You have to have figures because some of 

that interim supply will be directly involved with the GRIP 

program.  So please, Mr. Minister, try to give me some kind of 

a figure on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member from 

Arm River would look at the Estimates which he has available 

-- and I'm dealing here with the global numbers, as the Minister 

of Finance should do -- he will find that on page 19, the 

funding for 1992-93 under the gross revenue insurance 

program is $127.2 million.  It's there for everybody to see, 

including the member from Arm River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's exactly what I wanted you to say, Mr. 

Minister.  Because can you tell me, when they haven't even set 

a price for grain yet, we don't even have any idea what the crop 

is going to be like, where you got that figure from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we got that figure 

from the Department of Agriculture and the Minister of 

Agriculture. And if the member wants to find out how that 

figure was arrived at, he'll have to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture when that minister appears before this Committee 

of Finance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, I guess that's all we can do.  

You've estimated that that's going to cost a hundred and some 

million dollars, whatever . . . 127 million did you say?  All 

right. You said that's what it's going to cost.  Well there's no 

way that anybody would know.  It's like somebody just threw 

some figures in a hat and drew them out, because no farmer in 

this province can find out what their revenue insurance is going 

to be until after all the crop reports are in.  They don't know. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's why it's called an estimate, Gerry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay.  You've called it an estimate and we'll 

have to get into the details.  All right. 

 

Now the FeedGAP program that you just cancelled in the 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

budget, how much is that going to save so you didn't have to 

ask for more than half a billion dollars?  How much did it save 

this government?  Because that must have affected, Mr. 

Minister, your interim supply request. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not here to 

answer questions on specific programs in the government.  

That's what the specific departments have to do; that's what the 

specific minister has to do. And the member knows that he's 

going to have to wait.  We've got lots of time in this session.  

We can stay here as long as the members of the opposition like.  

That when the Minister of Agriculture is here, he will get the 

answers to all of his questions to the fullest extent that he 

desires. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I have examined Hansard carefully and 

the words used by the member for Arm River.  I have 

concluded and interpreted that the member's words were 

spoken in the form of a question as to whether the officials had 

lied.  Upon reflection, I therefore conclude that the context in 

which the words were used did not make them unparliamentary 

even if they tended to be inflammatory. 

 

I remind members that such language tends to be inflammatory 

and may not be temperate and worthy of being spoken in this 

place, and urge members to exercise stricter discretion on the 

use of such language.  I further refer members to Beauchesne's, 

6th Edition, at page 155, page 151 sections 493(3) and 493(4): 

 

 (3) The Speaker has traditionally protected from attack a 

group of individuals commonly referred to as "those of high 

official station".  The extent of this group has never been 

defined.  Over the years it has covered senior public servants 

. . . 

 

 (4) The Speaker has cautioned Members to exercise great 

care in making statements about persons who are outside the 

House and unable to reply. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was quite sure 

that I didn't put it in those words and I thank you for getting 

Hansard out so quickly.  And I just want to put it on the record 

that if anybody thought that I had any intentions of defaming 

anybody, that was not my intentions . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well I said . . . It came out very clearly.  It did . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, there goes the 

minister again. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I ask the member not to reflect on the 

rulings of the Chair.  If the member has a question, put the 

question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Minister of 

Finance, he seems to think he doesn't have to answer any 

questions at all about where this money's going.  What's the 

sense of having an interim supply Bill and a half a billion 

dollars and you can't tell us some of the key savings? 

 

You going to tell me that if you hadn't cut back in Health, if 

you hadn't cut back in Agriculture, if you hadn't cut back in 

Education, if you hadn't cut back in Social Services, if you 

hadn't cut back on Environment, you would have had to ask for 

more money.  And all I'm asking 

is, your cut-backs that you had, if you'd never had the 

cut-backs, how much money would you have had to ask for in 

this interim supply Bill?  Your officials would have to know 

that answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if we hadn't 

made the decisions that we made, then this budget would have 

had a deficit of $1.2 billion. 

 

The member wants to know how much savings there have been 

in total terms, which is what I'm prepared to discuss here and 

not specifics of any particular department.  He should know 

that under the directions established prior to the election and 

prior to November 1, this province would have had a deficit of 

$1.2 billion. 

 

Because of the decisions we made and the hard choices that we 

made because of our commitment to good, sound financial 

management, we've reduced that deficit to $517 million.  And 

it will be substantially lower next year until we bring a 

balanced budget in in four to five years, which is what the 

people of Saskatchewan elected us to do. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I never asked you that, Mr. Minister.  My 

question was, you've asked for half a billion dollars for interim 

supply, or $469 million.  Why did you put the . . . where did 

that figure come from?  Why have you got that particular figure 

on there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the member was not 

here when this all was debated the other day and I really do not 

think it's a good use of the time of this House to ask exactly the 

same questions which were asked on Thursday and again on 

Friday, simply to kill time at taxpayers' expense.  And further 

to that, Mr. Speaker, as the members already have done, 

because we're past the time, delay grant monies to school 

divisions and municipalities and hospital boards who will not 

be able to pay some of their bills because of the tactics of the 

members opposite. 

 

The answer I gave on Thursday and on Friday, and which I will 

give to the member now that he's here, is this: that this 

calculation is determined by one-twelfth of the total budget 

appropriation provided plus some additional expenditures 

clearly identified, which have been presented to the members 

opposite in printed form, which bring it to the figure that they 

are. 

 

But it's the traditional one-twelfth, as is done with any interim 

supply Bill except during times when it becomes two-twelfths 

-- and that's been known to happen under the former 

government and under the government before that -- but it's 

basically one-twelfth -- traditional -- so that the government 

can be accountable on a month-by-month basis until the budget 

is considered in the Estimates of each of the departments and 

the Department of Finance before this session is over. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- As usual, Mr. Minister, you get up there 

with all your rhetoric and try to make the people think that I 

didn't know what questions were asked.  And this question I 

ask was not asked before.  It's just the way you answered.  The 

question I asked was: you ask for $469 million interim supply.  

If you had have had no cut-backs, 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

if you had left the Department of Agriculture as is, the 

Department of Health, and all the departments, if it had have 

been on with no cut-backs, how much interim supply would 

you be asking for?  It would have to be a different figure. 

 

Now don't say that question was asked before, because it 

wasn't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't have 

that information.  We don't base the budget on what it might 

have been.  We could only know what the deficit would have 

been overall.  I can tell the member the facts; we're dealing 

here with the facts.  And the facts are that we're asking for 

one-twelfth plus whatever additional expenditures, which have 

been explained to the members opposite already because this is 

an interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Normally, Mr. Minister, this wouldn't be so 

important.  But when you've upset the whole province by 

having deterrent fees and cut-backs in health, we've got people 

that can't pay their bills out there, we've got diabetics that don't 

know where they're getting their money from, we've got 

farmers that have been charged another 60 cents a gallon for 

their gasoline, they've got the FeedGAP program gone -- 

you've just hit everybody out there, as I said before.  And there 

has to be some figure in mind how you derived at the 469 

million. 

 

You can say, oh well, that's because it's one-twelfth of the total 

budget.  Mr. Minister, if you had never cut back, what would 

the figures you would have had to ask for?  That's what I'm 

asking you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't 

know that because we don't know what we would have decided 

. . . what the government would have been decided that it could 

afford if the circumstances were different.  So I can't answer 

the member's question because there is no answer for it, 

because we're dealing with what is presented for the House 

today. 

 

But I can tell the member opposite something very important.  

That the reason we're not running a $1.2 billion deficit, as the 

PC government had they been re-elected would have done 

because that was their policy, is because of what Standard & 

Poor's said to everybody who cared to pay attention today.  

And they said, and I quote, and they talked about the debt: 

 

 . . . debt that must be serviced by the province now totals 

almost 180 per cent of annual budget revenues.  This burden 

is substantially higher than for other Canadian provinces and 

is a function of large budgetary deficits in recent years . . . 

 

"Large budgetary deficit in recent years" -- and everybody 

knows who was the government in those recent years.  He goes 

on to say: 

 

 . . . as well as sizeable provincial investments in several 

projects intended to diversify the economy. 

 

And then it goes on to say that Standard and Poor's never 

viewed these projects as being self-supporting. 

 

It's because of that kind of financial situation in Saskatchewan 

that we have had to make some very difficult decisions and 

have come to a budget this year which will be in total voted 

$4.2 billion in expenditures on the . . .  And as a result, for the 

interim supply, we're asking for one-twelfth of that plus some 

additional money because of conditions that the member well 

knows, such as quarterly payments to municipalities, payments 

to school boards, which will reach six-twelfths by the end of 

the month of June and so on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, your officials would have to 

be able to tell you right to the penny.  You're just holding these 

back because . . . this one-twelfth, this interim supply, that you 

don't want to get off that.  They'd have to be able to tell you 

what the saving was for all your cut-backs.  And you're just not 

giving that information. 

 

Now that's nothing that's too much to ask a Minister of 

Finance.  That we've had the biggest cut-backs that this 

province has ever known or probably any province in this 

country's ever known. 

 

I want to make a remark or two because I'm going to let . . . one 

of my other colleagues are going to start asking some question.  

You keep talking about this horrible Saskatchewan that had this 

great big deficit.  Mr. Minister, a year ago . . . well it's in the 

summer of 1990, I went into the United States of America and I 

went into 21 states that I was never into before.  And I make it 

a habit of stopping to talk to many people to learn.  And I 

wanted to find out what the feeling is in other states and 

provinces as I'd had in my trip. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, in the state of Alabama, the state of Texas, 

the state of . . . the Carolines, and all those states, in Virginia, 

you could stop and talk to people.  And I don't remember who 

was a Democrat or a Republican governor, but this is the kind 

of feeling you would get from them:  oh, we got a deficit; the 

economy's so bad we got a deficit, and if we could just get rid 

of that Democrat governor, it would be all right. 

 

The next state would say, if we could just get rid of that 

Republican governor, we would be all right.  And we got a 

deficit, deficit.  Every state I asked had a deficit.  There was 

nobody running in the blue. 

 

All right, I get back to Saskatchewan.  They said the same 

thing here, that oh if we could just get rid of the member from 

Estevan and get rid of the member from . . . the Prime Minister 

of Canada we'd be all right.  It's all over North America they're 

saying the same thing.  But now they're saying, we would never 

have voted NDP if we had have known you were going to do 

this.  You've just thrown the people right off stride.  It's the talk 

of every coffee row in this country.  And our past premier 

brought it up today, the member of Estevan, very clearly to you 

and to the Premier -- very, very clearly -- that why aren't you 

listening to people out there. 

 

(1545) 

 

You sit there so smug, you people in that front row, and 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

think that you can get away with this.  Well I'm actually . . . as 

a politician I should say I'm happy because you're going to 

defeat yourself, but I'm not that way.  I feel sorry for the 

province of Saskatchewan what you're doing to them.  Because 

you're going to defeat yourself; you haven't got a chance. 

 

You have 51 or 52 per cent of the polls and you wouldn't be 

more than about 42 now, and you are finished because you're 

not listening to the people.  You're not listening to the people.  

You can stand up here and say you are but you're not. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I'm going to turn it over to one of my other 

members to ask some questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

want to deal with a couple of issues that the member from Arm 

River raised earlier in the debate and that the minister was 

giving some answers to. 

 

Mr. Minister, you told the Assembly a short while ago that the 

accumulated deficit in the province of Saskatchewan in April 

1982 is about $3.5 billion, and that included the Crown side 

and the Consolidated Fund.  And I do agree with you, Mr. 

Minister, because in December 1982 the minister from 

Churchill Downs confirmed those figures in Public Accounts.  

He broke it down approximately $3 billion on the Crown side, 

and your deficit on the consolidated side wasn't the surplus that 

had been predicted, but it was in fact about $300 million on the 

debt side. 

 

And as we know the natural resource numbers that you 

predicted in 1982 didn't exactly come through, they were 

somewhat less, and that's excusable.  It was only about a $400 

million mistake but it was . . . that happens when international 

commodity prices drop.  So that confirmation by yourself today 

is important because it says that the debt of the province at that 

time was about three and a half billion dollars. 

 

In discussing this with people in the financial community they 

tell me that you will -- given the interest rates, the government 

interest rates of the past decade -- that you would double that 

number every seven and a half years.  And I think your 

Minister of Finance could . . . your staff would confirm that.  

So let's be kind and say that even though 10 years have passed, 

it simply doubled. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this same committee last year when the 

member from Elphinstone was questioning the Minister of 

Finance about the remaining $7.9 billion in his terms, he asked 

the minister for a list of where the money went.  And the 

minister -- and I presume relying on numbers given to him by 

his officials -- went through the list for the member from 

Elphinstone. 

 

And I'll just remind you of what the verbatim said at that time.  

It was broken down in this way in the response to the member 

from Elphinstone, and these are rounded off numbers: $717 

million in the Agricultural Credit Corporation; Crown 

Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan, $2.6 billion; 

Municipal Financing Corporation about $120 million; 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, $202 million; Saskatchewan 

Economic 

Development Corporation, about $175 million; Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation, $317 million; Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, about $1.9 billion which would include the debt 

of SaskEnergy and the power side; Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, about $750 million; Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications, SaskTel in other words, $775 million; 

and Saskatchewan Water Corporation, about $198 million.  

The minister was forthcoming with those figures, as provided 

by his officials to the member from Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you add those numbers up in conjunction 

with what debt there was -- and those numbers were provided, 

by the way, in 1991 dollars -- wouldn't you agree, Mr. Minister, 

that in 1992 dollars that your deficit today amounts to about 

seven and a half billion dollars prior to 1982 and about seven 

and a half billion dollars since 1982?  Would you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No I would not confirm that, 

because the member knows that in calculating that you'd have 

to have an inflation rate of about 7 per cent CPI (consumer 

price index) and it was never that over that period of time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I was giving you the benefit of 

the doubt.  The financial people are telling me seven and a half 

years is the amount of time it would take to double that amount 

of money given the interest rates that applied during that 

decade. 

 

I said I'm giving you the benefit of the doubt of 10 years.  So 

you can take your CPI or whatever number you want to throw 

to it and you're going to come up with a doubling of that 

number since 1982. 

 

And I sat through enough budget briefings, Mr. Minister.  I saw 

the officials from the Department of Finance provide numbers 

on how things grow in this country to realize that over a 

10-year period of time you would have had it doubling. 

 

And I think the questions the member from Arm River were 

asking you in discussing this interim supply, it's important that 

you put those in 1992 dollars.  Not 1982; 1992 dollars, Mr. 

Minister.  Given that it's ten years instead of seven and a half, 

won't you agree that three and a half billion dollars would 

double? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that's assuming that 

you want to use the same kind of logic and the same kind of 

mathematics and the same kind of approach as the members 

did when they were on this side of the House as a government. 

 

Some of the debt that was there in 1982 was repaid during the 

period of those 10 years because it came due.  And therefore 

money that was borrowed at particular interest rates prior to 

that time would have been repaid and refinanced by the former 

government in newer dollars.  So you can't just take a straight 

number and apply it, whether it's consumer price index or 

interest rates, and come up with that kind of a figure.  And the 

member opposite knows that, or if he doesn't know that then 

he's obviously been consulting some of the same kind of people 

that he 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

consulted when he was on the treasury benches which created 

the situation which we face today. 

 

Let me put it into perspective, Mr. Chairman.  For 75 years in 

the province of Saskatchewan, in 75 years this province built 

two universities, built the most extensive road and highway 

system in all of Canada -- more extensive than any other 

province -- built schools and hospitals, built all kinds of 

infrastructure, electrified Saskatchewan and rural 

Saskatchewan, provided telephone service to almost every 

place in the province of Saskatchewan.  And you know, Mr. 

Chairman, we accumulated during that period of time of 75 

years, an accumulated debt of $3.5 billion. 

 

In 10 years, the members opposite built nothing.  They sold off 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan at a loss, they sold off 

Cameco shares at a loss, they paid former colleagues and 

cabinet ministers exorbitant salaries as patronage by working 

for the government, and in that period of time of 10 years, 

raised the debt from $3.5 billion to $15 billion.  That's the 

perspective in which one has to consider this. 

 

And the reason the member for Morse is so animated -- 

because he doesn't like to hear these facts.  And if I were him, 

if I were him knowing that I had been on this side of the House 

when all of that horrible mismanagement took place, I would 

be irritated, too, because I would not want to show my face to 

the public anywhere in Saskatchewan as long as they 

remembered what the Conservative government did to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's interesting listening 

to the response from the Finance minister today.  At no point in 

the discussion will he convert those numbers to 1992 dollars.  

If it's not 7.1 or $7.2 billion, then tell us what it is. 

 

But it's interesting, you know, that we had an expansion at the 

Lanigan potash mine that that minister and his government 

started.  It ended up costing the Saskatchewan taxpayer $600 

million by the time it was done.  And I can bet you that some 

of the evaluation put on the shares of PCS prior to 1982 had 

that expansion built in.  The minister always likes to talk about 

his capital assets and how much they were worth to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

When all got said and done, Lanigan cost the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan a tonne of money in a falling potash market.  

Those numbers are in there, that debt that the minister doesn't 

want to put in 1992 dollars.  Every dime spent on the Lanigan 

expansion is a credit to that minister there and his government 

-- every dime. 

 

Because what do you do, Mr. Chairman, with a half-finished 

shaft at a potash mine?  You got two choices:  you can either 

fill it in, fill it full of garbage from around the mine, or you 

complete it.  You don't have any other choice. 

 

So an expansion in a falling market, when the province of 

Saskatchewan didn't need any more potash on, had to be 

completed.  Just as the same as the minister today is 

completing projects started by the former government. 

But a project of the same magnitude as Saskferco, a project of 

the same magnitude, bigger than Millar Western, a project of 

the same magnitude as the paper mill at Weyerhaeuser, and yet 

the minister roundly criticizes . . . he falls back on Standard and 

Poor's.  Standard and Poor's says these are questionable 

projects. 

 

Well there isn't one of those projects that when Donald Gass 

was reviewing them -- Saskferco, for sure -- said was a good 

investment, that that project will return to the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer in a very short time its initial investment. 

 

Matter of fact, the minister's own economic review in 

December '91 singled out almost every one of those large 

capital projects as being the only growth factor in the 

provincial economy in 1992; that the jobs associated with 

them, that the income tax associated with them, that the 

spin-offs identified with all of those capital projects were the 

only reason that Saskatchewan would have a growth rate, at 

that time predicted by the minister of around 2 per cent, were 

the only reason that it would occur.  Hardly any of them have 

had an opportunity to have a finished project come out of them 

yet. 

 

Very similar to the Lanigan expansion, large commitments of 

taxpayers' dollars.  Lanigan is producing potash today, 

producing it at a far less price than what the minister projected.  

I believe the figure he used in the 1982 budget was $180 a 

tonne and he can confirm that if he would like.  In fact potash 

today probably is around $108 a tonne.  In his projections of 

'82 on basis of the Lanigan expansion, it was nearly double 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, what you're going to have to do to put this 

committee moving ahead is start putting your numbers in 1992 

and come clean with the committee and the people that half the 

debt in the province of Saskatchewan today was tied to debt 

prior to 1982 and that much of the debt in the province today, 

much of the debt in the province today is indeed tied to capital 

projects -- capital projects that haven't had an opportunity to 

produce any finished product to make a return to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  Is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Chairman, it is not correct.  

What the member says opposite has no bearing on fact 

whatsoever.  I want to just correct him on some fact, and I will 

have in this House for the next little while some documentation 

which will support what I've got to say. 

 

The decision on phase 2 expansion of the potash mine at 

Lanigan was made by the former PC government.  They made 

that decision in spite of the advice that they were given not to 

proceed.  That's well documented.  As a matter of fact the 

minister of the day is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What advice did you get? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the member from Morse is 

excited again, Mr. Speaker, because he doesn't like the truth, 

because he's embarrassed once again by the truth which he was 

a part of. 

 

But the Potash Corporation expansion at Lanigan, Mr. 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

Chairman, was a decision of the former government contrary to 

the advice that they got, advice which said that was not the 

right time to proceed.  The annual report tabled by the former 

government right after that boasted about this decision which 

they made to expand the PCS mine at Lanigan at an 

inappropriate time.  Their responsibility, another example of 

the kind of mismanagement that they perpetrated on the people 

of Saskatchewan in 10 years. 

 

I also want to say something else, that today PCS is producing 

at one-half of its capacity.  Why is it producing at one-half of 

its capacity, Mr. Chairman?  Because the members opposite 

privatized the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, turned it 

over to interests in the United States which are running the 

Potash Corporation in the interests of mines in New Mexico 

which are higher-cost producing mines, are setting up the 

Potash Corporation in such a way to allow those mines and 

produce and creating extra competition.  The private sector 

mines are going three-quarter to 100 per cent capacity, even in 

Saskatchewan, but PCS is producing at one-half capacity 

because of decisions that the members opposite made. 

 

(1600) 

 

Is today's debt . . . was the prior-to-1982 debt one-half of 

today's debt?  Absolutely not, Mr. Chairman.  The debt in 1982 

was $3.5 billion accumulated, almost all of it self-liquidating, 

not a burden on the taxpayer.  Today we have a debt which is 

$13.5 billion, and if you add the interest . . . the guaranteed 

debt, it is $15 billion, almost all of that . . . all of that 

accumulated -- other than the 3.5 billion that was there in 1982 

-- accumulated in the last 10 years. 

 

Even using the member from Thunder Creek's strange logic, 

where he's not prepared to accept the fact that some of the debt 

from '82 would have rolled over . . . In fact most of it or a lot of 

it would have been paid off because the bonds would have been 

due.  Even if you use the simplistic arithmetic that he uses, the 

most that you could -- if you convert it into 1992 dollars -- the 

most it could amount to would be about $5.5 billion. 

 

But you can't make that kind of a conversion because a lot of it 

would not have been a debt from that period of time.  It 

would've been new debt which would've had to been 

refinanced during the period of time when the member opposite 

was on the treasury benches. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're making progress.  

We've got the minister to 5.5 billion now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is no denying that the unfunded pension 

liabilities that exist in this province -- in 1982 dollars and 

according to the member from Churchill Downs in December 

1982 said -- were $2.9 billion, okay, total on that side. 

 

Now those unfunded liabilities have grown.  Some of the 

members of the current government are in that category.  We 

know that the member from Riversdale alone has an unfunded 

pension liability of one and a half million dollars -- one and a 

half million.  And the reason that is so large is because that 

over time that money every seven 

years compounds.  That's a fact of life. 

 

If the member from Riversdale can stay in this legislature for 

another quarter of a century, I suspect it'll be about $3 million 

because that's the way the pension fund works.  Okay.  Now he 

may do that.  I don't know.  But the Minister of Finance knows 

that.  His own pension is tied to that old plan, and it will go up 

like that.  If he stays here long enough, maybe his will get that 

big too.  I don't know. 

 

But there's some simple facts, Mr. Minister, that those things 

grow.  A lot of it was there prior too.  And you can't get around 

that.   So I'm glad you've come to the point of 5.5, and I'm sure 

if you do a little more conferring you'll find that it's even larger 

than that. 

 

And that's the problem, Mr. Minister, we've had in this whole 

debate.  Last year when the minister of Finance went through 

the numbers for the member from Elphinstone and said where 

the money was, in many of these areas now you have chosen to 

take any debt attached to a particular area as outlined by the 

member from Weyburn.  You have pulled all that debt into the 

Consolidated Fund, all into the Consolidated Fund and attached 

it to '91-92. 

 

A lot of this debt was ongoing.  You have chosen, as was 

pointed out today in question period, to assume all of that debt 

in the current account of government.  And by doing so, you 

have incurred debt costs that are very large. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we're going to need you -- before we're 

said and done in this committee, as we asked you on Friday, as 

we asked you earlier in committee -- to convert those debt costs 

from back before to 1992 dollars, to show this committee 

exactly what you've done.  And if you have incurred a whole 

bunch of more debt costs in that particular year to service that 

debt, then we need to know about it.  And we believe that in 

this interim supply Bill, that by doing that you have changed 

numbers dramatically the government works with.  And that's 

why we're asking these questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this interim supply 

Bill changes no numbers.  This interim supply Bill deals only 

with expenditures the departments are required to expend in the 

month of June, nothing else.  They deal nothing with the debt; 

they deal nothing with the interest on the debt, and therefore 

those questions that the members opposite are asking do not 

apply on the interim supply Bill because this Bill does not 

apply. 

 

Here is what the interim supply Bill deals with, Mr. Chairman.  

And I want the public of Saskatchewan to take note.  And they 

have already started to take note because we already are getting 

telephone calls from Social Services agencies and from 

Education divisions throughout Saskatchewan who are being 

forced to access their lines of credit at great expense because of 

the delays that the member opposite have brought about on this 

interim supply Bill, for no reason other than to put in time 

because they're not ready to consider any of the other business 

of the House.  Because the members opposite have not spent 

the time to prepare themselves for the Bills which are before 

the House or for the various Estimates of the various 

departments where they should be asking 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

these specific questions. 

 

They are delaying of this House; they're delaying this interim 

supply Bill.  And what they have done is this.  School boards 

should have been receiving their funding by around May 31.  

Already some school boards are having to access lines of credit 

which is going to cost them interest dollars which they can 

sorely afford during times of restraint.  There is something in 

the area of 200 funded agencies that receive funds from the 

province by contractual obligation from the Department of 

Social Services.  They should be getting those funds on June 1 

which I believe is today.  When they can't receive those funds 

because of the tactics of the members opposite in delaying the 

interim supply Bill, those 200 Social Services agencies are 

going to have to go and access some money or stop the services 

which they are delivering to people in need. 

 

And be it on the heads of the member opposite who for no 

good reason are delaying this interim supply Bill when those 

results are making an impact on people who receive the 

services and the taxpayers in their constituencies who are going 

to have to shell out more money because their school divisions 

are now going to have to borrow money in order to operate 

because the member from Arm River and the member from 

Thunder Creek have not allowed them to get paid because they 

have not allowed this interim supply Bill to proceed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's very interesting.  

The member, the Minister of Finance, is now trying to blame 

his fiscal mismanagement on the members of the legislature.  

We're asking questions far, far broader than what the members 

of that party asked in the same committee. 

 

May 6 is the verbatim that I'm working off of, Mr. Chairman.  

Even in the long list of items that the minister of Finance 

provided to the then member from Elphinstone, even went on 

to include things like the land bank land that the member from 

Morse was asking about yesterday, the $185 million that seems 

to have disappeared off the books of Saskatchewan.  Capital 

grants, University of Saskatchewan, $2.2 million; 

Saskatchewan municipalities, 4.495 million.  These were the 

kind of numbers that the minister of Finance was providing to 

questioning in interim supply last year at this same time. 

 

So I think members of the House on this side are quite 

legitimate in asking them and we certainly haven't had the 

responses from the Minister of Finance that the member from 

Weyburn was even giving last year to members.  At least the 

minister of Finance last year was itemizing all of the issues, 

itemizing all of the areas, doing it in 1991 dollars for the 

member, not 1982 dollars, and giving some straight answers. 

 

And we can't even get that out of the member.  So I think it's a 

little poor for the member to stand and say that these people are 

keeping the poor of the province, they're keeping our various 

infrastructural areas from getting their money. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Minister, that your officials, knowing them as 

well as I do, have salted away a little bit for the rainy 

day that might come along that I'm sure, given . . . And the 

thing, Mr. Minister, I think that you should provide the House, 

seeing as we're dealing with nearly a third of the province's 

expenditures without a budget, that we should have exactly the 

amount that was garnered in the two special warrants, the dates 

that they were issued on, the dates that they were issued on, 

they in conjunction with this particular interim supply Bill, 

what the total is, so that we know exactly what those three 

items add up to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just enough to hold up the House, 

Mr. Chairman.  We've got that.  We'll get it right away.  I'll 

give you the number of each of the special warrants as soon as 

my staff has identified it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That will be 

appreciated. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as I was saying earlier in my remarks, the 

total debt of the province was very important to this committee 

last year, and we think it's very important for the committee 

this year because of some extraordinary things that you have 

done in your capacity as Finance minister by taking the debt 

from every conceivable area, rolling it into '91-92, showing it 

now in the consolidated side rather than in any of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that even though everyone in 

Canada is now looking at changing their accounting systems to 

move to a new style of government, if you will, that you have 

been less than honest with Saskatchewan taxpayers by mixing 

and matching your numbers all the time. 

 

And that's why we would like you to put those numbers in 

1992 dollars -- your debt from prior to 1982, debt that occurred 

since then but was accounted in the old way -- and put it in 

perspective for us in this committee so that we can view the 

entire package using one accounting system or the other.  Not 

mixing and matching all the time like you want to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the debt hasn't 

changed.  The member and the House knows that the debt 

hasn't changed.  It doesn't matter where the debt is; it still is a 

debt.  It's an obligation.  It has to be serviced with interest 

charges, and it has to be repaid. 

 

So no matter how and where the debt may be written off . . . 

Because it's now written down in the appropriate places, there's 

no more hiding of that debt.  The debt in 1992, June 1, is the 

same as it was a month from now because the total debt does 

not change, and it has not changed. 

 

There is a full and complete explanation of the Consolidated 

Fund statement of debt on page 61 of the budget speech.  It's 

clear.  It's precise.  It's presented in the form that the former 

government probably never provided it because they did not 

like to disclose to the Saskatchewan public what the full extent 

of the debt was. 
 

This statement shows where the debt is in the Crown 

corporations, by each of the Crown corporations, from 

Agricultural Credit Corporation to SaskEnergy.  This statement 

on page 61 shows the debt on the Consolidated Fund.  And it 

shows that the accumulated debt, the gross 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

debt, less sinking funds, plus the guaranteed interest is $14.979 

billion -- almost $15 billion. 

 

One cannot be more clear than that.  It's there for all to see.  

That debt was there prior to this budget, that debt was there 

prior to November 1 when the government changed, and that 

debt is still there.  That hasn't changed, and I think the member 

opposite knows that. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The minister, Mr. Chairman, still refuses to 

skate around, still refuses to answer the question that we've 

been asking all along, to put all of those numbers . . . And I go 

back again, December 1, 1982, Public Accounts, where Mr. 

Sawchuk is answering questions in the committee.  And he's 

talking about the teachers' unfunded liability.  He's talking 

about $911 million -- nearly a billion dollars.  And in his 

statements he says that there might be 20 million in there now 

-- there might be 20 -- but basically there is no real money in 

the fund. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, that liability that was talked about here 

has doubled by now.  There is no question.  Because the 

practice of government until about 1986-87 was to simply meet 

the current year's demands on that account.  Then there was an 

attempt to build up a surplus in the account which would look 

after some of that liability. 

 

Mr. Minister, because of numbers like this that everyone knows 

are around, we are saying that you have to put these debt 

numbers in a better perspective for people than what you have 

done.  Because what you have done, for instance, taking an 

equity investment and then in turn calling it a write-down 

simply isn't an accurate way, I don't think, Mr. Minister, of 

reflecting the debt of the province. 

 

You have an equity investment in the Bi-Provincial upgrader.  

You're saying that that equity investment is now a debt 

liability.  And I don't think, Mr. Minister, that by what you're 

doing by taking all of those write-downs in one particular year 

is in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan.  It may 

be in your best political interest.  It's in your best political 

interest because it accentuates the arguments that you make all 

the time, and it also allows you later down the road to make 

significant capital gains. 

 

I mean if you were going to take the process further, I suppose 

you might as well have written off the equity investment in 

Saskferco so that every tonne of fertilizer sold from now till 

eternity has a clear profit built into it for you.  Because that's 

what in effect you're doing.  You've taken your write-down on 

Cameco Corporation, you've taken your write-down on PCS, 

paper numbers that were based, I submit, on numbers designed 

by the former NDP government basis a number of things: basis 

projected prices for potash, basis projected ongoing costs of the 

PCS corporation, basis capital investments on buildings and 

infrastructure and mines and that type of thing. 

 

And at the end of the day you came up with a share value, a 

share value that I would submit to you, Mr. Minister, if the 

same evaluation process had been used during the 1980s 

instead of the 1970s would've resulted in a far 

different share value than what you had on the books attributed 

to the Potash Corporation, because you didn't have potash 

prices as high.  You didn't have newly acquired mines to attach 

value to. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, there are a lot of people out there that claim 

that you got taken to the cleaners when you purchased those 

mines, that that capital value that you attached to those mines 

was overinflated because you got taken to the cleaners when 

that asset was bought.  And by doing that, you attached a figure 

to it, a paper figure, a book value figure that you're now basing 

a write-down on; a book value figure that was inflated; that if 

it'd been done in the 1980s would've come nowhere close to 

that number. 

 

And yet you take a write-down; you load it all up into one 

particular year.  By doing that you incur debt costs to the 

province of Saskatchewan, because you've taken all of those 

write-downs in one particular year.  You'll have debt costs 

attached to service that debt. 

 

And it's no wonder, Mr. Minister, that you have a downgrade in 

your credit rating, because many people out there -- the same 

agencies, the very same agencies that review these things -- 

have said that those debt write-downs weren't necessary. And 

I'm sure at the time that you bought those mines and you 

assigned capital value to much of PCS probably said that you 

have bought an inflated price.  You have bought an inflated 

investment.  And you can't attach the value that you did to it.  

And that's why, Mr. Minister, it's important for us to know 

these numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in order to 

respond to a question the member asked earlier, we now have 

the information that the special warrant in April was $316.925 

million.  The special warrant in May was $360.882 million.  

That's the answer to the question. 

 

I just want to correct the member opposite, because either he is 

confused or he is deliberately trying to confuse the issue.  I'm 

not going to speculate on that.  But he keeps coming back to 

somehow that the accounting changes have changed the debt.  I 

want the member from Thunder Creek to listen.  And for the 

information of the member for Thunder Creek, the accounting 

rules have not changed in the treatment of the overall debt of 

the province.  There has been absolutely no change in the 

accounting rules as they apply to the treatment of the overall 

debt, so there is no change in the overall debt.  It is the same as 

it would have been under any kind of circumstances. 

 

Now one other thing that the member should know, or some 

first-year accounting student ought to be able to tell him, that 

he talks about somehow equity is not debt.  Well I want to say 

to the House and the member from Thunder Creek, that to 

make an equity investment, you have to have the money.  To 

make an equity investment, you have to have the money to put 

into this equity investment. 

 

Now because the government under the Conservative 

administration blew all their money, to complicate things even 

more they had to borrow the money to make the equity 

investment.  Now, Mr. Chairman, that is a debt.  Because those 

investments are not paying a return, 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

interest on that borrowed money has to be paid.  The taxpayer 

is paying the interest.  Ultimately the money that was borrowed 

has to be repaid when the bonds come due, or refinanced.  That 

is a debt.  But the rules have not changed, as the accounting 

rules have not changed as to how the debt is reported, so 

nothing is changed. 

 

The member uses some comment about being taken to the 

cleaners.  Yes, there was a taking to the cleaners in PCS.  But 

the people of Saskatchewan were taken to the cleaners when 

the PCS was privatized and the former government for straight 

political, ideological reasons sold PCS at a loss of $442 

million.  That has been documented by auditors, that has been 

documented by Gass in his commission report, that has been 

documented by Ernst & Young, and those statements and 

numbers cannot be refuted.  That's when the people of 

Saskatchewan were taken to the cleaners, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I admit that I am not a 

graduate of the school of Administration or Commerce.  But 

there are a few things that are fairly basic in Saskatchewan.  

What the minister is saying is that every farmer in this province 

who ever went out and borrowed money to buy a tractor or a 

piece of land should have done it with cash, and not borrowed 

money.  That that equity investment that I make each and every 

year on my farm doesn't have the potential to return a profit to 

my farming operation down the road. 

 

When the point was made to the minister earlier on in debate 

that a number of the areas in which he has taken a write-down 

have not yet even had the opportunity to produce a product 

means that in the future . . . the same as the farmer buys a piece 

of equipment or a business man invests in a piece of 

infrastructure that returns investment sometimes many fold 

over back into that business at a later day. 

 

The Minister of Finance can't stand here and tell us today in 

this legislature that the former NDP government bought the 

potash mines without any borrowed money.  You wouldn't 

have had unfunded liabilities in the pension plans, in the 

formula plan, if they hadn't been out there borrowing money to 

buy potash mines. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Borrowed from New York. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Borrowed from New York, as my colleague 

says.  But they borrowed the money in the belief that they 

would buy all of these mines, and I submit at an inflated value, 

that that money would go into the hands of various American 

corporations, in fact flee our country.  The only money of that 

borrowed money that was used in Canada was to build a potash 

mine in the province of New Brunswick. 

 

The money was taken . . . It was borrowed in this province, it 

was taken out of this country, and then it was reinvested back 

in the province of New Brunswick to a mine that fully produces 

8 per cent of the world's potash today -- is what that mine in 

New Brunswick does. 

 

And that is built with money paid to that company by the 

province of Saskatchewan -- borrowed money.  So the minister 

doesn't need to lecture this side on the use of 

borrowed money and capital investments. 

 

What this minister is saying is that the capital investments of 

the former government, which he has now written down, 

written off, will never return a dime to the taxpayer of this 

province; that if the shares of Cameco Corporation go to 18 or 

$19 that the Government of Saskatchewan, on its remaining 

shares, will not receive a capital gain.  That's what the minister 

is saying. 

 

I find that very hard to believe.  Because if you've written off 

all the debt, at some point you have a debt-free operation.  The 

same as if somebody were to write off my tractor that I 

borrowed money for.  If I'd borrowed money from a finance 

agency or the equipment company to buy that tractor and then 

somebody writes it off, that that tractor won't produce profits 

for me down the road.  Because that's why every farmer goes 

out and uses borrowed money -- to buy capital assets that he in 

turn depreciates over time; and while he's depreciating that 

asset, makes money on his farm or hopes to make money on his 

farm. 

 

And the minister is saying the government doesn't work like 

that at all.  The government should never do that.  when in fact 

their own past history is that they have done that.  They've gone 

out and borrowed money to buy capital assets in the belief that 

they would make a profit in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me try to help 

the House in coming to grips with this strange line of logic and 

this strange line of question.  I want to ask the member 

opposite, since he wants to talk about his debt and his 

government's debt, how does he think that $3.5 million that 

was invested in GigaText is going to get a return to the 

Saskatchewan public?  The member may want to comment on 

that. 

 

I want to ask the member from Thunder Creek how the $8 

million which he lost and his government lost in Supercart 

International because of nice cushy little political 

manoeuvrings is going to bring a return on the investment?  I 

want to ask the member opposite if he doesn't mind 

commenting on Joytec, the failure which cost the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers $5.2 million.  What of return can we, 

the taxpayers, expect on this marvellous investment by the 

former PC government?  Or High R Doors which lost half a 

million dollars?  Or Austrak Machinery Corporation which lost 

$700,000?  Or Pro-Star Mills Limited which lost $490,000?  Or 

Nardei Fabricators Limited which was officially opened six 

days before the provincial election in 1986 and shut down four 

days after the election after the government had pumped in 

$600,000? 

 

These are the kinds of investments, Mr. Chairman, that have 

caused the need to write off some of this huge amount of debt 

which has in no way the capacity to repay the investment. 

 

I refer the House and you, Mr. Chairman, to the Crown 

Investments Corporation annual report, 1991.  Now here's a 

great story of the Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation.  

There was $450,000 into Trinitel International, $250,000 into 

Contact Technologies Inc., 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

$150,000 into Redvers Agriboard Industrial Ltd., and goes on 

and on and on.  Where in heavens name is there going to be a 

return on any of this since all of those outfits have gone broke?  

Marvellous investments that were brought about by the 

members opposite. 

 

And I don't know whether the member for Thunder Creek was 

the minister in charge of SEDCO or not -- something tells me 

that he was for a while.  And he was one of those who'd made a 

decision on some of those investments.  No wonder he's so 

defensive here today, because he knows that when the Crown 

Corporations considers SEDCO, which he was the minister of, 

there will be an amazing story of mismanagement and 

decisions made by he, as the minister, contrary to the advice of 

the management which said, don't lend the money; this is a bad 

deal.  And he and his board said, we're going to give the money 

because these are good guys; they hold Progressive 

Conservative membership cards. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there were other things that can be shown 

in the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan annual 

report.  There was a loss of investment in Cameco, 189 million; 

write-down of investment in Bi-Provincial upgrader, a joint 

venture, 63 million; grant to MLPLP (Meadow Lake Pulp 

Limited Partnership), 50 million; write-down to debenture from 

Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd., $47 million. 

 

Now I want to comment about that one.  We have written off, 

the province has written off, $47 million, $47,316,000, because 

of the privatization deal that the members opposite made where 

Weyerhaeuser on a debenture of $236 million, a debenture at a 

subsidized interest rate of eight and three-quarters per cent, not 

one single penny of that investment has yet been repaid -- that 

loan -- not one single penny.  And because of the deal that they 

wrote into that contract, the company does not even have to 

pay the interest charges unless it makes a fairly significant 

profit, which has cost the province on top of all that a write-off 

of $47 million.  And the list goes on and on. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if you look at the budget speech document 

again, you will see all of the write-offs that have had to be 

provided.  Let me say this about those write-offs.  They are 

write-offs because each and every one of them has no asset.  

Each of those write-offs has no asset which has the earning 

capacity to repay the debt; can't pay the interest, can't pay the 

debt because there is no asset to do it with. 

 

So what is supposed to be done?  Are we supposed to in this 

legislature pretend that it doesn't exist?  Well we can't do that 

because the former Conservative government went out and 

borrowed the money.  We have this debt that they borrowed the 

money for, but we have absolutely no assets with any capacity 

to earn any income, not so much to pay the capital, but not 

even the capacity to pay the interest on the capital that was 

borrowed.  So there are no assets to support any of this and 

that's why, as you would do in any business enterprise, you 

have to write it off.  It then becomes a liability of the 

Consolidated Fund and it becomes part of the accumulated 

debt, which the taxpayer has to pay. 

And it was caused by the members opposite.  They made these 

decisions.  They squandered the taxpayers' money.  They made 

deals with all kinds of special-interest groups closely connected 

to the premier and to the member from Thunder Creek and to 

the member from Rosthern.  People who were friends of theirs 

were given tens and hundreds of millions of dollars which they 

knew would not return anything to the Saskatchewan people, 

but it was a way of rewarding their friends.  And because of 

that, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan taxpayer today has to 

pay a price.  And the price is a debt of $15 billion.  The price is 

interest on the debt this year of $760 million. 

 

So just think, Mr. Chairman, think what we could do with $760 

million if we didn't have to pay it on interest on the debt -- 

$760 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Buy some more potash mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member from Kindersley says 

buy some more potash mines.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, 

we'd be far better off with a potash corporation that's paying 

dividends to the province of Saskatchewan than we are with a 

potash corporation which was sold and has left a debt, with no 

assets for the taxpayer, of $442 million, which is your decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, absolutely we'd be better off 

than we are today.  There is no denying that.  But I say to the 

member from Kindersley to contemplate for a while, 

contemplate for a while, contemplate what we could do with 

$760 million which we now have to pay as interest on the 

public debt.  For one thing we wouldn't have had a $516 

million deficit; we would have had a $242 million surplus.  

That's one thing. 

 

It's right here for the member to read.  And if he has trouble 

with that, he can find any of his colleagues to help him out.  

With $760 million which we paid in interest on the public debt, 

Mr. Chairman, we could have provided more money to our 

education system.  We could have provided more money to our 

health care system.  The government could have provided more 

money in revenue sharing to municipalities.  Why is it not 

possible to provide additional money beyond what's here? 

 

Because this province is almost broke.  Why is it broke?  

Because we have to pay an interest this year of $760 million, 

almost every cent of it created by the Tory government in 10 

years when they wasted their way away on this side of the 

House, on the treasury benches in keeping with the former 

premier, the member from Estevan's philosophy when he said 

in New York:  this province has so much going for it we can 

afford to mismanage it and still break even. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, I will never forget those 

words, and I will repeat them for many, many days and years 

because the people of Saskatchewan know it was that kind of 

mismanagement, that kind of irresponsible attitude, that 

brought us to where we are today.  And those members, the 10 

of them that are there temporarily, better remember that 

because three or four years from now 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

when the next provincial election is on, the people of 

Saskatchewan will still be talking about it, and they will 

remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well it's 

interesting to receive a lecture from the former minister of 

Finance prior to 1982.  And the minister's right.  I was the 

minister of SEDCO.  Unfortunately I did have about $58 

million on my books of bad debt from the previous 

administration that I couldn't do much about, but I didn't write 

it all off in one particular year. 

 

Many of the things that SEDCO was involved with, many of 

the things that SEDCO is involved with, are trying to create 

jobs, particularly in rural Saskatchewan.  And I do know quite 

a bit about some of the projects that he talks about.  I do know 

about the attempts to start a business in Redvers that would 

take straw and make particle board that could be used in the 

home industry.  Whether it works or whether it doesn't, Mr. 

Chairman, is no different than the long list that I have before 

me from the previous government. 

 

You know I can go through areas where the former government 

also wasted the taxpayers' money.  And some of them were 

written off because there was nothing else you could do with it.  

You had SGI's reinsurance debacle.  And I will put my 

numbers in '92 dollars, Mr. Minister, even though you won't.  

And these you can check.  I'm sure your officials can take and 

do a little multiplication.  Forty-seven point six million dollars 

on that little ditty. 

 

Rogers Lumber, $4.2 million in '91 dollars; Fibre Form, $2.1 

million.  Do you remember some of these, Mr. Minister?  

Shane Industries, 245,000; Pro Star Mills, 5.6 million; Prairie 

Malt, 39 million; Snoasis, 840,000; Golden Acres Motel, 

305,000. 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, I can go through the same type of 

lists.  We ended up having to write down some of these 

because they simply, as you say, weren't going to work.  And I 

suspect that there will be some . . . there will be some come 

along, some that will come along between 1982 and 1992 that 

you're still going to have to write off because something will 

change out there and those particular companies and industries 

. . . the dreams many times of Saskatchewan people, will not 

work.  And they won't work for a number of reasons.  But they 

aren't all tied to how well government necessarily manages. 

 

You know it's interesting, Mr. Minister, you make comments 

about the Potash Corporation, how wonderful it was.  The 

international accounting firm of Arthur Anderson examined the 

performance of this company from 1975 to 1987.  Arthur 

Anderson's report showed that by paying too much for the 

mines and through poor management the potash adventure had 

cost Saskatchewan people over $1.13 billion in '91 dollars. 

 

So there's no question, Mr. Minister -- no question, Mr. 

Minister -- that when you finally do put something on the 

market that you should have never owned in the first place, and 

you allow the market to put a true evaluation on what the asset 

is worth, then you might come up with a  

divergent figure. 

 

But I'll say to you, Mr. Minister, if there's a paper write-down 

associated with what you're doing, your government bears full 

responsibility for it because you padded the numbers in the first 

place.  Arthur Anderson's accounting firm isn't here in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That was an independent analysis. 

 

And you can talk about PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) 

all you want, but PAPCO was losing $91,000 a day.  You want 

to put that in '91 dollars.  Between 1985, that totalled $204 

million down the tube.  And you know what?  There's another 

thousand people working there. 

 

Now I don't know what the average wage is up there these 

days, Mr. Minister, but I suspect after the last budget you're 

probably picking their pockets for around 10 to $15,000 apiece.  

Every one of those thousand good, unionized jobs are probably 

up there in that 18 to $20 an hour range -- be lots of them.  And 

I suspect you're picking their pocket plenty after the last 

budget.  And all that money's going into the Saskatchewan 

economy, every last job in that paper mill. 

 

And before that it was simply going down a drain.  It was gone, 

because your investment there between '81 and '85 had already 

cost Saskatchewan taxpayers $204 million. 

 

Now I'm saying you went out and you bought shares in Agra 

Industries in the '70s, and by the time it was all said and done 

you had lost a million six on Agra Industries.  And you went 

out and you bought shares in Intercon, and by all the time said 

and done we're down $7.2 million.  I mean you went out and 

you bought into a whole bunch of things that you shouldn't 

have been in.  You overvalued the shares as always.  And all of 

a sudden there's a big loss. 

 

I have no doubt in my mind, Mr. Minister, that there was a loss, 

a paper loss, associated with potash. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A paper loss? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A paper loss because according to Arthur 

Anderson you had a billion point one three messed up in there, 

and there's a big difference between what you're writing off, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

So I can go on and on and on about the follies of the NDP 

administration of the '70s.  And I suspect there's probably, I 

don't know, 150 million $200 million that was lost on various 

projects.  You've said that we lost some money, and I admit we 

did.  I admit we did, Mr. Minister.  No question about it.  No 

question about it.  We did.  But I suppose you can take the 

Nabus and you take the GigaTexts and you stack them up one 

by each, and all you can do is try not to make the same mistake 

twice on stuff like that.  And I hope you take that attitude, that 

you don't make the same mistake twice. 

 

But I'm saying, Mr. Minister, there was a ton of debt out there; 

a ton of debt that could be attributed to the former government.  

And this committee needs you to take those numbers and put 

them in '92 numbers so that we get a true perspective on it, 

because that's the only way we're 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

going to be able to go through these interim supply Bills.  And 

my guess is there's going to be another one before all is said 

and done.  And you will have spent over a third of the budget 

for this year before there's a budget passed in this House. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, by taking all of these write-downs, by 

piling all that debt up in one particular year for your political 

ends, we aren't going to know exactly where this province's 

finances are until you come clean with those numbers.  And I 

think you're going to have to do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to hear a 

response from the minister about the observations that were 

made from the member from Thunder Creek.  I want, first of 

all, for him to acknowledge that there were those kinds of 

things that he did as the minister of Finance in the '70s. 

 

I believe that that's what we have to establish.  He wants to 

assume that all of the debt that was ever accumulated was 

accumulated in the last 10 years.  We have Public Accounts 

records that indicate . . . And these are people who worked in 

the Public Service Commission superannuation.  We have 

documents here.  We'll provide that to you.  You'll know where 

they are.  But they will show that there was $5 billion worth of 

debt in the unfunded liabilities. 

 

And you said that that really has no meaning for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan -- that doesn't expand itself.  I'd 

like to hear your response to what you think about your 

teachers' superannuation fund that you are a part of and that is 

unfunded by you. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well my response is this, Mr. 

Chairman -- that in 1976 or 1978, 1976, the former 

government, not the former PC government but the New 

Democratic Party government, took steps to address the 

pension situation in Saskatchewan and introduced both for 

teachers and in the public sector, the public service, a fully 

funded, money purchased plan so that what's left are people 

who are long-standing employees.  And the numbers there are 

reducing there every year as they superannuate.  Steps were 

taken in 1978, I believe it was, to address that situation.  It was 

taken by an NDP government, and that's why we are far better 

off than we would have been had we not taken those steps. 

 

Now the unfortunate thing that happened, that until 1987 there 

was an accumulation of surpluses in that pension plan.  One of 

the members opposite there mentioned that, and that was okay.  

What wasn't okay, that the member from Morse and his 

colleagues in 1987 and each year after began to plunder those 

accumulated surpluses and use that money for the purposes of 

the Consolidated Fund expenditures and made the situation 

even worse. 

 

Now I didn't respond to the member from Thunder Creek 

because I didn't think he said anything particularly important.  

And he certainly didn't have a question.  And I'm here to ask 

questions . . . to answer questions.  But since the member from 

Morse raised the issue, I will 

respond. 

 

I want to say this, and I want to refer back to page 81 of the 

Gass Commission report, the Saskatchewan Financial 

Management Review Commission.  And here is what Mr. Gass 

and his commission said about the squandering of $442 million 

in the privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

said the following. This is part of good business and good 

management is timing.  You do things because it's of greatest 

benefit rather than doing things because it's politically 

appropriate. 

 

And what the commission said was that: 

 

 The timing of the sale of the Province's shares in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was contrary to the advice 

provided by the Crown Management Board's external 

advisors . . . we have concluded that the timing of the issue 

resulted in a loss to the Province.  We were unable to find 

any documentation to support the Government's reasons for 

overriding the recommendations of its advisors. 

 

That kind of political decision making, contrary to economic 

and financial advice, caused the loss of $442 million which is 

now part of the public debt. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the government opposite sold PCS shares at 

$18.  Today they're valued at $25.  Their timing was dead 

wrong.  And they did it not because it was good for 

Saskatchewan.  It hasn't increased potash production.  It has 

actually reduced the PCS's potash production so that potash 

mines in PCS are operating at 50 per cent of capacity.  But we 

have the $442 million debt, and we don't have the asset.  The 

asset is owned by others rather than the people of 

Saskatchewan.  The board of directors in PCS is almost 

exclusively, not totally, but almost exclusive American 

citizens.  And what have we got to show for it?  We have got to 

show for it a debt of $442 million. 

 

The same kind of decision was made on Cameco.  The Cameco 

warrants which sold at $14.75, today they're at $16.  Timing.  

The timing was politics, not good economics and not good 

finances.  And if anybody wants to know on the other side of 

the House why we are where we are today is because that 

former Conservative government day in and day out was never 

motivated by the good interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They were motivated by greed.  They were 

motivated by partisan politics.  They were motivated by 

rewarding close partisan friends. 

 

I can read the lists if the member wants me to.  There's a long 

list.  And it goes from Larry Birkbeck to Eric Berntson, right 

down the line. This senator who, after he was a senator, was 

paid $19,000 by the PC government for doing some work for 

them.  They were at the public trough, Mr. Chairman, like 

never in the history of Saskatchewan has anybody been at the 

public trough. 

 

And I say, Mr. Chairman, if the members opposite want to 

contribute anything to this debate, they should each and every 

one, at least those who were -- not the new ones, they're 

innocent here and that's why they're quiet here -- 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

but every one of them should stand up in the House and 

apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for taking this 

province from a total debt situation of $3.5 billion and bringing 

us to a debt situation in 10 years of 10 billion . . . $15 billion.  

They should stand up and apologize and at least show some 

humility, rather than trying to confuse and mislead even when 

they are in opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could argue and give you all of the arguments 

that I could give.  My colleagues could do the same.  But we 

don't have to do that because others have done it for us.  Others 

have done it for us.  The Gass Commission has done it for us.  I 

just gave you a quote of the kind of decision-making process 

that was used in squandering $442 million in PCS.  The Ernst 

& Young report, I have it right here.  The Ernst & Young 

report -- independent audit by a credible international firm -- 

which showed what happened to the Crown Management 

Board, the Crown Investments Corporation, and how money 

was squandered and wasted and politically decided upon while 

the member from Morse was in the cabinet, sitting in cabinet.  

And I don't know whether the member from Morse was a 

member of the Crown Management Board in 1990 and 1991. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He never ever was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it's a good thing he wasn't.  

But the member from Thunder Creek was.  The member from 

Thunder Creek was.  In fact the member from Thunder Creek 

was the minister of SEDCO. 

 

And I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that it was while the 

member from Thunder Creek was a member of the Crown 

Management Board, that the Crown Management Board 

decided in 1992 to say that . . . or 1990, that the Crown 

Management Board was supposed to pay a dividend to the 

Saskatchewan Consolidated Fund; money which they didn't 

have. 

 

And the Crown Management Board management -- the minutes 

are there to be seen -- recommended that they should not take a 

dividend because it would mean taking all of the retained 

earnings out of the Crown corporations.  And not only that, 

because the Crown corporations would not even have sufficient 

money in that to pay the dividend, they would have to borrow 

money to pay a dividend to the treasury, creating a greater debt 

over there. 

 

All of that is exposed in Ernst & Young.  All of that is exposed 

by Deloitte & Touche and the study that they did in December.  

And now, Mr. Chairman, it is all confirmed, it is all confirmed.  

Not by Saskatchewan agencies but by Standard and Poor's in 

New York. 

 

Standard and Poor's did something that none of us would have 

hoped ever happen to the province of Saskatchewan.  Standard 

and Poor's looked at the legacy that the former government left 

behind and said, the debt of the province of Saskatchewan is 

just too high.  And they said that they're going to lower our 

credit rating to a BBB plus.  Well what does that mean? 

 

Mr. Chairman, that means that today when the province of 

Saskatchewan goes to borrow money it's going to have 

to pay a premium.  We're going to have to pay up to a quarter 

of a per cent more in interest charges because of the downgrade 

of our credit rating caused by the members opposite when they 

were in the government. 

 

So if the province of Saskatchewan goes out and borrows a 

billion dollars, it's going to cost an additional two and a half 

million dollars in interest charges. 

 

That's not the worst of the problem, Mr. Chairman.  The worst 

of the problem is that the Saskatchewan government has to 

borrow huge amounts of money.  Why do we have to borrow 

huge amounts of money?  We borrow huge amounts of money 

because of the debt that the members opposite created, and it 

has to be serviced. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, what that means, that with a BBB rating, 

many of the investors who used to invest in Saskatchewan will 

now not invest in Saskatchewan.  It is going to be more 

difficult to borrow the money.  It is going to be more . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You'd better believe it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And the member from Morse says, 

you'd better believe it.  All I can say to the member from 

Morse, I wish he had believed that between 1982 and 1992 

when he was on the government side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- He may believe it now.  I say to 

him, where was his integrity back in the 1980s when he should 

have believed it and he should have said to his premier, the 

member from Estevan, this is wrong.  Where were you, 

member from Morse? 

 

It's funny and it's so interesting how somehow you have this 

new-found integrity today when you're on that side of the 

House, after you have created this crisis in Saskatchewan, but 

you couldn't find it when you were in the treasury benches and 

in a position to make a difference. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't have to give the arguments.  The 

arguments are made.  The arguments are made by Standard and 

Poor's.  And I am going to read the statement of Standard and 

Poor's for the record of this House and for the viewers who are 

watching on television so that they can tell their friends and 

their neighbours and so that they can talk about this for many 

generations to come and then we won't have another PC 

government in this Saskatchewan for another 30 or 40 years or 

60 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because the good people of this 

province deserve better.  And they're going to get better under 

this administration. 

 

What did Standard and Poor's say?  Well here's what Standard 

and Poor's said, "Saskatchewan Long-Term Debt Lowered to 

BBB+." 

 

And then they went on to say, and I quote: 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

 About $2.3 billion of rated debt is affected. 

 

 The adjustment reflects the province's high debt burden, 

budgetary pressures stemming in part from past unsuccessful 

off-budget investment projects, and the difficulties inherent 

in adhering to a deficit reduction plan in a 

resource-dependent economy. 

 

And then it recognized what this government was doing, and it 

went on to say: 

 

 While the New Democratic Party government is strongly 

committed to deficit reduction, as evidenced by the measures 

taken in the current budget year, increasingly difficult 

choices may have to be made to sustain this effort. 

 

And I can tell you for the record, Mr. Chairman, that this 

government will show the leadership and make the choices that 

are necessary as we have showed the leadership already to 

guarantee a future for this province and guarantee a future for 

our children and our grandchildren.  That's what we're elected 

for, and that's what we're going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now some of the more devastating 

numbers that the Progressive Conservative government created 

-- that the member from Rosthern and the member from Morse 

and the member from Thunder Creek and the member from 

Estevan and the member from Souris-Cannington -- some of 

the things that they created are further stated in the S&P report 

when they say that: 

 

 Saskatchewan's tax-supported debt rose to 55% of provincial 

gross domestic product (GDP) on March 31, 1992, from 50% 

at a year earlier, and is expected to reach 57% in 1993.  

Moreover, debt that must be serviced by the province now 

totals almost 180% of annual budget revenues.  This burden 

is substantially higher than for other Canadian provinces and 

is a function of large budgetary deficits in recent years as 

well as sizeable provincial investments in several projects 

intended to diversify the economy. 

 

Which Standard and Poor says were questionable and they 

believed never could be supported.  Mr. Chairman, the 

members opposite, when we return at 7, should stand each and 

every one and apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for 

bringing this about, into this province, and causing the crisis 

which we face today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock this committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 




