


















































Hansard: June 08, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 941 

 June 8, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 

the Assembly some students from Swift Current, from Irwin 

School.  There are 110 students here today.  They're all in 

grade 6 and they've filled your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

they've filled half the west gallery.  And I'm sure that with all 

that many Swift Current people in the crowd, the decorum of 

the House will be much better than it normally is. 

 

I would also like to introduce their teachers, Ms. Donna 

Stinson, Bert Gould, Norm Buchanan and Dave Niessen, and 

two chaperons, Dawn Leshures and Colleen Wallace. 

 

I plan to meet with these students after question period and 

we'll share some refreshments together, and I hope that they 

have a good day in Regina.  Please welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, for the hon. member from Regina Dewdney who is 

not able to be here today -- is out of Regina -- 22 grade 4 

students from Henry Braun School in Regina.  They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Dorgan, and by chaperon, 

Mrs. Gullickson. 

 

They've had a tour and are now going to be present for question 

period, and I'll meet with them at 2:15 for pictures and 

questions.  I'm sure they'll have a number of them from their 

tour and from the proceedings today.  And we'll also meet with 

them for refreshments in room 111.  So I'd ask members to join 

with me and welcome the members from Henry Braun School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Legislative 

Assembly, 8 students from Nepean, Ontario.  They're part of 

the Canada 125 Exchange -- I hope I got the name of the town 

right -- part of the Canada 125 Exchange group. 

 

They're accompanied by Kathy Munroe, Gloria Cameron, John 

and Cindi Vanderzwan, Lynn Bakken, and their bus driver, 

Gary Erhart.  They're in Regina this morning at the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) museum and I believe 

they're going to the IMAX theatre tonight, or over to the centre 

anyway. 

 

We're delighted that they would take time out and visit our 

lovely Assembly and our building and so forth.  And I ask the 

members to join with me in welcoming them. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

you and through you to members of the legislature, a group of 

students from Peterborough, Ontario.  They're with Voyageur 

Canada '92. 

 

And they're seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they 

include people like Jennifer Faulkner, Lindsay Scott, David 

Gilbert, Derek Smith, Michael Burchell, and Shannon Heins.  

And with them as well are people like Jason Rogers from 

Estevan, Nadine Victor and George Marcotte of Estevan.  And 

the contact person for Voyageur Canada '92 is George 

Marcotte. 

 

So I would ask all members of the Saskatchewan legislature to 

welcome these people into the province of Saskatchewan, 

particularly given our 125th anniversary coming up.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 

the Assembly here today, 13 grade 7 and 8 students from the 

fine, fine community of Makwa, Saskatchewan.  They drove all 

the way down.  I'm not sure whether they came down last night 

or drove down early this morning . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Last night?  Good. 

 

With them is their teacher, Charles Stein, chaperon, Eleanor 

Stein, and also the bus driver, Charles Stein as well.  If the rest 

of the Assembly would join me in welcoming them, I'll be 

meeting them shortly after for drinks. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly here today the new federal candidate for the New 

Democrats of the constituency of Regina Wascana, Donna 

Shire, who is sitting in the west gallery, and I ask all members 

to congratulate her and to wish her a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it appears as though there's a 

former member of the House who has attempted to sneak into 

the building unobtrusively but not been able to do so, and I 

would ask all members to extend a warm welcome to the 

executive director of the Canadian Wildlife Federation -- who 

is seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker -- Colin Maxwell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like the 

members of this Assembly to join me today in congratulating 

the people of Prince Albert who have taken a bold step forward 

into the future of health care in 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

our province.  Five health care organizations, Mont St. Joseph 

Home, Pineland district home care, Northern Housing 

Development, Victoria Union Hospital, and the Holy Family 

Hospital have joined together to operate under the mandate of 

the newly established Prince Albert Health Board. 

 

This grass-roots accomplishment was initiated by the 

community itself and reflects a community's commitment to an 

improved health care system.  The new board reflects the 

interests and make-up of the community.  It is made up of 

aboriginal, urban, and rural representatives with Jan Kernaghan 

assuming responsibility as chairperson. 

 

I asked the members present here today to join me in 

congratulating the community of Prince Albert for their vision 

and their initiative, and wishing the new Prince Albert Health 

Board members good fortune as they provide leadership 

towards a more effective continuum of health care based on 

wellness into the future. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a word that was 

in one of the energy magazines that I'm sure people here in 

Saskatchewan and across Canada will find of interest: 

 

 Federal Energy Minister Jake Epp and Russian Atomic 

Energy Minister Vicktor Mikhailov have signed a 

memorandum of understanding to expand and strengthen 

co-operation for the peaceful use of atomic energy.  The 

memorandum was signed during Epp's visit to Russia and the 

Ukraine.  Parties agreed on areas of co-operation including 

safety of channel reactors; development of district heating 

reactors; nuclear waste storage technologies; development of 

nuclear fuel cycles; plant decommissioning; nuclear 

applications in medicine and agriculture; and exchange of 

information on questions of medical radiology. 

 

We wish to congratulate the Federal Minister of Agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and particularly Moose 

Jaw are proud of the long association with the Canadian Forces 

base in Moose Jaw in excess of two generations.  The Canadian 

Forces Moose Jaw, of course, is the home of the world-famous 

Snowbirds, one of the finest aeronautic performance units in 

the entire world. 

 

On Saturday, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of presenting the 

Government of Saskatchewan trophy for highest overall 

graduation performance to flight trainees as they earned their 

wings at Canada's pilot training school in Moose Jaw.  It was 

the highest number of grads ever from one class -- 18 -- from 

six different provinces, and three of the grads were from our 

own home province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the cream of the crop, and I would ask 

all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) to join in 

wishing congratulations to the potential Snowbirds of 

the future, and to wish them a distinguished career in service of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, today I would like to highlight 

an important program that was announced by our government 

just in the last week and that's the Saskatchewan bond program.  

I'm particularly proud of this program, Mr. Speaker, because 

it's a show-case in the positive kind of initiatives that are 

created when a government and the people are working 

together. 

 

Many people approached us with the idea of some kind of a 

government saving bond, a saving bond that would not only 

benefit the people investing, but would also be of assistance to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  We took that advice to heart, 

Mr. Speaker, and after extensive planning and consultation 

have created a program that can only be described as a win-win 

situation. 

 

Saskatchewan savings bonds will be an excellent guaranteed 

investment for Saskatchewan people with a competitive rate of 

interest that will be announced later this week. 

 

Just as importantly, every dollar invested in Saskatchewan 

savings bonds will decrease our dependency on the whims of 

financial institutions in New York and Zürich.  At the same 

time, millions of dollars of interest charges will be going back 

to the pockets of people resident in the province. 

 

Saskatchewan savings bonds will allow our people to invest in 

their future, and I encourage all Saskatchewan citizens to take 

advantage of this program when the bonds go on sale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Arm River 

constituency was well represented in the protest in front of the 

Legislative Building last Friday pertaining to the government 

not listening to the people expressing themselves in last fall's 

vote at election time as to the funding of abortion on demand. 

 

I wish to thank the Arm River constituents as well as all people 

who attended.  It was not that nice a day out.  And I had seven 

towns from Arm River represented.  I also had another 12 

towns represented in phone calls over the weekend, older 

people and what not, who didn't come out in part of the 

weather, expressing themselves that they would like to see the 

government revert their views on paying for abortions on 

demand.  And I'm hoping that they do. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the constituents of 

Arm River for being so well represented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to announce that today the town of Leroy are holding 

the official opening of their newly established museum.  And I 

wish to extend congratulations to the 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

organizing committee, chaired by Laura Miller, and supported 

by a cast of community-minded people. 

 

The museum will add yet another attraction to the community 

of Leroy.  But even more important, the people of Leroy are 

demonstrating what can be achieved by people working 

together in a co-operative manner.  They set an example for 

other communities. 

 

Leroy has had many recent successes -- a new co-op store, a 

new credit union, a beautiful new town administration office, 

and indeed major upgrades to their arena.  And recently the old 

chiefs, former senior hockey players, embarked on yet another 

imaginative program which entails leasing land which they 

farm -- all inputs, all machinery, and all costs are donated to 

this project by the surrounding business community.  All 

proceeds go to support minor hockey in Leroy.  And the second 

project that they're embarking on is the installation of artificial 

ice. 

 

My congratulations to the people of Leroy and surrounding 

area on yet another success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

inform the Assembly of an important seniors' housing initiative 

that was announced today by our Community Services 

minister.  The healthy housing program is designed to promote 

independent living programs and services for low income 

seniors and families that live in subsidized housing units. 

 

Following on the heels of pilot projects in the Melfort, 

Melville, North Battleford and Weyburn areas, tenant services 

consultants will be introduced to six new areas of the province.  

These consultants have also had their mandates expanded to 

help deliver better programs for seniors, families, and disabled 

persons living in subsidized housing.  Some of these enriched 

programs include wellness clinics, fitness activities, and the 

integration of health care services with those operated by local 

home care boards. 

 

The second part of the program will see the redevelopment of 

areas in existing units, which will provide more space for the 

delivery of these programs.  Studies have proven that seniors 

live more independent lives for longer periods of time when 

they have access to community-based programs.  I would just 

like to congratulate the minister for recognizing that fact and 

for taking action that will benefit a group of people who spent 

much of their lives building a province for the rest of us to 

enjoy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Fiscal Policy 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in the 

absence of the Premier and the Finance minister, I'll 

place my question to the Associate Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Minister -- and I would say that a simple yes or no would 

be sufficient on this question -- Mr. Minister, is it not true that 

the decision to harmonize or not was discussed during your 

budget consultations during your cabinet round on the budget.  

Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member opposite, the discussions which take place among 

members of Executive Council during budget finalization have 

always been treated as confidential. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

obviously a question that might or might not raise 180 to $190 

million for the Government of Saskatchewan would be one I 

would think you would want to talk about. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it also not true that during that discussion, the 

decision whether to raise money through an equity share 

offering of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) was a 

choice, a real choice that the Government of Saskatchewan had 

in preparing its budget this spring?  Would you confirm, Mr. 

Minister, whether that was a choice or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, my response would be 

the same.  The discussions which took place among members 

of this government leading up to budget finalization are not the 

subject of public discussion, either by this government or by 

the government of which you were a member.  You would 

have thought that question equally improper when you had 

been sitting on these treasury benches six months ago. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we've had the government say over and over again how 

consultative they were during their budget process, that they 

were open to all sorts of suggestions.  And I'm sure -- as a 

matter of fact I'm positive, Mr. Speaker -- that those types of 

choices were put to the government.  So, Mr. Minister, the 

words yes and no are quite simple to use.  All I'm asking you 

are some very simple answers; you can say yes or no. 

 

Is it not obviously also true, Mr. Minister, you had another 

choice, and that was to issue an equity share offering in 

TransGas, a choice that would have had a very strong bearing 

on the economic outlook of Saskatchewan?  Mr. Minister, was 

that a real choice of your budget considerations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me make the response again to 

the member that those discussions are confidential. However, 

let me comment on the larger issue which you raise.  We have 

tried to avoid doing what got the former government into so 

much difficulty.  What you're suggesting is we sell capital 

assets to pay operating expenses.  That may have been thought 

by members opposite to be a proper way to finance a 

government, but it soon gets you into serious difficulty, as it 

did.  Mr. Member, we do not regard the sale of capital assets as 

a proper way of responding to an operating deficit. 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, your hidebound ideological 

notions are not sufficient to govern a province by.  There are 

always choices to be made when you are going to tax people in 

this province or anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've made lots of choices, obviously.  You've 

cancelled the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

agreement; you didn't harmonize; you didn't offer equity share 

offerings in areas that are quite well accepted everywhere else 

in the world.  And because of those bad choices, your credit 

rating is now in a free fall. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Premier and your Minister of Finance have 

been down East all weekend trying to convince people that 

Saskatchewan is an ideal opportunity to still invest.  Obviously 

the minister must have something positive to say, because I'm 

sure the Premier is saying it to the Americans. And we would 

just like you to tell the Assembly today, sir, given the choices 

that you've made, what those positive things are that your 

Premier is telling the Americans to ask for more money.  What 

is it, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member opposite referred to 

ideological hidebound approaches.  You ought to recognize 

that.  It was your ideological hidebound approach which got 

this province into so much difficulty. 

 

Shortly after being elected in 1982, you abolished a number of 

taxes without reducing expenditures.  Later on you privatized 

profitable corporations, Crown corporations which might have 

contributed to the solution, and you privatized them by selling 

them for less than what they're worth, and you sold them at the 

wrong time. 

 

If this province is suffering from an ideological hidebound 

approach as you say, it was your own, not ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, just about everyone else in the world, 

looking at the press comments over the last few weeks, have 

said that you people are going to have to give up this 

ideological nonsense that you maintain and get on with being 

part of the world. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Premier of Saskatchewan must be telling the 

Americans something if he is hoping to reverse the downgrade 

in our credit rating.  Is he simply saying to the American 

bankers, just give us a year, just give us a year until the voters, 

until the voters get some confidence back in us and then we'll 

harmonize, then we'll give equity offerings; just give us a little 

bit of time until we get the heat off.  Is that what the Premier is 

in New York telling the bankers today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- He is pointing out to people in 

eastern Canada and the eastern United States that this province 

has a lot to offer potential investors:  a relatively low 

unemployment rate; low operating costs; a well-trained, 

productive and energetic work-force. 

 

But I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, the thing that he is emphasizing 

above all else and that is that there is finally in office a 

government which has begun to put the finances of the 

province on a sound footing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, the things that you all listed off 

just now are exactly the way Saskatchewan was all during the 

'80s.  We had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada.  

Inflation was lower here than anywhere else in Canada.  I don't 

think you've changed the educational system in the last seven 

months.  So, Mr. Minister, you can't cover with that kind of 

stuff. 

 

The very fact is, sir, you've broken every promise you've made 

last fall.  Your credit rating is in a free fall and your ideology 

doesn't allow anybody else to come in and invest.  And what 

we would like to know from you, Mr. Minister, is what is the 

Premier and the Minister of Finance telling the people that they 

hope to borrow billions of dollars from that would give them 

optimism to come to this province, Mr. Minister?  Tell the 

Assembly what that is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, he is undoubtedly 

assuring them that the reign of lunacy which extended from 

1982-1991 is over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, by your answers I can only 

conclude that the Premier and the Minister of Finance are 

going to go stand in Times Square and hold hands or something 

like that.  They must have a plan.  They must be willing to tell 

the New York bankers that we aren't hidebound by ideology, 

that we aren't going to tax people into the ground if they come 

to our province.  They must have something that is optimistic 

to tell the folks in New York.  You have a shelf filing there for 

a billion dollars U.S. (United States).  I suspect you're going to 

borrow the money.  What is the plan, Mr. Minister, that is 

going to give people confidence to come and invest their 

money in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well we won't be saying that 

Saskatchewan is so wealthy you can afford to mismanage the 

economy and still come out ahead.  That's one of the messages 

we may not offer them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We won't be assuring them that we're 

going to be running up ever larger deficits and solving it some 

time in the future, as your Finance 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

minister did. 

 

We're going to be saying some plain, common sense things 

about this province, and we are going . . . but most important of 

all, we are going to assure them that the province's finances is 

being put on a sound footing and they can come and do 

business here, knowing that sane, sensible policies exist in 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, question to the same minister.  

Mr. Minister, it's obvious to everyone in this province that you 

had choices.  The official opposition didn't make you cancel the 

energy agreement.  The official opposition didn't make you 

cancel an equity offering in TransGas.  The official opposition 

didn't make you cancel an equity offering in SGI General.  The 

previous administration did not force you to cancel 

harmonization and boost income taxes. 

 

Mr. Minister, the simple fact is you've made choices but you've 

made all the wrong ones.  Now you have to go to New York to 

borrow billions of dollars of money. 

 

My question is: Mr. Minister, what plan are you presenting to 

the people in New York?  Tell us about that plan.  In fact, sir, I 

would like you to table in this Assembly the economic 

blueprint that the Premier and the Minister of Finance have 

taken to New York to give them the confidence to send money 

to this province.  Will you table that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, that's already been 

done.  That was contained in the budget which was delivered in 

this Assembly on May 7. 

 

The Premier and the Minister of Finance have gone to New 

York to say some different things.  They won't be saying, give 

'er snoose, Bruce; they won't be saying, never say whoa in a 

mud hole.  They're going to be saying some more profound 

things than that.  They are going to be saying that this province 

has changed its economic direction and that this province's 

finances will now be on a sound footing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agreement with AECL 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

notice that the NDP (New Democratic Party) Government of 

Ontario is not only falling in the polls very rapidly, but they've 

had a big flip-flop with respect to Sunday shopping.  And I 

notice in one of the papers recently that the Minister of Energy 

for Saskatchewan is now prepared to flip-flop on uranium.  

And he's talking about, well he'll go against party policy. 

 

So my colleague here was beginning to ask the questions to the 

Minister and Associate Minister of Finance whether they're 

prepared to flip-flop in some other things. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Energy.  Given the fact 

that I read for information the fact that the federal Minister of 

Energy has now signed an agreement with the past Soviet 

minister like an AECL agreement that we had with AECL, is 

the minister familiar with that agreement; and if he is, would he 

table what's in that agreement so that he might tell us about his 

potential to consider having the AECL agreement signed here 

in Saskatchewan like it was last fall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting 

that the Leader of the Opposition would raise an agreement 

with the Soviet Union and the Government of Canada in 

regards to the AECL agreement or the AECL MOU 

(memorandum of understanding) that SaskPower signed with 

the AECL, or Mr. Hill . . . not Mr. Hill, but AECL signed with 

SaskPower last fall, a few days before the election, not for any 

purpose of generating revenue for the province of 

Saskatchewan, or electricity, but purely for political reasons. 

 

And the leader knows very well why that agreement was 

signed.  It was purely for political reasons -- for nothing else.  

Because in the larger MOU that was signed only seven days 

prior to the AECL/SaskPower agreement, the former premier 

and his government clearly stated there would be no 

agreements reached between provinces and the Government of 

Canada until there was a steering committee set up which 

would review all these agreements.  That steering committee 

was never set up. 

 

So it was strictly for political reasons.  And this question is also 

strictly for political reasons. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Minister of Energy.  The people of Saskatchewan endorsed an 

agreement between the province of Saskatchewan and AECL.  

You got it from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), chambers of commerce, boards of trade, rural 

and urban; Saskatoon is talking about it all the time.  So you 

must know that there's more than politics involved in having a 

good research agreement. 

 

The agreement that was just signed by the Minister of Energy 

for Canada and the minister in Russia and the Ukraine included 

such things as a memorandum of understanding for nuclear 

energy research, safety, waste management storage, 

decommissioning of plants, nuclear medicine, agriculture, and 

radiology. 

 

Now doesn't the minister agree that sounds somewhat familiar 

when he looks at the potential that we could have here in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Is the minister aware of this 

agreement?  And is he aware of the kind of discussions 

necessary to bring that agreement home to the province of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatoon, and across the 

province, both rural and urban? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think that we 

are fully aware of what the people of Saskatchewan want in 

Saskatchewan. 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

But there are two things that the people of Saskatchewan do not 

want, and one of them is a pre-commitment to a CANDU 

(Canadian deuterium uranium) reactor and no pre-commitment 

to a waste disposal site.  This government and this minister has 

said all along that we are very interested in research facilities if 

we can reach an agreement with AECL for research facilities in 

this province.  But we are not going to pre-commit to a reactor 

or to a waste disposal site, which the former government did 

without due consideration for its effects on the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I would ask the minister if he has read the 

agreement recently and also ask him if he has read or is 

familiar with the agreement between the Soviet Union, the 

former Soviet Union, and the Minister of Energy for Canada.  

Because the facts are, Mr. Minister, and you know it, there's no 

pre-commitment for Saskatchewan to use a reactor, research on 

a reactor, and research on waste as we see with the former 

Soviet Union.  All it is is a research contract, and he knows it. 

 

He's playing politics with the people of Saskatoon and the 

people of Saskatchewan.  If he can show us anywhere in the 

agreements in the Soviet Union or those that have been done 

here, would he table in this legislature that will allow 

Saskatchewan people to know that in fact we have that 

potential for the agreement.  It's tens of thousands of jobs, and 

it's only NDP hard line politics that is keeping the province of 

Saskatchewan having the success we now see in the Soviet 

Union. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It seems to me 

that this is getting to be a little bit like Alice in Wonderland; 

the questions are getting curiouser and curiouser.  And the 

Leader of the Opposition seems to want to link us with deals 

that the Government of Canada makes with the Soviet Union, 

or the former Soviet Union.  And I suppose that the 

Government of Canada can make any kind of deal they want 

with the former Soviet Union. 

 

But I haven't seen the agreement.  I'm not sure that the 

agreement is made public for everybody to see.  And I know 

what was in the agreement between Saskatchewan and the 

AECL, and that agreement clearly indicated, Mr. Speaker, that 

it was a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. No matter 

what the Leader of the Opposition said didn't pre-commit us. 

 

When we talked to the Minister of Energy in Ottawa and we 

said, we don't want to pre-commit to a reactor and we don't 

want to pre-commit to a waste disposal site, his simple reaction 

was, you can't go cherry picking.  It wasn't a single . . . it was a 

single package, and it had nothing to do with separating one 

from the other.  We indicated to him very clearly that we were 

interested in the research aspect of it, but we were not going to 

pre-commit to the other two. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, one of your members, and I can 

only quote, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please let the 

member from Estevan ask his question? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The reason that I'm raising this with the 

Minister of Energy, Mr. Speaker, is that it seems like the NDP 

are beginning to change their tune and their policy on energy 

and several other items.  And I just quote: government said to 

okay more uranium development.  And I read: it's a wonderful 

policy in boom times that is stopping uranium, but frankly we 

weren't counting on such a prolonged recession in 

Saskatchewan, said Trew.  And that's obviously a member of 

the legislature here. 

 

Now if you're about to change your caucus policy on uranium 

development and you're going to announce that policy in the 

next ten days to two weeks, couldn't you not, sir, tell the people 

of Saskatchewan that it would be okay to do research policy 

and have a policy of the NDP that say, we can do research 

nuclear activities as they do in the Ukraine, nuclear activities as 

they do in Russia.  And you could just kind of bring yourself 

into the 21st century, not only on uranium policy, but indeed on 

research and science associated with nuclear energy.  Could 

you answer that please, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan 

certainly don't have the same policies that they have in the 

Soviet Union. 

 

In answer to the member's question, however, whether we are 

interested in research, I've said this right from the very 

beginning that Saskatchewan is interested in the research 

facility, but we are not going to pre-commit to a reactor nor are 

we going to pre-commit to a waste disposal site.  The member 

opposite seems to have difficultly understanding that we have 

some conditions on this.  We don't sign blank cheques for 

federal governments like the previous government did.  That 

day is done. 

 

The other part that I'd just like to remind the member from 

Estevan is that your members have been knocking us and 

telling us about lack of consultation.  I would like to know 

what kind of consultation your government did with the people 

of Saskatchewan about a waste disposal site in northern 

Saskatchewan and the Canadian Shield.  What did you do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, for the record, would the minister 

acknowledge that the memorandum of understanding between 

the province of Saskatchewan and AECL said, after three years 

of research if you don't want to do reactors and you don't want 

to do the kinds of waste management technology, that not only 

you don't have to do it you even get your money back.  Would 

he acknowledge that's in the memorandum of understanding so 

that the public knows that this is research? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not acknowledge 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

that because that is not what it said.  What the Minister of 

Energy, Mines and Resources for the federal government said, 

that you cannot go cherry picking.  You either take the whole 

package, or you get nothing. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I assume that the Leader of the 

Opposition has another question.  He'll get on his feet again, 

and I'll allow him to ask the question.  But in the meantime, let 

the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The federal 

minister said very clearly: no reactor, no research; no waste 

disposal site . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have just asked the Leader of 

the Opposition not to interrupt.  I'll allow him to ask another 

question, but I want the minister to answer his question and 

then the leader . . . Order.  I think it's only fair to let the 

minister answer his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Leader of 

the Opposition doesn't want to hear the answer and I'm sure 

that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The answer to the question is that you 

cannot have the research without the reactor, without the waste 

disposal -- you have to have the whole deal.  And that is right 

from the words of the Minister of Energy, Mines and 

Resources in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, would the minister agree to bring 

that MOU in the House and we'll jointly read it to the public 

and to the Speaker of the legislature so that he can read it in 

front of everybody here, including the media, which says the 

following . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order!  I want to call the 

Government House Leader and the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser to order, please.  I asked the Leader of the Opposition 

to come to order when the minister is answering a question.  

Would you please give the Leader of the Opposition the same 

courtesy. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very 

much.  I just want the public and the media and everybody to 

know, in front of the Minister of Energy, that he's not giving us 

the straight goods on the MOU.  The MOU said there's three 

years of research and if Saskatchewan doesn't want to go any 

farther, they can stop and they even get their money back. 

 

Now that's in the MOU and you know it, and it has nothing to 

do with ministers' statements with respect to cherry picking, 

anything else.  Would you agree to do research? 

 

I'm asking you: if the Ukraine will agree to do research and 

Russia will agree to do research, and it's tens of thousands of 

jobs in a province that has uranium, and you've agreed now to 

change your policy on open economic activity in uranium, can't 

you bring yourself to do the right thing and have research done 

in the province of Saskatchewan and reopen the negotiations on 

AECL in a credible fashion and bring it to the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan 

has indicated right from the very beginning that we would be 

willing to do research and we have told the federal minister of 

that in no uncertain terms.  We have told him . . . The federal 

minister is holding it up.  It's not Saskatchewan that's holding it 

up. 
 

And I would just like to remind the Leader of the Opposition 

that maybe he should have read that agreement before he 

signed it or had his people sign it.  Because it's a simple thing 

for us to bring that agreement here and read it to the people of 

Saskatchewan, but I suggest he should have read it before and 

should have thought about what he was signing before he did 

it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Changes to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

Regulations 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

announce some important changes to The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act regulations.  The deductible on licence plate 

insurance for large class A commercial trucks has been 

increased to $2,500, and the vehicle insurance rate has been 

reduced by 20 per cent. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these changes were made following extensive 

consultation with the trucking industry.  We've been talking to 

the truckers about their concerns, and found that a change in 

the deductible on their licence plate insurance was a top 

priority for them. 
 

The changes affect about 400 owners and more than 2,000 

vehicles.  They give the truck owners more flexibility in 

dealing with their insurance needs.  Mr. Speaker, they can 

choose to go with the higher deductible and retain the 20 per 

cent refund. Or if they require a lower deductible, they can use 

the refund to buy it down to a level they need. 
 

Mr. Speaker, refund cheques are being issued to cover the time 

remaining to the end of the current licence for each truck.  

These cheques will be in the hands of truck owners within the 

next few weeks. 
 

The 20 per cent reduction will be applied for a full year as 

these licences are renewed.  Before these changes were made, 

we had the situation where owners of some fleets were, with a 

good safety claim record, were paying the average rate for 

large class A trucks, and paying for a deductible that was lower 

than they wanted. 
 

Preferred rates and higher deductibles were available to these 

owners if they registered their vehicles outside of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, the system ended up providing an 

incentive for owners of some fleets to move their base 

operation out of the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these changes are an example of our 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

government's commitment to listening and acting in a way that 

benefits all the parties involved.  We have consulted with the 

trucking industry and made changes which give truck owners 

the flexibility they need.  This initiative is part of an approach 

to government that is both responsive and responsible. 

 

These changes to AAIA (Automobile Accident Insurance Act) 

regulations are also a good example of our government's 

approach to economic development.  For Saskatchewan 

economy to do well, small- and medium-sized businesses, like 

the trucking firms we're talking about, have to do well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will rebuild our economy through actions such 

as these, respond to the needs of Saskatchewan businesses 

without investment dollars by the taxpayers.  We are 

continuing our discussion with the trucking industry, and 

announcements of further initiatives to this response to their 

concerns will be coming forward in the next few months. 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the minister 

for his courtesy in passing on the statement over to this side of 

the House.  Just a couple of quick comments. 

 

I have a little bit of difficulty in the minister giving himself a 

bouquet for listening to the transportation industry.  And the 

reason is is that we're looking at very high costs and taxes in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And I believe if you look at 

something like 13 cents a litre, if you're in the trucking 

business, 13 cents a litre is a major form of cost when you're 

transporting goods across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Secondly the trucking industry was part and parcel of the 

whole theme to harmonize the tax system so that in fact all the 

sales tax is rebated to industry.  And this administration, the 

NDP, will not harmonize, so the truckers pay it twice.  They 

pay the tax obviously as a consumer, and then when they run 

around and do their business, they pay it on top of it.  They're 

not unlike the farmers. 

 

So taxes have increased not only in terms of income tax and 

sales tax but gasoline and fuel tax up 13 cents a litre.  And in 

terms of the tax system, they joined with SUMA and SARM 

and chambers of commerce and boards of trades saying 

harmonize. 

 

Let me also make the point that the trucking association has 

been part and parcel of those kinds of people who not only 

want to see changes in terms of insurance rates, but they said if 

we could have an openness in the province of Saskatchewan 

that would allow people to invest . . . and obviously we think 

and believe as they do that share offerings in something like 

SGI CANADA and affiliated insurance companies could in 

fact lower the costs even further. 

 

And finally I'd make the point, Mr. Speaker, that the more that 

we can allow the utilities -- things like insurance companies, 

power utilities and others -- to have more and more equity as 

we see across the country, then in fact 

the rates can even get lower and lower for insurance. 

 

So there's a long ways to go, Mr. Speaker, before the NDP 

administration can give themself a bouquet with respect to the 

transportation industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of The Rural Municipality 

Amendment Act, 1992.  The purpose of these amendments is to 

update the Act so as to reflect the changing needs of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Changes to the interpretation section of the Act will expand the 

voting privileges of business corporations in rural 

municipalities.  Until now . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker.  I believe the 

Member from Regina Downs made some unparliamentary 

remarks earlier, and I think that the member should, through 

his experience, not only understand what those remarks are, but 

that he should apologize to the Assembly for them. 

 

The Speaker: -- I heard those remarks from the member.  I do 

not believe, in the context in which it was said, that it's 

unparliamentary.  But it certainly doesn't help to raise the 

esteem of this legislature, and I ask members to be a little more 

careful in their pronouncements from their seats.  The minister 

may continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

changes to the interpretation section of the Act will expand the 

voting privileges of business corporations in rural 

municipalities. 

 

Until now, the chief executive officers of business corporations 

had a right to vote on bylaw or question, but they could not 

vote for council.  This amendment recognizes this 

government's commitment to supporting and encouraging those 

who have invested in rural areas. 

 

For the first time, legislation will provide a definition for a 

municipal road.  A recent court case challenged the authority of 

municipalities over roads previously considered to be under 

their jurisdiction.  The Act will now clearly place all municipal 

roads under the control and management of the municipality. 

 

Several amendments to election procedures are being made.  

The changes clarify procedures to be followed in rural 

elections.  They provide for fair and efficient operation of 

voting for members of council and on bylaws 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

or questions. 

 

A number of rural municipalities in the province have trailer 

park developments.  These municipalities and a number of 

trailer park operators have requested the right to license trailers 

rather than to assess them.  Municipalities will now have the 

option of licensing trailers or continuing to assess them.  This 

option was provided to urban municipalities a number of years 

ago and has worked effectively. 

 

A safe and consistent supply of potable water is vital to our 

rural areas and small communities.  Rural water pipelines are 

now becoming increasingly common.  This Act provides for 

municipalities to individually or collectively form corporations 

to manage the development of water pipelines.  These 

corporations can be granted authority by the municipality to 

levy a user tax to fund these programs in a manner similar to 

that used to finance the old rural telephone systems. 

 

Some changes have been made to the tax exemption 

provisions.  For example, greenhouses will now be exempt on 

their growing areas.  The tax exemption provided on residents 

will be limited to one residence per person. 

 

Municipalities have asked for amendments to the Act to 

facilitate tax collection.  Municipalities will now be able to 

charge a penalty on tax arrears paid in the month of January.  

Also municipalities will be able to apportion the cost of tax 

enforcement with other taxing authorities. 

 

There are also a number of housekeeping provisions in this 

Bill.  This Bill provides an increased autonomy to our rural 

municipalities and supports this government's commitment to a 

strong and viable local government structure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Rural 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a number of 

questions and concerns with Bill No. 27, the Act to amend The 

Rural Municipality Act.  We would like an opportunity to 

consult with SARM about these changes, to get their approval 

on the changes, if indeed they've been consulted.  In order to 

allow us the opportunity to do that, to consult with SARM, our 

municipal affairs critic would like the opportunity to do that 

and we would ask that the House adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 35, The Milk 

Control Act, 1992 is an Act repealing and replacing The Milk 

Control Act.  The Milk Control Act was created in 1934 -- 58 

years ago -- and it requires revision.  It is out of date. 

 

There are two main reasons for these revisions: first, to clarify 

the authority granted to the Milk Control Board by the Act, and 

secondly to improve the accountability of the 

Milk Control Board to the government of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Rather than simply amend the old Act, we 

chose to completely rewrite it in order to make it easier to 

understand and to interpret. 

 

The Milk Control Act set out the framework under which 

Saskatchewan's dairy industry marketed its milk for the past 58 

years.  During these years the Milk Control Board established 

by the Act has regulated the industry and assured consumers of 

an adequate milk supply. 

 

The Milk Control Act has served the province well.  It served 

in the years when there were many small creameries in our 

towns and villages.  It served through the development about 

20 years ago of our current supply management system, and it 

has served in recent years when we have over 600 modern 

dairy farmers who last year sold a hundred and two and a half 

million dollars worth of milk to two processing companies 

which have only 10 processing plants. 

 

But many things have changed and are changing in the 

industry.  It is time to bring the regulatory framework up to 

date.  The new Milk Control Act, 1992 clarifies the powers and 

duties of the Milk Control Board which of necessity changed 

over time but were not clearly spelled out in the old Act.  These 

include the establishment of quotas, milk price-pooling, the 

collection of levies, and the establishment of funds. 

 

In regard to quota establishment, the new Act clarifies 

authority for establishing production quotas and quota 

transfers.  Quotas control the supply of milk, matching it to the 

needs of the market-place and ensuring that the price covers the 

producer's cost of production.  Milk price-pooling, the new Act 

more clearly provides authority for the procedure whereby 

producers are paid using a blended or pooled price for their 

milk.  Fluid milk, sold fresh for drinking, commands a higher 

price than manufacturing milk used for ice cream, yoghurt, 

butter, or powder.  Each producer is paid proportionately for 

the amount of milk which goes into the two categories rather 

than one farmer being paid for all fluid and another for all 

manufacturing. 

 

The new milk control Act 1992 more clearly provides authority 

for the board to collect levies on behalf of the Canadian Dairy 

Commission.  The Canadian Dairy Commission collects levies 

to cover the cost of disposal of surplus dairy products which 

must be sold at world prices. 

 

The new Act also provides authority for the establishment of 

funds, such as a plant-security fund from which producers 

could be paid in the event of a foreclosure against a plant. 

 

The new Act clarifies the procedures required for hearings and 

investigations and increases penalties for individuals and 

corporations who are in violation of the Act.  Again we can see 

how outdated the former milk control Act had become.  The 

existing penalties for violations of the Act range from 5 to $50 

and from 10 to $100.  These are hardly significant to 

processors the size of those now in the province which control 

all of the milk supply here.  The new Act increases the 

penalties to 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

$5,000 and $10,000. 

 

In the past the Milk Control Board operated independently of 

government: setting regulations, establishing prices, and 

managing the industry.  Members were appointed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, and the board provided an 

annual report to the premier.  The board has run this business in 

this fashion since the early '30s.  It worked well, and the 

industry wanted it that way. 

 

But one of the powers of the board is to establish milk control 

areas in which a processor may be granted exclusive licence to 

distribute fluid milk.  This is done to ensure the viability of a 

local processing plant in the community in which the milk 

control area is established.  If the exclusive distribution rights 

were not there, other processors could compete in that area.  

The local plant would lose market share and become 

uneconomic.  The result might be that the plant would close.  

Local people would lose jobs, and local dairy farmers would 

face higher freight costs to move their milk to a distant 

processing plant and have it hauled back again in litre boxes. 

 

As you can see, the granting of dairy processors' distribution 

licences in milk control areas has significant impact on the 

local and provincial economy.  This is an impact beyond the 

board's intended mandate to regulate the dairy industry and 

assure consumers of an adequate supply of milk.  The new Act 

provides for the Milk Control Board to set milk control areas 

and gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council the power to set 

conditions for milk control areas. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, The Milk Control Act 1992 will be 

appreciated by the industry and the Milk Control Board.  A 

failure to revise the former milk control Act may result in 

challenges to the Act, the regulations, and the Milk Control 

Board's authority to enforce existing orders and regulations.  

These changes address major inadequacies of an outdated Act.  

They allow the community interest to be considered in 

decisions of the Milk Control Board. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to bring forward 

The Milk Control Act, 1992, and I ask all members of this 

House to support it.  Therefore I move that Bill 35, The Milk 

Control Act, 1992 be read a second time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister's 

probably right when he says this Bill needs to be updated.  And 

if he just had have been changing it by a few clauses in it . . . 

but now when the minister says of course this is an entirely 

new Bill, we have to take a good look at it.  I did read through 

the Bill here and there is some parts that maybe have to have 

some good questions asked. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when the minister gave his remarks now on 

second reading, there's things that come out on his remarks that 

I just don't see . . . doesn't seem to jibe with what's in the Bill.  

But perhaps when we get discussing, it will. 

The one thing that kind of bothers me, Mr. Speaker, is it looks 

like this one question in section 5, clause 2, where it's going to 

give more powers to the minister.  And maybe that's all right 

where they want to appoint extra board members; we have to 

understand that.  And this government, Mr. Speaker, hasn't 

been in the habit of going out and talking to the people when 

they do anything, make any changes, to make any moves, or 

anything they've been doing they haven't been consulting with 

people. 

 

So I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, before this Bill . . . that we'll 

be letting this Bill go on this side, that we'll be consulting with 

the milk producers ourself, as we hope that they are.  I haven't 

got too many dairies in my area.  I have a couple of dairies at 

Outlook. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I would like to ask for 

adjournment on Bill 35. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Parks 

Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

The purpose of these amendments is to better protect or 

represent important ecosystems within the province.  The 

amendments will also introduce efficiencies in enforcement, in 

administration, to reflect the changing needs within the 

Saskatchewan parks system. 

 

Candle Lake, Douglas, Good Spirit Lake, Marquis Lake, and 

Meadow Lake provincial parks are being expanded to 

incorporate adjacent lands of high natural significance.  This 

will broaden the provincial park system's representation of the 

province's physical features. 

 

These changes will add a total of 215,267 hectares to the 

provincial parks system.  Residents and visitors alike will 

benefit from the increased recreation potential available in the 

expanded parklands. 

 

Danielson Provincial Park will be reduced by 761 hectares due 

to the removal of land which is not suitable for park purposes.  

The land currently under cultivation will be leased to 

neighbouring farmers. 

 

Several name and designation changes will be made.  The 

name Nipawin Provincial Park is being changed to Narrow 

Hills Provincial Park to highlight the park's most prominent 

physical feature and to reduce the confusion with the town of 

Nipawin.  This name change has been requested by the town of 

Nipawin. 
 

The Athabasca Sand Dunes Parkland Reserve and the Wildcat 

Hill protected areas will be designated as provincial wilderness 

parks.  Public meetings have shown that there is a strong 

support for this recognition of the Athabasca Sand Dunes, a 

nationally significant physical feature.  The provincial 

wilderness park designation will allow controlled recreation 

use of these areas, thus 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

making them more accessible to both Saskatchewan residents 

and visitors. 

 

A protected area will be designated at Brockelbank Hill in 

recognition of its significance as habitat for rare and 

endangered plant species.  The Waskwei River protected area 

will also be expanded.  These two changes will add a further 

2,711 hectares to the province's protected areas. 

 

Several housekeeping provisions are included in this Bill.  A 

section dealing with speed-measuring devices will allow for 

better enforcement of speed limits within provincial parks.  

Minor errors in land description will be corrected. 

 

This Bill provides a better representation of Saskatchewan 

provincial parks, and it supports this government's commitment 

to an enhanced parks system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Parks Amendment 

Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a number of 

questions that we would like to ask the minister about the Bill, 

and we'll be doing that at an appropriate time, particularly with 

respect to the changes in the name of the provincial park at 

Nipawin and also whether the people affected by the Bill were 

consulted on the changes.  I understand the name change of the 

provincial park at Nipawin is going to be changing to the 

Narrow Hills Provincial Park, and we wanted to consult with 

people in the area to find out whether they felt it was an 

appropriate name change. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, we would like to move to adjourn 

debate on the Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 21 -- An Act 

to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, to make certain 

consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from that 

continuance and to validate certain transactions involving 

SaskEnergy Incorporated be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again the 

SaskEnergy Bill No. 21 is a very lengthy Bill with a number of 

things in it that are of concern to the opposition.  We would 

like to have the opportunity again to consult with people within 

the industry.  Because of the length of the Bill, it also requires 

an additional time to look over the provisions within the Bill.  

So at this time I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 21. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 28 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 28 -- An Act 

to amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

are going to let this Bill proceed into committee.  I would like 

to mention a couple of things so that the minister is prepared to 

answer questions at that time.  I find it a little strange in 

reviewing this particular piece of legislation that the Crown's 

liability for over-collections has been limited to four years 

while limiting corporate taxpayer liability to five. 

 

And I would think that in designing a piece of work like this 

that the government would have thought that what's good 

enough for one is good enough for the other and that there 

should be some solid reasoning behind having a difference like 

that.  In reviewing this particular piece of legislation I don't see 

that reasoning at all.  It just seems that one figure's been 

arbitrarily picked for government and one for everyone else, so 

to speak. 

 

The other one, Mr. Speaker, is some designations of . . . they're 

actually just word changes in this particular piece of 

legislation, what a collector is and the way that they have 

changed some of the wording in it.  So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would allow this one to move on to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 29 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

normally the practice of members, when they stand in this 

House, is to say it gives them pleasure to speak on a particular 

topic.  I find no pleasure at all, Mr. Speaker, in talking about 

this particular Bill.  The reason I don't, Mr. Speaker, is because 

this one is the epitome of betrayal of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The former opposition went at some great length, both in this 

Assembly and out, to say to Saskatchewan people: you 

shouldn't be paying any more sales tax.  And one only has to 

remember sitting in this House listening to the tabling of 

petitions day after day after day to have the impression clearly 

imprinted in one's mind that the opposition of the day was 

trying to make a point with Saskatchewan people.  And that 

point was that there should be no increase in sales tax. 

 

They berated the former government for not living up to the 

promise of eliminating sales taxes over a five-year period of 

time and always held that one up as one of the broken election 

promises from 1982. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the very fact was that the sales tax was not 

eliminated in this province over five years.  In fact it increased 

from 5 to 7 per cent.  And it was found by a great number of 

people in this province that that increase in 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

sales tax over a period of time was placing an ever-increasing 

burden, particularly upon our sectors that produce wealth in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  They said, you've got to simply 

find a better way of using sales tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion that better way was found, 

because it allowed the most productive sectors in our society, 

the people in the raw resources industries, the people in 

manufacturing, people in agricultural production, the people 

that add value to most of the products that we either grow, 

mine, or develop in this province . . . they said by using that 

particular method we at least are going to have the opportunity 

to invest in tax credits, to become more viable and more 

competitive in the North American market-place, at the same 

time recognizing that there had to be significant government 

revenue generated from sales tax.  It's been a fact of life in this 

province for a long time.  It was in the 1970s as it was in the 

1980s as it will be in the 1990s. 

 

If you're going to raise that type of revenue you only have 

certain vehicles available to you.  And unfortunately 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have been paying for the wrong 

vehicle, in my opinion, since budget day. 

 

They're not happy about it.  You walk down the streets of my 

home community, take a hike down Moose Jaw on Friday 

afternoon, and it is amazing to hear the comments one year 

later -- one year later when people, when I used to walk down 

that street last year, saying, what are you doing with 

harmonization.  And it was a very difficult thing to explain to 

people about how it helped Saskatchewan remain competitive. 

 

But I'll tell you today, Mr. Speaker, now that they've had a year 

to think about it, they are starting to realize the difference, the 

difference between raising the old E&H (education and health) 

tax from 7 to 8 per cent, plus a whole raft of other taxes -- 

utility hikes, rate increases, personal income taxes, taxes on 

taxes . . . Now they understand the difference. 

 

Even those business people, Mr. Speaker, that were most 

adversely affected by harmonization -- people in the clothing 

stores, the food industry -- all others have had the time to sort 

of take stock, look around, look at their counterparts in other 

places in Canada and realize that a lot of the downturn that they 

experienced in 1991 didn't have anything to do with 

harmonization because it was affecting their counterparts in 

every other province. 

 

And I think since then StatsCanada have delivered the figures 

and they show that Saskatchewan's drop in consumer 

confidence -- in other words the amount of money that 

consumers spend on an annual basis -- in fact was less in 

Saskatchewan than it was Canada wide. 

 

That is why people are angry.  They're going through all of this 

pain because they had the alternative misrepresented to them.  

And they had it misrepresented for only one reason and that 

was politics.  That's why we heard day after day, Mr. Speaker, 

in this Assembly and out in the public the term "enough is 

enough."  And it came from a great variety of people, but it 

certainly came from the mouths of a lot of New Democrats. 

And I think that's why people are so terribly bitter today.  It's 

all over the coffee shops.  It's all people talk about out there.  

Because they've been told for so long, so long, in my home 

town and everywhere else that this new government, if it were 

elected, would be different.  It would live up to its word.  There 

would be no new taxes.  Mr. Speaker, this hasn't been the case 

and we have a terrible sense of betrayal in every community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'm not particularly talking, Mr. Speaker, about things said 

in the heat of debate in this Chamber.  All members of this 

Chamber take certain amounts of political licence when they're 

in here talking.  This forum has always been available to 

members to express themselves more fully.  But I think people 

did take words to heart when they were said outside of this 

legislature, particularly when people went on open line shows, 

when they appeared at various functions, when they met with 

various business groups and really staked, in my view, some 

reputations on the line -- staked out some ground that didn't 

leave a lot of room to move on.  And these are the promises 

about no new taxes, the belief that somehow sales tax was 

going to disappear in this province that have people so angry. 

 

And it's statements such as the member from . . . the Health 

minister.  You know, this: enough is enough was one of here 

favourite lines, and she used it in this Chamber, outside of this 

Chamber; well-quoted in Hansard.  One is June 7, '91.  It went 

on and on from that member. 

 

I'm sure everyone in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, remembers 

the ad recently, the full-page ad in the Leader-Post, and I 

believe it was in the Star-Phoenix, sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers' association.  The Saskatchewan 

taxpayers' association and the things that they said on an 

ongoing basis last year were often referred to as gospel by 

members of the then NDP opposition. 

 

I mean, Kevin Avram couldn't pop on the stage anywhere in 

this province and there wasn't a New Democrat sort of trailing 

along behind, eh.  It was the old dog-and-the-puppy theory, I 

guess.  But anyway, they just trailed along behind Kevin 

Avram.  Well all of sudden that particular association doesn't 

have the same credibility in the minds of NDP members these 

days and they seem to take a great deal of issue now that the 

shoe is on the other foot. 

 

And once again, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that that speaks 

toward the credibility of members doing those things, saying 

those things, and now wondering why the public is so 

extremely angry with them. 

 

(1445) 

 

Our Premier has often been quoted in the past, Mr. Speaker.  

March 24, 1990, Leader-Post:  I say the people of this province 

are fed up with taxes and we're going to change that. 

 

A New Democratic Party government would change that. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

And the minister from Regina Dewdney, the Minister of 

Finance, and I quote, March 25, '91, Hansard:  The problem is 

on the expenditure side.  We have a structural deficit.  

Revenues cannot fix this deficit.  It has to be dealt with at the 

expenditure side in order to get government under control. 

 

And then we have the Minister of Economic Diversification, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister from Regina Elphinstone, a little 

later on in life -- this quote though, Mr. Speaker, June 12, '91.  

We're progressing along here in the whole taxation debate.  

And the minister said: 

 

 We've indicated many, many sources where we would see the 

government saving the kind of money that would make these 

massive tax increases unnecessary . . . (i.e., harmonization.) 

 

We don't need to do that because we're going to save a whole 

lot of money.  And the fact of life is, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

second highest deficit in Saskatchewan's history.  And we've 

had the highest tax grab in Saskatchewan's history.  And that is 

why people are so terribly cynical in Saskatchewan society 

today. 

 

And everyone wanted to get in on the act of course, Mr. 

Speaker, so I'll quote the now Minister of Justice, the member 

from Fairview.  We refer to him fondly in here as the minister 

of patronage. 

 

And I'll quote, and this is from Hansard, April 24, '91: 

 

 The problem isn't government revenues.  I repeat again -- 

government revenues have increased by . . . 70 per cent in the 

last nine years and the government that can't operate within 

those kind of numbers is a government that doesn't deserve to 

be a government . . . 

 

Well there's one thing about the member from Fairview, Mr. 

Speaker, he tends to want to put things on the line.  I mean he 

stood in this legislature and told us there wouldn't be one New 

Democrat back-filled in a government job and we appreciated 

those comments. 

 

And he's also very, very strident on this tax business.  ". . . the 

government that can't operate within those kind of numbers is a 

government that doesn't deserve to be a government . . ."  Now 

that, I think, is fairly succinct and to the point. 

 

And the member from Fairview I'm sure must have difficulty 

some mornings getting up and looking in the mirror and 

coming into caucus.  Because obviously that hasn't been the 

result at all. 

 

Oh and then we have, Mr. Speaker, the Associate Minister of 

Finance, the latest addition to cabinet.  And I presume the 

member that was brought along because the member from 

Regina Dewdney couldn't quite handle the entire portfolio, so 

in the words of the Premier, we now have a toy minister to help 

out. 

 

That member was quoted on May 21, '91 as saying: the NDP 

won't raise any personal taxes for four years.  Now 

once again, Mr. Speaker, we have a member that must have a 

difficult time getting up in the morning and looking in the 

mirror because every time that this government has turned 

around they promise on one hand not to raise any taxes and 

then wham -- straight between the eyes you get it -- the 

taxpayer gets 'er again, another shot to the head. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's what it's all about in this Bill that 

we're debating, is that everything that was ever said, either in or 

out of this Assembly over the last couple of years, they said 

that that simply would not be acceptable to Saskatchewan 

people and that no one should undertake a move like that.  That 

it would predicate anybody doing that as being someone that 

wasn't fit to govern. 

 

Well knowing as we all did, Mr. Speaker . . . And I say we all 

did because most members in this Assembly are fairly well 

educated and I think do take time to read and study things.  The 

very fact that this new government could be in office a matter 

of hours and move with the cancellizing of $180 million worth 

of sales tax, meant that you're going to have to pick it up 

somewhere else. 

 

Even though just about every sector in Saskatchewan that was 

involved in productivity and employing people, the people 

that'll be I suspect the ones that will pull Saskatchewan out of 

its economic doldrums in the future, said that harmonization 

was a reasonable way to progress.  These people simply 

cancelled it within a matter of hours without, I don't believe, 

doing their homework. 

 

And they justified this because the new Minister of Finance 

said his department had prepared studies, studies that would 

show how Saskatchewan's economy would be destroyed with 

harmonization, that the act of harmonizing federal and 

provincial sales taxes would destroy the economy, and that 

thousands of jobs would be lost because you raised hamburgers 

by 7 cents a hamburger. 

 

So we had no problem with cancelling some sales taxes within 

a few hours of assuming office, and we had no problem 

spending taxpayers' money on this study that said how 

damaging it was.  On the other hand, we all wait in anticipation 

for a budget which finally arrives before us in the month of 

May.  And lo and behold, taxpayers in this province are just 

whammied at every opportunity by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The Minister of Finance 

stands in the legislature and absolutely refuses -- refuses, Mr. 

Speaker -- to table any studies done by his department that 

would show the effects of the recent tax increases on 

Saskatchewan's business community, its home owners, on 

taxpayers in general. 

 

So on one hand we can generate a taxpayer-paid study that 

shows how devastating harmonization is in just a matter of 

hours -- I mean it's just happened -- and yet when we stand and 

ask the minister: well what happens to the business sector in 

downtown Moose Jaw when you go from 7 to 8 per cent on 

E&H, when you have 10 per cent surtax on personal income 

tax, when you raise utility rates across the board, gasoline goes 

up, all of the costs of 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

production for that business person; and we say to the Minister 

of Finance, well what do your studies show?  You had one that 

showed how bad harmonization was.  If you've got all these 

new taxes, what do your studies show?  How many jobs are 

going to be lost?  How many people are going to move to 

Alberta?  What's going to be the outflow of population from 

our province?  You must have some idea, because you quickly 

generated it on the other side. 

 

And the minister says, well we don't have any of that stuff.  We 

just had to get on with raising some revenue and everybody 

else is to blame.  You know, the feds have cut back my transfer 

payments and there's too much debt here and you shouldn't 

have sold off some of the companies, and that sort of thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is called sticking your head in the sand.  

Because I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, no doubt in my mind at 

all, having sat in cabinet for a couple of years, that the 

Department of Finance did do some studies.  They did show 

that there would be job loss.  They did show that there would 

be an outflow of migration of Saskatchewan people because of 

these new taxes. 

 

They would show that certain businesses wouldn't look 

favourably upon this province to do business because their 

margins are very thin in some cases, and it wouldn't look like 

Saskatchewan was a good place to do business. 

 

I am sure those studies exist, Mr. Speaker.  And perhaps when 

we get into committee on this Bill, the minister will be 

prepared to bring those studies forward so that we can answer 

the questions, so we can ask the questions, so that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers can get to the bottom of this matter 

and know exactly where they stand with these massive tax 

increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people say this government is wrong with 

what they've done.  They say that, we thought a government 

that prides itself and its family of Crown corporations, wouldn't 

use those corporations to gouge us.  They're saying, we don't 

want our automobile insurance paying for SGI General 

adventures across Canada.  They're saying that, we don't want 

to see our natural gas bill go up every month because the 

Government of Saskatchewan wants to be the owner of the 

pipeline system, different than every other jurisdiction in North 

America. 

 

The people that use the telephone, and particularly the people 

out in rural Saskatchewan who through rationalization of the 

railroads and elevator companies and schools and rural 

hospitals are saying, you shouldn't be putting up our telephone 

rates to fund other areas of government. 

 

And you shouldn't be, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

putting a tax on a tax -- a deficit surtax as the government calls 

it, on my personal income, when you clearly had some choices 

that would have prevented that.  I was quite prepared to pay 7 

cents on a cup of coffee or a hamburger or a magazine, rather 

than have a 10 per cent surtax on my personal income tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's strange that when those choices, those 

very fundamental choices, were being made by this 

government, that they didn't look at some of the studies done 

by the previous administration.  Because it would have shown 

that you had a choice of harmonization or the accumulation of 

a 1 per cent increase in the E&H, an increase in personal 

income tax, an increase in gas tax, an increase in all utilities.  

Because those clearly were outlined.  They were outlined two 

years ago. 

 

Everyone that was in government knew what those choices 

were.  That the fairest way to tax people, the fairest way, is to 

take more tax from those that spend more on consumer goods 

because they obviously have more income to dispose of.  And 

those that have less money will spend less money on consumer 

goods and therefore will not pay as much tax. 

 

And you can do that, Mr. Speaker, because it is entirely 

voluntary -- entirely voluntary.  You spend according to your 

wishes and your wants.  And instead we have the government 

say no, the other way is fair; that will impose certain things on 

you that you don't have any choice about.  It will also go after 

your ability to create wealth in this province. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, it's so regressive.  Every last 

resource industry in this province and minister after minister in 

the government has stood up and said yes, we're a resource 

economy and we depend on trade and we must ship our 

products here and there to survive.  I've heard the Minister of 

Economic Development say it many times. 

 

The reality was, Mr. Speaker, that harmonization gave every 

last one of those resource companies the opportunity to make 

business decisions that would add to the wealth of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Increasing the taxes the way they've been 

done now, the input costs of every one of those through the 

E&H does not do that.  It will not hire one single soul.  It will 

not put another dollar into the treasury of Saskatchewan 

ultimately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can't fool the folks.  Two years the members 

of the New Democratic Party went around this province saying, 

we will not tax in the way that we have done.  And I believe 

before all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, in this debate on 

taxation, before this term of government is up -- over four 

years -- that the people of this province will remember this 

betrayal as they have never remembered tax increases before in 

our history, because they are so wrong-headed, they are so 

wrong-headed, they are choices that were made strictly to try 

and get the NDP out of their political problems and they had 

nothing to do with doing what was right for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.  And any time Saskatchewan voters are faced with 

that type of choice, I believe, Mr. Speaker, they will always 

punish the people that make the political choice rather than the 

rational one. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, we will be allowing the minister to 

come into this Chamber in committee and answering some of 

the questions about his tax increases that everyone out there 

wants to hear -- the studies that we know have been done that 

are going to show the wrong-headedness of this government.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking the minister to come in 

and explain to 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

Saskatchewan people exactly what those numbers are. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

Bill No. 30 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 30 -- An Act 

to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The questions that 

we have on this particular Bill apply to specific areas of our 

economy and we'll be happy to ask the minister those in 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 46 -- An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As with the 

previous Bill, I think the questions that we have can best be 

answered by the minister in committee, because they do get 

down to the specifics of individuals and companies and that's 

the proper place to place those questions. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Weyburn on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- I would request leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- I rise on behalf of the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University who's requested me to 

introduce to the Assembly students from Holy Family School 

in Saskatoon.  There are 19 in number, grades 7 and 8.  And 

accompanying the students are the teachers, Margaret Martin 

and a teacher's assistant, Marc Duret. 

 

And I welcome the students and their teachers to the Assembly, 

and I hope they've had an enjoyable afternoon and I hope they 

continue to enjoy themselves.  I will meet with the students 

after they've had an opportunity to observe the workings of the 

House and have an opportunity to ask me any questions they 

wish.  And I would like the members to welcome the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials first, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my left 

is Arleen Hynd, deputy minister of the Department of 

Education; directly behind me is Fred Renihan, the deputy 

minister . . . assistant deputy minister, pardon me, in 

curriculum and instruction; and to his left is Rita Archer, 

director of finance and operations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's been 

more than six months since the current government took office; 

six months of deceit, betrayal, indecision, and political 

patronage, and misplaced priorities.  This year's budget stands 

out as a pathetic centre-piece of the NDP's dismal first attempt 

at governing.  Each year the budget document sets out clearly 

the priorities of the government.  Let's look at where the 

priorities of this government lie when it comes to education  

Let's start at the top. 

 

Last year in her opening remarks during Committee of Finance 

debate on Education, the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

indicated her approval of the appointment of Eleanor Rourke as 

deputy minister of Education.  The member described the 

appointment as a very positive move on the part of the 

government and praised Ms. Rourke's credentials and 

experience.  Well, Mr. Chairman, the current government 

approved of this appointment so much that it chose to fire Ms. 

Rourke almost immediately upon coming to power.  Why, Mr. 

Chairman?  It certainly was not because of her performance, 

which by all accounts was exceptional.  No, Mr. Chairman, it 

was politics, pure and simple. 

 

Even the most effective and professional of senior officials 

could not escape the blood-bath of politically motivated civil 

service firings undertaken by the NDP once they obtained 

power in October.  Politics; it's one of the three pillars of the 

NDP government.  It goes along with the other two pillars: 

deceit and betrayal. 

 

Mr. Chairman, last year the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

prefaced her remarks by saying that education didn't do too 

well in last year's budget.  Well, Mr. Chairman, judging from 

the carnage wreaked upon the education system in the province 

in this year's budget, the member from Saskatoon Broadway 

should, in all good conscience, be asking the new minister's 

resignation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, education has always been a priority of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  It may come as a bit of a surprise to 

the members opposite, however it is something members on 

this side of the House have always known and acted upon.  It 

was always a major priority of the previous government, as was 

demonstrated by the fact that funding to education increased 

over 70 per cent between 1982 and 1991. 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Yet the NDP continually demanded more money for education 

and promised to provide more if only the people would make 

them the government.  Now those same members have formed 

government, what do we see?  Betrayal and deceit, Mr. 

Chairman.  Not bad -- two of the NDP's three pillars in one fell 

swoop. 

 

What we get is an utter reversal of what the NDP promised 

time and time again, both before and during the last election.  

We get funding decreases in every major area from K to 12, the 

universities, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology), student financing assistance, literary, 

and core curriculum implementation. 

 

Let's talk about priorities.  Last year we provided school 

divisions with a $13 million increase in operating grants.  For 

that we were soundly criticized by the NDP in general and the 

member from Saskatoon Broadway and the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana in particular.  They said it wasn't enough.  

They said they would do better. 

 

Now the NDP is government and what do we get?  Deceit and 

betrayal, Mr. Chairman.  What we get is $7.5 million of cut in 

the operating funds to school divisions.  Madam Minister, is 

that your idea of doing better?  Well it's not good enough. 

 

We've got a news flash for you, Madam Minister.  The people 

of Saskatchewan are serious about quality education.  It's a 

major priority for everyone except this government. 

 

Madam Minister, we challenge you to explain to the people of 

this province why the NDP government has absolutely failed to 

recognize the importance of our K to 12 school system and 

why the NDP government has chosen to ignore every promise 

it made to educators, parents, and students at the K to 12 level. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in reply to the hon. 

member, I would say that the education and training of 

Saskatchewan's people continues to be, as it always has been 

for our government, a very high priority for the people of this 

province. 

 

The member opposite talks about what they expect and what 

they got in the budget with respect to education.  What we got 

was a $15 billion deficit that they left us which requires that we 

look at some new directions, some new ways of doing things in 

the education system to make sure that as many of our scarce 

resources, our scarce dollars as possible, find their way into the 

class-room and the program level and reach the student.  And 

this is what our budget and our priorities will attempt to 

achieve. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair has been negligent and apologizes to 

the House in having failed to put before us formally what both 

the hon. member and the minister have assumed, which is item 

no. 1, administration.  So let me put that before you as item 1 

agreed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

minister mentions deficit in this province.  And I'm sure we'll 

get into the deficit later on, Madam Minister, because part of 

that deficit started in 1934 with the teachers' pension plan.  And 

we will certainly be discussing that. 

 

But at the present time I'd like to ask you some questions, 

Madam Minister, on the K to 12 system.  Over the past 10 

years the Progressive Conservative governments have set 

education as a major priority and have allocated funding 

increases in education in every year since 1982.  Over those 

same 10 years the NDP sat in opposition and called for 

additional money for education, accusing the government of 

underfunding.  During last fall's election the NDP candidates 

went around assuring everyone who would listen that education 

was a priority and that they would increase funding to 

education if elected. 

 

Mr. Chairman, voters were sold a bill of goods, and now school 

divisions and students across the province are paying the price 

for those hollow promises.  In this, the NDP's first budget, 

those same candidates are betraying the promises by delivering 

nothing.  This budget calls for a funding decrease of 2 per cent 

to school boards, to school divisions, for operating costs.  As 

the minister is surely aware, this overall 2 per cent decrease 

translates into a much larger decrease in many individual 

school divisions around this province. 

 

Would the minister provide the House with a complete account 

of the operating fund and capital funding allocated to each 

school division in the province for 1991-92 and for 1991-93 

fiscal years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to be able 

to provide the schedule as allocated in the 1992 budget for the 

operating grants.  I will undertake to provide the details of the 

capital budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How 

many school divisions are experiencing funding increases this 

year?  And how many school divisions will have to swallow a 

funding decrease of more than 2 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question, there are 31 school divisions in total that 

receive an increase.  There are six where it's under 10 per cent . 

. . or over 10 per cent increase, six that receive between 5 and 

10 per cent increase, and 19 that receive up to 5 per cent 

increase. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if Madam 

Minister would table that document that she just read from, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll undertake to 

provide the table that I read from. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, if we could, we would 

appreciate the entire document that she read from, that single 

page. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm prepared to provide 

the table that shows the whole range in numbers of school 

divisions affected by increases or decreases, this 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

being the table that I read from. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  A 

new question.  Why would you not table the rest of the 

document? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's simply a briefing 

document. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that if a minister 

reads from a document in the House that when asked they are 

to table that entire document, are they not?  When she read 

from a single page, simply asking for that single page. 

 

The Chair: -- Just in response to the member's request of the 

Chair, the minister, I believe, is reading from a briefing note 

provided to her and she is not required to table that if she 

makes reference to it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I'm prepared to add that there was 

other information on that page that is not in any way relevant to 

the question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, the result of the NDP's 

operating funding cuts to school divisions will leave the boards 

no choice but to close schools, lay off staff, and reduce the 

number of courses that will be available in those schools, as 

well as cut back on extra-curricular activities.  It will also result 

in an increase in the mill rates for many school divisions. 

 

While these funding cuts will do serious damage to the quality 

of education in schools across this province, schools in rural 

Saskatchewan will suffer the most.  What specific plans does 

the NDP government make to make sure that students attending 

schools in rural Saskatchewan will continue to receive the same 

quality of education as those attending schools in the larger 

urban centres? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, when we announced . . 

. or prior to announcing the third-party grants and the amount 

of funding that would be available this year and in public 

statements following those announcements, we talked to the 

stakeholders in the education community and the school 

boards, universities, SIAST and the regional colleges 

specifically, about the dollars that were available for us to 

provide in the form of third-party grants. 

 

We asked them to look closely at their governance structures, 

at their administrative structures, and to try to priorize the 

spending within their jurisdiction to make sure that as much of 

the money that was available and as much resources that were 

available found their way into the teacher and the class-room. 

 

We also, within the third-party funding, we did make some 

substantial adjustments within the funding.  We took into 

consideration the sparsity factor, small-schools factor, and the 

transportation factor and made some significant adjustments 

within those categories. 

 

For example, in the small-school situation where a school was 

30 kilometres or more away from another school, 

there was actually an increase in allocation on the basis that if 

there is a school that's that distance away from another school, 

there must be a good reason for it being there such as the 

avoidance of a longer bus ride for children.  And I have been a 

rural parent and a rural school bus driver, and I know the 

hardship that that entails.  And schools that were within 10 

kilometres or more of each other were reduced on the basis that 

two schools that close together offering the same programs 

could perhaps be combined without hardship to the pupils or 

the families. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, 

what kind of formula did you use to figure out how much 

money each one of those schools should receive?  I'm sure you 

didn't just use a formula that said if you're more that 30 

kilometres apart, then you get an additional grant. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member is 

aware, the funding formulas for grants to schools are very 

complicated and take into consideration a wide range of factors 

in an effort to recognize the disparities that there are in 

Saskatchewan in the rural school system, and to try and make 

sure that there is equality of opportunity for all children in 

Saskatchewan no matter where they live. 

 

So of necessity because of the disparity, it is difficult to be 

specific in each school unit.  But for example in the small 

school factor, the per pupil rate increased for the elementary 

student, for example, from $490 to 525. So that was the $35 per 

student at the elementary level.  In the middle years it went 

from 530 to 560. And the secondary level stayed the same, I 

guess on the basis that it's more of a hardship for younger 

children if there has to be a change in the configuration which 

results in more distance for pupils.  The kindergarten one, for 

example, was increased from 250 to $330 per pupil. 

 

So we didn't take a broad brush, in terms of just taking a 

percentage off the top, when we found ourselves in serious 

financial straits due to the condition that you left behind.  But 

we did try to be sensitive to the needs of the rural education 

system. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- With leave, for the introduction of guests, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1530) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you a 

group of 23 school students from the Dodsland School in 

Dodsland, Saskatchewan.  They are accompanied here with 

their teacher Mrs. Worth; chaperons are Mr. Zinger, Mrs. 

Campbell, Mr. Worth, Mrs. Nak, Mrs. Hamilton, and Mr. and 

Mrs. Gillen. 

 

I'd like to welcome them to the Assembly in Regina here today, 

and please join with me in welcoming these students to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I'd also like 

to welcome this group of students and teachers and bus drivers 

here.  These are people that I've had an association with for my 

17 years in the school board before I came to this new life.  

Welcome to Regina, and I hope you enjoy your stay here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, can you provide us 

though with the formula that you used to figure out the base for 

your student grants? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it is a very complicated 

arithmetic formula and we don't have it here, but we certainly 

can undertake to provide it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'd like to 

refer to the information you provided us.  You show that two 

rural schools and one town school will receive a 25 per cent 

decrease in their funding, in their provincial funding.  Can you 

identify those school divisions, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, I missed the . 

. . while I was looking for the table in anticipation of the 

question, I missed the exact two that the member would like an 

answer for. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Those that received more than a 25 per 

cent decrease. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- There were three in that category, Mr. 

Chairman.  They were Weyburn Central, Wolseley, and 

Estevan Rural. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, would it be possible for you to provide us with a 

complete list of all the school divisions and whether they 

received an increase or a decrease, and by what amounts? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

document that was tabled first that reflected the operating 

grants and indicated the 1991-92 and 1992-93 for comparison, 

would give the member exactly the information that he is 

requesting. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Last month the minister indicated that 

there would be $14 million available to school divisions for 

emergency capital projects this year.  This week the minister 

changed her mind and said only 8.8 million would be available.  

This constitutes a reduction in the emergency capital funding of 

almost 40 per cent. 
 

What advice does the minister have for school boards who 

have been led to believe emergency funding will be available 

and who are now faced with having to pay 100 per cent of the 

bill for repairing and renovating facilities 

that at this moment pose a safety risk for students? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the announcement that 

the member refers to was $14 million in total that had been 

provided for in capital.  Three million of that, it was made 

clear, was to be available to the post-secondary sector.  The 

total . . . the announcement that was made last week that 

provided for $8.8 million for a number of projects that have 

been identified as schools that had conditions affecting health 

and safety was just the beginning - the first ones, the highest 

priority ones.   So the balance between 8.8 million and the 11 

that was said to be available is still available. 
 

But we have a somewhat different philosophy than has 

prevailed in the last nine and a half years, and we know that 

there is still a number of months of this fiscal year left and 

there may be some contingencies, some emergencies, develop 

between now and the end of this fiscal year that we're not 

aware of, so we're providing a reserve to meet those.  We're not 

spending all our money before we get it or before the situations 

arise. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what is the total 

amount of funds that you have available in the budget for 

capital projects? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure if the 

member is asking . . . there's 7.5 million will be the 

government's share, and then there's the share that's contributed 

by the local school division which is requesting the work to be 

done, and that the share varies depending on the nature of the 

project. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, the figure I'm interested 

in is the amount that the government will provide for capital 

funding in the budget. 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The amount that will be available as 

the provincial contribution in this fiscal year will be 7.5 

million. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, is not the figure 70 

million dollars-plus for capital funding in this budget? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member was asking 

about the emergency repairs.  If we're talking about all capital, 

there is approximately $65 million that is earmarked for 

payments towards capital that has already been spent -- schools 

that have been built in the previous years that there is a 

commitment for us to pay.  In other words, the annual 

mortgage payment on new schools that are already there. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And, Mr. Chairman, the minister says 

$65 million for payments to prior commitments.  Where is the 

other 5 million then?  What's it allocated for? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's as we stated, that 3 

million is for post-secondary -- that's the provincial 

contribution; 7.5 million is the total of the provincial 

contribution in K to 12 for this year; $65 million is our 

commitment in this annual term to pay for construction that 

was previously done.  In other words, schools that were built 

by the Tories that they didn't pay for, and we're paying for 

them now. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if your 

government was embarked on some capital project spending, 

I'm sure that you would not pay for the whole construction of 

all the schools in the province in a single fell swoop. Since you 

are not providing any capital funding for any new buildings, 

you don't have to provide for that. 

 

The minister has indicated that there is a new capital funding 

process in place this year at Saskatchewan Education.  Will the 

minister explain how this new system works and how it differs 

from the system used in previous years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

make clear that at this particular time, the new capital funding 

plan is only a proposal.  It was developed within the facilities 

branch.  It has many what we feel are good features.  But we 

are taking it out to the stakeholders in the education community 

for them to look at, for them to make comments on. And it's a 

process that has not been adopted. 

 

I think what the intent of it is is to completely depoliticize the 

allocation of capital in the education system and to prevent 

things happening like happened last year where just prior to the 

election the previous administration made promises or 

approvals in principle, mind you, of new school construction to 

the value of $51 million; went out and made those promises to 

school boards without allocating one penny to pay for them. 

 

And this is the system that we want to change.  And we want to 

make sure that when scarce dollars are available to provide 

capital for the school system, that they're spent in the highest 

priority areas and not a situation where brand-new schools are 

being built and five or six years later having to be closed, as 

was the case in the previous administration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister has made an 

accusation that the previous government provided absolutely 

no funding to match any promises they made on capital 

funding.  Do you have any proof of that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well I think that the $65 million that 

were committed to pay for this year for past construction is 

certain partial proof. And we have . . . if you think in terms of 

the commitments that we have in years ahead to construction 

that was done during your administration without any provision 

being made for that, all of those commitments are being paid 

for and were paid for under your administration with borrowed 

dollars.  And that's not a sound way to finance the education of 

the young people in this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you provide us 

with a list of schools to which that $65 million is being 

allocated and the amounts being provided to each? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I find it somewhat 

passing strange that members opposite don't remember which 

schools they built or how much money they spent. 

But if they want to be reminded, we can certainly undertake to 

provide them with a list of what they did. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, had I been part 

of building those schools, I would have remembered.  But since 

I'm a new member also, I was not part of that. 

 

Madam Minister, has your government consulted in any way 

with any of the stakeholders in education in the K to 12 system 

where you are cutting the budgets? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to that 

question, we did have extensive consultations both prior to the 

budget, during the budgeting process, and following the 

announcement of the levels of third-party funding and 

following the budget itself. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the minister be willing to indicate 

who she consulted with? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we talked to all of the 

stakeholders in education.  We had meetings with the school 

trustees association, the teachers' federation, LEADS (League 

of Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), 

the business officials.  If your question was framed in terms of 

the K to 12 system only, those would be the main ones. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find it strange 

that the stakeholders in the K to 12 system would have advised 

you to cut programming, to cut funding, to cut teachers.  Can 

you table any of the documents that were part of that 

consultation process? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, these were serious 

discussions held with these people.  And I should have added 

that the directors from the Department of Education would 

have talked with the local boards and the school divisions as 

well. 

 

I think that it's not a good atmosphere when you have to talk to 

people about reducing funding, but all of those people without 

an exception understand that they are citizens of this province, 

that they want to make a contribution to the financial health 

and recovery of this province.  They realized that things were 

going to be tough.  They wanted to do their share.  And they 

undertook to provide the best educational opportunity they 

were able to to the students in our province within whatever 

financial constraints they were faced with.  And they're doing 

that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to ask 

you some questions now on the core curriculum area.  

Saskatchewan is on the leading edge of curriculum reform in 

North America with the implementation of the new core 

curriculum.  This major curriculum change is designed to give 

Saskatchewan's young people the skills they will need to 

compete successfully in the world in the 21st century.  Core 

curriculum has the support of every major educational 

stakeholder in this province. 
 

Criticism of core has tended to be directed at the funding level.  

Many educators and administrators have expressed concern 

that they are being asked to implement the new core curriculum 

without the necessary teaching 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

resources and in-service requirements. 

 

While in opposition the NDP, especially the members for 

Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon Broadway, chastised the 

previous government for underfunding the core curriculum.  

Madam Minister, you said you would do better.  You said you 

would provide more of everything.  And now the NDP has 

formed government, and what do we see? 

 

Not only has the NDP failed to come through with their hollow 

promises of more money, you and your NDP colleagues have 

seen fit to cut back on the funding for the core curriculum by 

more than 10 per cent in this budget.  Madam Minister, did you 

consult with the education stakeholders about what you would 

do with the core curriculum before you inflicted these cuts? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we did consult 

extensively, starting right after November 1, with the education 

community with our commitment to the development of the 

core curriculum in mind.  We recognized that there would be 

financial shortfalls, that it would be difficult.  And keeping in 

mind that the core curriculum is a resource based curriculum 

and that in order to continue the pace of implementation, it 

would be required to spend a great deal of money especially at 

the outset, acquiring new resource materials, the new books 

that would be required. 

 

We did set up a review committee chaired by the assistant dean 

of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) in education and 

asked him to consult and provide us with a revised timetable 

for the implementation of core within the financial constraints 

we face so that we could continue to develop the curriculum, 

continue to make sure that school boards would have the 

required resources to provide in-service for the teachers 

because we didn't want to continue the pace without having the 

resources available and frustrate teachers and students.  We felt 

it was much more important to do it right -- that's 

implementation of core -- than to try to do it quickly. 

 

It was originally a 10-year program.  The timetable had been 

altered at one previous time to make it 12, and we're saying 

now that we want to carefully priorize the way it's 

implemented, making sure that resources are available . . . does 

not dilute our commitment to the core but it does make sure 

that it's very sensitively done. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, do you have a time 

line for the implementation of core at the present time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the 

committee that I mentioned, chaired by the assistant dean of 

Education at the U of S, has just recently reported that the 

recommendation is that the implementation of core curriculum 

will be complete by the year 2000 and further that teachers and 

all the people in the education community that were consulted 

with were very supportive of the changes in the timetable. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you be 

prepared at this time to table that report? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in due course.  As I 

said, the report was received very recently, and I have not even 

seen it yet myself.  But in due course we will be prepared to 

table it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What 

advice have you provided to the school boards and to the 

educators who are being asked to continue the process of core 

implementation but without access to the adequate funding to 

provide the proper services? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the implementation 

window of three years remains unchanged.  The curriculum 

development within the department will continue.  And 

working towards the time frame that's been recommended and 

supported, we will do everything possible to support teachers 

and boards in providing resources and making sure that the 

implementation remains on that schedule. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you've cut the core 

curriculum budget by $2 million.  You're going to implement 

the program you say in three years.  How are the parents and 

the teachers and the school boards to implement this program?  

They can't start it off with half a class-room.  You either have 

the facilities in the class-room or you don't have.  So what 

advice are you giving to them in the meantime?  How do they 

provide those services to those students? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, quite a large part of the 

allocation would have been devoted to development.  A great 

deal of development work has already been done.  We do 

continue to support the in-service portion of the budget. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are you advising some 

of the school divisions to discontinue the core curriculum 

activities at this time because of the funding shortfalls? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- No, Mr. Chairman, on the contrary.  

As I said, we still have and the education community has -- and 

we appreciate that support -- a very strong commitment to core.  

But on the basis, as I said, that it's important to do it right rather 

than do it quickly, we are working with them at all levels 

within the department, in the field, to attempt to do the job as 

thoroughly as possible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, prior to forming 

the government, your party demanded more money for the core 

curriculum.  It was never good enough.  And now we see a 

flip-flop on that issue. 

 

Is your government really committed to the core curriculum or 

will we see this important process disappear?  You say it's to be 

done right rather than quickly.  If you're not going to provide 

the funding for development, how is it even going to be done 

right? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had to be, 

within our very strong commitment to core with the new 

timetable, we have to be very selective about 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

priorizing the way energy and dollars are devoted to this 

initiative.  And we are doing that. 

 

And I repeat that our commitment and the commitment of the 

education community to the development, implementation of 

core is not diluted.  But in the face of the fiscal realities that 

were left to us, we have to be very careful and we have to 

priorize.  We're doing that in concert with the partners that 

deliver the program and I'm sure that it will be a success. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

in our discussion with the minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation we asked 

about the transfer of debt from the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation in each of the departments.  And he 

indicated to us that that information would be provided by each 

of the ministers. And I wonder if you would provide the 

volume of dollars. 

 

In the budget speech it talks about $715 million going from the 

various departments to the Consolidated Fund.  Would you 

provide for us the volumes of dollars that were transferred in 

debt from the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation to the Department of Finance, and how that 

worked through into the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the question that the 

hon. member, the member opposite poses doesn't have a very 

large significance within the Education capital budget.  Within 

the K to 12 system, it's not applicable at all. 

 

The only reference I can think of that may be included in his 

question is some portion of long-term debt repayments 

committed to the university sector.  And there was a portion of 

that repayment that was transferred to the consolidated revenue 

fund.  And I do not have the figure here.  I can undertake to 

provide it. 

 

That's the only portion of the debt management -- and debt 

management we're doing a lot of these days -- but that's the 

only portion that would be applicable to the question, I believe. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well in each of the, Mr. Chairman, each of 

the places that it talks about the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation in your Estimates it says that, "The 

accommodation charges reflect a change in the Province's 

accounting . . ."  Would you then describe for me how that 

process worked that you changed, and would you define that 

for me?  And I'd like to have the volume of dollars that you 

transferred through that system to the universities. 

 

I'm not sure whether I'm making myself clear, but I thought 

that there was some transferred in the K to 12.  And I ask then 

about the technical schools; was there any done in the technical 

school side? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that the 

member's question is quite clear but I'm quite sure that my 

answer with respect 

to the K to 12 system was correct.  There wasn't any such 

transfer made with respect to the K to 12 capital.  There was an 

amount with respect to university capital. 

 

The only adjustment with respect to any other portion of the 

system would have been the discount system on the rents to 

SIAST, and I'm not sure what that number was.  But it was the 

jiggery-pokery that was being done under your administration 

with adjustments made at the end of the year so that no 

institution that was paying rent to SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) could ever figure out 

exactly what the final number was going to be.  And we 

stopped doing that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you explain to me then how schools 

from K to 12 have been financed? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a 

provincial contribution.  Once a construction project that's in 

the approval process within the Department of Education is 

approved in principle and approved to go ahead, then there is a 

formula that provides for a provincial contribution, usually in 

the neighbourhood of 80 per cent.  And the local school board 

issues bonds to raise . . . or uses whatever means are available 

to them to raise their portion. 

 

And as the member knows, those amounts for new construction 

are never shown in the current year because it's all in the form 

of debt and is reflected in, for instance, the $65 million that we 

have allocated for this year is to pay those obligations that were 

incurred in previous years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I just want to make an observation, Madam 

Minister, that you were berating us for us spending the $65 

million.  And I'm not saying one way or the other whether that 

was good or bad, but I know that in the last 10 years there have 

been five schools built in my constituency and that the one 

that's the oldest was probably built before you were born and 

before . . . well I know it was before I was born, and I'm not 

saying how old you are, but it was prior to either one of us 

being involved in any of the debate that we have here today, 

that is for sure. 

 

But I want to say too, that the $65 million is, on the basis of 

what you just said now, going to be allocated for how long in 

determining when these debentures are going to be paid off, or 

this volume of dollars is going to be paid off? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

flatters me.  I think most of the schools that were built before I 

was born have probably fallen down already.  But the $65 

million that is an obligation for this administration in this year 

is repayment for previous commitments.  If we didn't build a 

single . . . if we didn't hammer a single nail this year, we'd still 

be committed to that 65 million.  It will decline in '93-94 as the 

capital payments which range in time, depending on the 

project, as they diminish. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, how long has this process 

been in existence? 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, probably, as with the 

previous reference to the condition of schools that are the same 

age as me, I think this formula has probably been around that 

long as well.  And I think that if we didn't build . . . it's a 

maximum of 10 years, the repayment schedule.  So if we didn't 

build a single school for 10 years, the contribution to capital 

that's reflected in that $65 million would by then have reached 

zero. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What's the volume of debt carried through the 

K to 12 system if you add the 65 million on?  What's the value 

of that indebtedness? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting, but 

telling I guess, that the member opposite is asking me to define 

the total of the debt that was incurred by capital construction 

that they did.  We certainly could calculate the repayment 

schedule as it declines and give you a total.  But at this point I 

don't have it with me.  I could undertake to provide it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, I wish you would.  

And I wish you would also provide for us the transfer of 

payments from the department to . . . or from the Sask Property 

Management into the Consolidated Fund for the universities 

that you talked about earlier.  I'd like to have that volume of 

dollars as well. 

 

I just want to make a point.  There isn't any one of us here who 

are in rural Saskatchewan that don't understand debt financing 

and debt financing to improve ourselves.  And I would hazard a 

guess, Madam Minister, that an investment in young people in 

this province is an investment in the future.  And that 

investment is also going to take care of it if we administer the 

dollars after we have the education process involved and have 

young men and women who are going to continue to provide 

resource dollars for this province if we provide work for them. 

 

And I don't ever consider a dollar spent in education as a 

non-recoverable asset because it's going to be recoverable with 

the kinds of conditions that we provide for our young men and 

women in this province.  And I will never say that that was a 

dollar that wasn't well worth spent.  Even the five schools in 

my constituency were money that was well worth spending.  

And I believe that. 

 

And I think that there is an opportunity there for young men 

and women, children, to learn the kinds of things that they're 

supposed to learn.  And I think that with the quality of teaching 

staff that I know that are in my constituency -- I know the 

majority of the teachers really well -- they need the tools to 

provide the work environment to provide the children with the 

kinds of education that they have to have in competition with 

the market-place. 

 

And so I will not be intimidated, Madam Minister, by the 

volume of dollars that you're going to tell me that we spent in 

the 10 years.  And I'm not going to be intimidated by that 

because that's an investment in my children's future, and it's an 

investment in my grandchildren's future.  That was the same 

dream that those people had that built the schools in the first 

place.  And I believe that that is a very, very important part. 

On the Property Management Corporation, were there any 

monies transferred from the Department of Education to Sask 

Property, Sask Property to the Department of Education, that 

dealt with any of the operating grants that we have in the votes 

that we are having here in Education. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there are only two 

instances of payments to SPMC from the Department of 

Education -- one being in relation to the leasehold 

arrangements for the head office on College, which would be 

$2.9534 million, and the other one is with respect to SIAST; it 

is shown in the budget as $16,297,600.  That's a reduction of $5 

million from the prior year, reflecting, as I said earlier, the 

year-end adjustments that we're no longer making. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How long, Madam Minister, do these 

debentures that these schools have usually continue?  What's 

been the practice that has been followed in funding your 80 per 

cent of the funding for capital projects? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the normal practice has 

been a maximum of a 10-year term. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So I guess that we probably are now at the 

10-year term from when we started building schools in the total 

of the capital project.  Have you any idea how many dollars we 

paid off during the 10 years that were there, the 10 years of 

your administration, that the volume of dollars that that would 

have been equivalent to? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 

information here but we could certainly undertake to provide it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to have that, Madam Minister.  I have 

another question here that deals with the teachers' pension plan.  

Would you be able to give me the volume of dollars that the 

Saskatchewan teachers' pension plan, in the formula side, how 

many dollars there are unfunded? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the estimate that we 

have on hand at the moment would be in the range of 1.6 to 

$1.8 billion, but we are this year having an actuarial review 

which will further refine the extent of that liability. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When was the last time that that was done? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that was last done, I 

believe, at June 30, 1989. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The plan on how you do these, can I have you 

provide me some information on how you set up the actuary?  

For example, how many teachers are involved in all?  How 

many possible pensioners that there would be?  Could you 

provide that for me?  And also could you provide for me today 

how many teachers there are on the formula plan in the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I thought we might 

have the latest estimate of the number of teachers that are 

currently in that plan; we don't seem to have it 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

here but we can undertake to provide it. 

 

And as to the terms of the actuary review, it is usually done by 

. . . the practice has been to have that done by an outside 

consulting firm that specializes in that work and which takes 

into account such factors as the number of teachers that still are 

on the plan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to have that information, Madam 

Minister.  I think . . . could you break it down for those 

teachers who are still under the formula plan and are still 

working, and then those people who are already retired and 

under the formula plan. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we can undertake 

to provide that information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the basis of a 1.6 to $1.8 billion shortfall, 

was that the actuaries estimate in 1989? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could you describe to me how the formula 

plan is paid out, or on what basis it's paid? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the basis that the 

formula plan is paid out on is the average of the highest five 

years of earnings of the teacher. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I'd like to ask you some questions about the 

foundation operating grant information you provided us.  The 

Arcola School Division had a decrease in the student 

population of one, and yet they had a decrease in their grant.  

Can you explain why this occurred? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the number doesn't 

seem to correspond with the name of the school division that 

the member quoted and I'm wondering if he'll just repeat his 

question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- School Division No. 72 had an 

enrolment change of one student -- decreased by one and yet 

their capital grant . . . not the capital grant, sorry, the 

foundation grant decreased by $80,000.  Can you explain it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm just having some 

difficulty reconciling the numbers that the member is quoting 

because with respect to the Arcola School Division there's an 

effect of . . . the grant redistribution effect of the equalization.  

Increasing the equalization factor by 3 mills and the basic rates 

by 3.1, the effect on the grant is a minus 36,400.  But I don't 

have any numbers in this analysis that would equate to the 

80,000 that the member is referring to.  I'm sorry, if he could 

clarify his question I'd be pleased to answer it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, in the 

information you provided us, the 1992 grant is $3,031,691; the 

1991 grant was $3,120,953.  This is your information. 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess I think the 

problem that we have here is partly solved in that I was looking 

for an $80,000 figure, as referred to by the member opposite, 

and the difference is really 89.  And it is, as I said before, the 

largest portion is with respect to the effect of equalization on 

the grant distribution. 

 

And it is . . . there's a whole range of adjustments, some up and 

some down.  The net effect is 89.  And it has to do with mill 

rates, with population, with changes in transportation, 

depending on the configuration of the school district and where 

the population is now.  So there would be a number of 

profound changes in the configuration of the system in that 

school division besides the net loss of one pupil that would 

result in that $89,262 figure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you talk of a change in 

the equalization formula.  How are parents and school boards 

supposed to know whether or not they were given a fair hearing 

on this change and whether or not their school board got the 

proper amount of change, up or down, as compared to the next 

school board?  How do you explain to them whether or not 

they received the proportion they should receive? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the director of 

education for each school division is given the whole detail and 

is part of the process in terms of explaining how the changes in 

funding will affect the school division and how they were 

arrived at. 

 

So there's certainly . . . It's not a mystery.  There certainly is a 

mechanism where each individual school board can find out 

which changes in their division or which changes in the policy 

affect the level of grant that they ultimately receive. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Is the formula that you use, Madam 

Minister, the same for every school board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, the formula, as well as being very 

comprehensive, it attempts to be very equitable and it is applied 

in exactly the same way to all the same factors in each and 

every school division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I haven't had to deal 

with this formula before.  Would you mind explaining to me 

how it works? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, since the member 

opposite has asked for a comprehensive explanation of this 

highly complicated formula, which the basis has been in place 

for many, many years and as conditions changed, the 

Department of Education, under various administrations, has 

attempted to be responsive to those changes and still meet the 

objectives of the funding formula.  But I will go over it in 

detail and describe the objective of the foundation formula as 

being to distribute grant funds to school boards equitably. 

 

There are three major principles of the formula, being, first, 

equity: the board's ability to generate local revenue affects the 

level of the grant.  In other words, a municipality or a school 

division with a high assessment would have a better ability to 

generate funds locally and 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

would likely require less assistance. 

 

Responsiveness: the unique needs of specific groups of 

students; for example, special education, enrolment decline, 

and small schools is recognized.  There is unconditionality: the 

major portion of the grant is unconditional, allowing boards to 

establish their own budgets within their own priorities. 

 

And the structure of the formula is based upon a range of 

recognized expenditures.  And we take, number one, need; to 

try to define the need in terms of dollars.  Take the enrolment 

times the basic rates in the formula, the incremental rates for 

comprehensive high schools, special education, enrolment 

decline, sparsity, and the small-schools factor are all taken into 

consideration together with any tuition fees that might be 

applicable, transportation, facility rental, and a whole other 

range of recognized expenditures. 

 

Then we deduct from that recognized revenue, which 

recognizes the ability to pay.  Take the equalized assessment 

times the equalization factor, the mill rate, tuition fee receipts 

as a recognized revenue, and any other recognized revenues 

that the school division might accrue to the school division.  

That is subtracted from the recognized expenditures, and we 

arrive at the unconditional grant.  The payments are scheduled.  

The operation of the formula -- if enrolments increase the need 

is increased, obviously, and the grant goes up; if the assessment 

increases, the ability to pay increases, and the grant goes down. 

 

So that's just a basic overview of the macro-factors that are 

taken into account in trying to deliver equity to the student no 

matter where they live in the province, no matter what the 

assessment of the municipalities in the local school divisions, 

and try to address the unique needs of the school division in 

terms of the needs of the individuals in the student body. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, would Madam Minister 

table that please for us? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with the assistance of a 

page we'll undertake to have a copy made of this one and 

provide you with it shortly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, that would 

be nice.  Back to the Arcola School Division.  Now that you 

have told us all the implements in the formula, what changed in 

the Arcola School Division? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question with respect to the Arcola school division, the formula 

is indeed very complicated, with a whole range of pluses and 

minuses.  But the major factor here would be . . . and the 

misleading part of this is it says net enrolment change, but this 

includes tuition fee students in and out.  So there really was a 

net loss of 27 students, a large number of whom paid tuition.  

So there was a substantial adjustment in that factor, so I think 

we're being misled by the net enrolment change being one. 

And I can understand the nature of your question, you know, 

how come one student, $90,000?  But it was a net of one, in 

and out, and a number of the out ones were tuition fee paying.  

So there was a very large drop in revenue with respect to the 

tuition fee factor. 

 

And then there's a number of others, like the change in the 

equalization factor, that would have had some effect.  So in all, 

the total change is $89,262, but there were many more 

profound changes than just the gain or loss of one student. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, on the change of 

tuition paying students in and out, was that an increase or a 

decrease of tuition paying students? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there would have been 

a substantial decrease. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  There is a decrease in tuition 

paying students, therefore the school board would be receiving 

less money coming in to them from outside sources, and yet 

they received an $89,000 decrease.  I would have thought that 

if they had more students that were from the division and 

should have been receiving grants, that they should have 

received an increase then, rather than a decrease of 89,000. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's some of the 

convoluted logic, I guess, that got us into the financial position 

that we're in, is that the students were not there, were not 

paying tuition fees.  But the division was also not educating 

those students, so they didn't have any of the costs of providing 

for those students. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So these students that were . . . Tuition 

fees, this was tuition fees being paid by the division out to 

another division rather than tuition fees being received by the 

division. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- No.  A drop accompanied by a 

reduction in the number of students would indicate that they 

must have been students from outside the division that were 

being educated in the division, and tuition was being paid on 

their behalf by another division.  And those arrangements 

obviously changed, and so it's a loss of revenue to the Arcola 

School Division, but an accompanying decline in enrolment 

because the students went elsewhere. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the students 

went elsewhere, and yet we only have a net change of one.  

That means there must have been an additional 26 students 

from within the division that have started attending schools.  

The unit is receiving less money because of no tuition fees 

coming in, and yet you've cut their grant by 89,000.  How do 

you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I've tried to indicate 

previously that this is misleading because we don't normally 

count, in the enrolment we don't count the tuition fee students 

in that division.  So the net enrolment change figure is 

misleading.  It's not meant to be, but it's just that now that we're 

relating it to the changes in the grant which makes it appear 

that there's  



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

this one student accounting for $89,000, it does not reflect the 

influx or leaving of tuition fee students, the enrolment numbers 

don't. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what effect then on 

your formula would a tuition paying student coming into the 

division have? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a variety of 

different arrangements.  There are some school divisions that 

accept students from neighbouring school divisions without 

charging tuition fees at all.  When tuition fees are paid, it's 

recognized by the formula and by the department as an expense 

and revenue in the corresponding school divisions.  So it's an 

offset really and that the arrangements do vary.  And as I say, 

there are some school divisions that don't charge tuition at all. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if you say that 

tuition paying students . . . the revenues generated into the 

division is offset by the expenses they would have, then they 

should have no effect on the formula.  Therefore the net change 

is one student for the Arcola School Division equals $89,000.  

Is that not right? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said before and as 

is becoming increasingly obvious, these are very complicated 

formulas.  And all I can really say is that there was a change in 

the equalization.  There was a change in the transportation. 

 

There was a very large change in the tuition fees revenue, 

where the real number was 27, the loss of 27 tuition paying 

students, who don't show up here because the tuition paying 

students are not counted in that school division.  Beyond that, 

the loss of the 27 students probably would have cost or 

accounted for almost the whole difference between the two 

numbers on the table between '91 and '92, and so it isn't 

$89,000, one pupil.  It's much more complex than that, but it's 

really 27 tuition paying pupils that made most of the difference. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, this loss of the 

27 or 26 students, is that because they are no longer in the 

school division or because they're no longer counted in the 

formulation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't be 

definitive about that.  They may have been students who 

graduated, who aren't in the system any more.  They may have 

been students who are being educated in another school 

division.  They may have a different transportation 

arrangement.  So I cannot be definitive in an answer to that 

question, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in the information you 

gave us regarding the formula for the operation grants, you 

have a basic rate.  Will you mind saying what that is and how 

it's calculated? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, these numbers are 

public knowledge because as they're adjusted, they're published 

each year in the regulations. 

But for the benefit of the member opposite and in reply to his 

question, the basic per pupil rate for kindergarten in major 

urban school divisions is $1,555.  And all others, which would 

be rural and small urbans, is $1,640. 

 

The elementary basic per pupil rate in major urban divisions is 

3,007, and the corresponding rate for rural and small urbans is 

3,156.  In the middle years the basic per pupil rate for major 

urban divisions is $3,224, with all others, being small urbans 

and rural, 3,383.  And at the secondary level, major urbans are 

3,714, and the rural and small urbans is $3,883 as a basic per 

pupil rate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will you 

table that, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

table the table on a separate sheet of paper because there is 

some other information on this particular page which is not 

relevant to the question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, since we went 

through this before and I only got half the page, I guess I'll 

have to accept it again. 

 

On the second part of the formula where computational mill 

rate or equalization factor . . . how is that calculated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in theory this equalized 

assessment is supposed to be . . . supposed to represent the 

weighted average provincial mill rate.  This is difficult with as 

many municipalities and school divisions in the province that 

we have, but that's the closest short version of a definition that I 

can give you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, how is the general 

public supposed to know whether or not their school division is 

being treated fairly and equal to the other school divisions 

around the province when you can't give an answer that will 

define how this equalization factor is calculated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this year's 

calculation or representation of that provincial weighted 

average mill rate is 70.5 mills.  So a school division could look 

at what their actual mill rate is and compare it to that 

theoretical provincial weighted average and then they could be 

assured whether they were above or below that.  They could be 

assured that whatever else happens, based on that number, that 

their application of the formula to their situation will be exactly 

the same as the application of the formula in every other school 

division in the province.  It's very even-handed in that way, as 

complicated as it is. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what factors are 

involved in decided how that formula is weighted? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's simply that the 

assessment within the school division is multiplied by the 

computational factor.  And that's done in every case. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you said that the 

equalization factor was determined by the weighted assessment 

mill rates across the province, and yet you turn around and 

saying it's figured out by 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

multiplying it times the computational factor.  You're going in 

a circle there. 

 

How does it work? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- No, Mr. Chairman.  If, for instance, if 

the actual mill rate in a school division was lower than the 

computational rate, then the school division would know that 

they're not getting the full benefit of equalization.  So every 

rate payer in every school division, by comparing their actual 

situation to the provincial average situation, can tell how they 

are faring in the disbursement of equalization. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you're saying if your 

division board's mill rate is below the computational mill rate, 

that they would receive less funding, and if they're above it 

they would receive more from their foundation grants? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what we're 

reflecting on here is the difficulty of trying to find an average 

when there are such disparate situations in the province.  And I 

guess one of the things about an average is that we use the 

computational mill rate, or this provincial weighted average, 

and apply it equally across the assessment. 

 

But as you know, a mill -- depending on the assessment in the 

school division -- a mill in one school division in actual fact 

will raise more or less money than a mill in a neighbouring or 

another school division, depending on the assessment.  So that's 

the problem that you get into when you start using an average. 

 

But if we tried to use a actual, then we would be . . . we'd be 

providing for very disparate situations.  And that's what we're 

attempting to do through the equalization formula, is to make it 

even handed so that pupils in every school division in the 

province no matter where they're situated, whether their school 

is rural or urban, has an equal opportunity. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll ask you a 

question dealing with another school division then.  The 

Oxbow School Division has a change of approximately 

$176,000 from 1991 to 1992, and yet they have a net change in 

their enrolment of plus 30.  They've gone up 30 students and 

dropped $176,000, whereas Arcola, according to your 

information -- and we've already been through the tuition 

students -- had a net change of minus one, and dropped 89,000.  

How do you explain the differences? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as we said 

before, in answer to the question on the Arcola School 

Division, the same thing would apply to Oxbow as the 

questions that have ensued and the answers in between, that it 

is a very complicated formula which recognizes many, many, 

many more factors than an increase or decrease in students.  It 

depends where the students are, depends whether or not they're 

tuition paying students; it depends upon a whole range of 

factors. 

 

The Oxbow School Division would most certainly have the 

detailed information and have had the director of 

education for their division go over an analysis with them.  So 

they will understand exactly how and why they are affected, 

and there will be much more taken into account than student 

enrolment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would you 

provide us with the information that what those changes were 

in the Oxbow School Division, so that the rest of the people in 

the province can understand why in one school division you 

have a net change of negative one, another one you have an 

increase of 30, and yet the one that has the increase of 30 has a 

much bigger drop in their foundation grant. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, rather than pick up 

pieces of this, I have an analysis of the Oxbow School Division 

No. 51, and I will read it for the member.  It shows a summary 

of enrolment in 1992 being 1,264; in 1991, 1,234, a net change 

of 30.  The basic grant that . . . the difference is minus 176,373. 

 

Now for some of the factors, there's changes in expenditures.  

There's a change because of the 30-pupil increase to 219,950.  

The other adjustments, the ones that we referred to earlier 

where we tried to refine the formula -- the sparsity, the small 

school, the enrolment decline -- results in a downward 

adjustment of $95,033.  Tuition fee expenditures declined by 

$19,464.  Transportation costs increased by $34,641.  Other 

recognized expenditures which this summary doesn't define are 

$35,602 for a total recognized expenditure change of $100,264. 

 

Then in the revenue, local tax revenues increased, I assume by 

a change in the mill rate, growth in the local assessment, and a 

change in the equalization factor, for a total of 205,265.  Then 

there's other revenue shown as 11,649, for a total revenue 

change of 216,914.  So there's an impact, a negative impact of 

$116,650. 

 

Then the grant redistribution effective equalization -- the factor 

that we've been talking about -- increasing of the equalization 

factor by 3 mills and the basic rates by 3.1 per cent.  The effect 

on the grant is minus 72,000. 

 

The factors, in summary, contributing to a change in the basic 

grant, the losses would be the increase in equalization factor of 

3 mills, the decrease in adjustment factors, the decrease in 

tuition fee expenditures, a decrease in some other recognized 

expenditures, for total losses of $346,000. 

 

The gains would be the increase in enrolment of 30 pupils for 

$95,000; increase in basic rates of 3.1 per cent, $125,000; an 

increase in transportation recognition, $35,000.  So the gains 

would be 255,000 and the approximate effect of both of those 

would be minus $91,000. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  It being past 5 o'clock, the 

committee stands recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


