




















































Hansard: August 19, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2681 

 August 19, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

debate on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

legislation has been ongoing for some time now.  Most of our 

members . . . I think all of our members have had an 

opportunity to speak on the legislation. 

 

We've reviewed the legislation.  I think the farm communities 

have reviewed the legislation, and generally I think the results 

of that review are clear amongst farmers.  They don't believe 

that the government has heard the protests of farmers -- 

protests which are put together by a group of farmers that have 

shown that they definitely want an opportunity to challenge this 

legislation in court, which they've already started proceedings 

some months ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think at the time, the opposition raised concerns that the 

government would be coming in with legislation that would 

take the rights of farmers away from them in court.  I think a 

lot of people . . . the government members expressed surprise 

that we would go so far as to say that would be in the 

legislation.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, when the legislation 

came down, that was exactly what was in it. 

 

It took away the rights of farmers to have their day in court.  It 

stripped farm families of their contract that they thought they 

had with the government, that seems intent on reducing the 

amount of support for farmers. 

 

That I think is the bottom line here, is the contracts being taken 

away from farmers and a government that wants to cut back on 

support for farmers, a government that says Ottawa has shown 

no support for farmers in the past or possibly into the future, 

and yet a government in Ottawa that has pumped in $13 billion 

into farm help over the last number of years -- $13 billion. 

 

And we see in this province a Premier and a Minister of 

Agriculture that say Ottawa isn't doing enough.  I say to them, 

they aren't doing enough.  They haven't put in one red cent into 

agriculture since forming office last fall, and yet they continue 

to say that they are going to continue helping farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farm community is getting, I think, very, 

very tired of a Minister of Agriculture that makes all sorts of 

promises during an election campaign and a Premier that 

makes all sorts of promises during an election campaign and 

then, once they form office, doesn't carry on with any of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the GRIP '91 program . . . I wanted to confine my 

remarks to two areas, and that is the '91 program versus the '92 

program and as well the second area of my comments will be 

the illegal nature in which I believe this government has put 

forward these changes to the program. 

 

The '91 program was introduced in the spring -- early spring -- 

I believe it was in January, late January of '91.  There were 

public meetings held all over the province.  I can recall 

something in the order of 50-some public meetings held all 

over the province.  Seven ministers, I believe it was, toured the 

province.  Seven ministers, I believe it was, toured the 

province.  The minister of Agriculture, the associate minister of 

Agriculture, toured the province at these meetings, laying out 

the groundwork for the '91 program. 

 

There was consultation, direct consultation with over 40,000 

farmers about the '91 program.  The ministers -- and I want to 

make that point very clear -- the ministers of the government 

toured the province and consulted with farmers.  Then at the 

time, I think the farm community showed support for the 

program, showed concern for the program in certain areas, and 

we recognized that right from the outset.  They showed concern 

in certain areas. 

 

Now the election came about.  We saw a government -- 

government members opposite -- touring all over the province 

in their constituencies.  The Minister of Agriculture in his 

constituency and the Premier in his constituency saying that, 

and all throughout the province, they were going to provide 

more support for farmers.  They were going to get more out of 

Ottawa. Everything was going to be good for farmers. 

 

And unfortunately I believe, Mr. Speaker, they were able to 

convince farmers of a half or maybe even not a truth 

whatsoever.  They were able to convince farmers to support 

them, and they did. And they are elected, and now they form 

government. 

 

And then what did we see?  I think shortly after taking office 

the Minister of Agriculture reconvened the GRIP advisory 

committee, and I think he went in with the premise and told 

them that this program had to be cut back. They wanted to save 

money. They wanted to cut it back.  And that was the premise 

at which this committee came up with the recommendations 

they came up with.  And I think those recommendations, had 

they been given another opportunity, they certainly wouldn't 

have come up with the same conclusions. 

 

They were told, this is the amount of money this government is 

prepared to put in to this program.  You do the best you can 

with the available dollars that we're going to allow into this 

program.  And they came up with a program that was seriously 

flawed -- a program that has a lot of farmers upset and will 

continue to have farmers 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

upset. 

 

The program . . . and I want to, as I said, confine my remarks to 

two areas -- GRIP '91 versus '92.  And we'll do that right now 

and then deal with the illegal nature that the changes have been 

brought in. 

 

GRIP '91 was not perfect, and everyone realizes that.  No one 

on this side of the House, no one on this side of the House has 

suggested that GRIP '91 has been perfect -- no one.   But it 

offered a couple of things that I think farmers looked at and 

appreciated. 

 

It offered a bottom-line guarantee of total production -- 100 per 

cent of production versus price, the long-term average price, to 

come up with a bottom-line guarantee.  '92 GRIP offers a 

bottom line but it is nowhere near the '91 guarantee, and 

everyone has to recognize that.  The bottom-line guarantee, the 

bottom-line guarantee in '92 GRIP is simply crop insurance. 

 

And any of you members, and I'm sure some of you have had 

to opt . . . to negotiate operating loans and things of that nature.  

I had to on my farm.  Farmers all over the province had to on 

their farms. 

 

You went into the banks this spring and they said yes, '91 

offered you anywhere from $20 an acre upwards in a lot of 

cases -- $160 in some cases on wheat or durum.  And this year 

the '92 GRIP, the bottom-line guarantee was crop insurance.  

So you're somewhere in the 70 to $80-an-acre range.  That was 

the guarantee, Mr. Speaker, in the '92 program. 

 

Of course, and I recognize that there was a market . . . or there 

was the potential for a revenue payment in '92 GRIP and the 

potential is based on your performance gauged against the area 

average.  And yes, indeed it could come up with 40 to $45 an 

acre, probably starting at about $20 to $40, 45.  That's the 

range. 

 

But there is no guarantee of that like there was with the '91 

program.  The bottom-line guarantee in the '91 program offered 

both the revenue side and the yield side as protection.  The '92 

program offers the yield side at a reduced level -- 80 per cent.  

And the guarantee on the market revenue side is not there -- is 

not there.  It's dependent upon the price of the grain and your 

performance relative to the area average. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there definitely is a shortcoming in the 

difference of the guarantee.  In a lot of cases it's in the 

neighbourhood of 20 to $30 an acre.  That's the bottom line 

difference in the guarantee.  And farmers recognize that.  And I 

have a short little thing that I'd like to read into the record.  

Monday, August 10, '92, a farmer in the Kisbey area, Mr. Brian 

Hookenson, he reports and sends in a letter to the editor.  And 

it suggests: 

 

 On my farm alone, the changes to GRIP amount to a possible 

loss of over $71,000 from GRIP '91 to GRIP '92 (based on 

the same seed acreage of growing the same crops of durum 

and hard red spring wheat). 

 

 (The Minister of Agriculture) dismissed our plea 

and warning and, therefore, placed thousands of farmers in a 

disastrous position due to drought and potential frost. 

 

Now I respect this man's opinion.  I respect this man's numbers.  

He clearly has shown, I think, to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the '92 program offers substantially less guarantee.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, in these extremely difficult times in agriculture, 

that guarantee was of paramount importance in a lot of farming 

operations.  They needed that guarantee in order to secure 

financing for their ongoing operations this year. 

 

The '91 program was bankable.  The entire guarantee was 

bankable.  And I appeal to the members opposite again.  You 

know very well if any of you went in to make banking 

arrangements this spring, that that's what the bankers told you 

and that's what they told me and that's what they told thousands 

of farm families. 

 

They went in and the banks looked at the '91 guarantee and 

said, we can lend on a basis of the entire guarantee -- the entire 

guarantee -- because it is there; it's locked in; we know what it 

is.  You brought in your crop insurance information and they 

showed it to you.  You showed it to the bank and they said, 

we'll base your operating loan or your financing on that entire 

guarantee.  It was fully bankable. 

 

The '92 program, it is bankable to an extent, yes, but the extent 

is that it's bankable only to a percentage of the total crop 

insurance guarantee.  They will not in a lot of cases lend on the 

market portion, the revenue side of that guarantee, because it is 

not predictable and it is not guaranteed, Mr. Speaker.  So again 

I think the '92 program comes up short. 

 

The '91 program was predictable.  It offered farmers the 

opportunity to go in in the spring, find out their total guarantee.  

They knew right to the cent what their guarantee was going to 

be for the entire year.  The '92 program does not offer that.  It 

offers, sort of again, a two-thirds guarantee compared to the '91 

program. 

 

In the spring we all went in as farmers, and farm families all 

over the province went in and saw their crop insurance agents 

and that's exactly what they found.  They found that it offered a 

guarantee, a predictable guarantee at least, up to 80 per cent of 

their crop insurance long-term average relative to their average, 

and then the revenue side of the equation was on top of that, if 

there was going to be a revenue payment.  And no one is sure 

of that yet.  Even the Minister of Agriculture, I predict, could 

not stand in this legislature and give us any kind of firm 

guarantee of what that revenue side is going to be.  No one can 

until the final figures will be in in the fall of '93, before that full 

guarantee can be assumed. 

 

In the '91 program, Mr. Speaker, the government has said that 

the reason there needed to be changes was because farmers 

were working the program, Mr. Speaker.  They were working it 

to their benefit.  They were abusing the program.  The program 

was fraught with moral hazard. 

 

(0915) 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

And they hold up examples.  And the one that they most often 

like to talk about is lentil -- the crop of lentil.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if the crop of lentil was in such jeopardy of moral 

hazard, I would like the Minister of Agriculture in this province 

to explain to me why then the acreage of lentil continues to 

increase and yet they have taken away the guarantee that was 

associated with the '91 program.  Why is there still so much 

moral hazard?  Why do farmers still want to grow lentil, if 

indeed the only reason they wanted to grow it in '91 was 

because it offered a large guarantee. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that argument doesn't . . . it doesn't hold any 

water with farm families.  And the evidence is clear.  They 

continue to grow a crop that the Minister of Agriculture said, 

the only reason they grow it because they had a big guarantee 

in '91.  Well that's not true, and the Minister of Agriculture 

knows that.  Because the evidence is in.  The lentil acreage is 

still up. 

 

I don't believe there was a substantial number of farmers that 

were associated themselves with moral hazard.  The vast 

majority of farm families in this province still want to farm the 

land to the best of their ability.  And we all can debate whether 

or not the program had too many moral hazard or no moral 

hazard.  But, Mr. Speaker, the farm families in this province I 

think believe that the '91 program offered to them a full 

guarantee that they need, particularly in these desperate times. 

 

The '91 program, as I said, was not perfect and it needed some 

improvements.  And I think those improvements could have 

been worked into it.  The Minister of Agriculture knows in his 

mind what some of those improvements could have been, and I 

just want to touch on a few of those possible improvements that 

could have been made in the program. 

 

There could have been a mechanism for over-production.  The 

crop of '91 was one of the largest crops in the history of the 

province, third, I think -- second, third, somewhere in that 

neighbourhood -- of total production.  And as a result of that, 

Mr. Speaker, I think there was a lot of farmers looked at the '91 

program and said, here is a shortcoming -- not a possible one -- 

here is definitely a shortcoming in the '91 program.  Anything 

above their guarantee came off of their total revenue side. 

 

So farmers looked at it and said, there's an area that needs to be 

improved on.  Farmers in Alberta looked at it.  Farmers in 

Manitoba found themselves in similar circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that's why I believe that the governments of 

those respective provinces made some changes -- the Jackson 

offset in Alberta and some changes in Manitoba -- which 

allowed farmers an opportunity . . . And I think the same thing 

could have been done in Saskatchewan.  There could have been 

a mechanism put in place to deal with over-production over 

their long-term guarantee, which I think farmers would have 

accepted. 

 

In speaking with farm families and in talking with them, I've 

found that that would have been an acceptable avenue for 

farmers.  And I'm sure the government members have found 

the same thing -- farmers wanted 

some adjustments made in that area. 

 

The premiums, I think, farmers looked at that and said, it's a lot 

of money in one Bill, sort of thing.  It's a lot of money to have 

to pay out for a program in one shot. 

 

And I think they were asking for something in the nature of 

being able to pay their premiums at the elevator as they 

delivered the grain.  And I don't think that would have been an . 

. . I think that would have been a popular program if we could 

have implemented that into the '92 changes.  I think if 

premiums would have been able to be paid at the elevator as 

you delivered your grain, the farmers would have appreciated 

that part of it. 

 

I think another thing that could have been done to the '91 

program, Mr. Speaker, is a producer-elected advisory 

committee to advise of changes in the future.  We have crop 

districts.  The Crop Insurance Corporation sets out crop 

districts.  I think there's 23 in the province.  We could have had 

producer-elected advisory committee elections held in each one 

of those advisory committees and had an election set up to 

come up with an advisory committee -- 23 members, 23 crop 

districts.  And then I think the farmers would have recognized, 

clearly recognized that their voice was being heard in any 

changes. 

 

What we did see though was a government that went along 

with the previous committee set up and brought in changes that 

I believe are extremely unpopular -- extremely unpopular. 

 

And we've seen rallies all over the province, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think lend evidence to that claim.  We saw a rally in Shaunavon 

where 1,200 people showed up at it.  The Crop Insurance 

minister was there.  I'm not sure whether the Minister of 

Agriculture was there or not.  The Crop Insurance minister was 

certainly there.  And I think there was a lot of discontent, and I 

think it showed.  And the media reports of that meeting clearly 

show that farmers were upset with the changes in the program. 

 

We saw a rally in Regina here at the Agridome, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think it clearly showed there today.  There was a show of 

hands a couple of different occasions with respect to changes in 

the '91 program, and farmers wanted to go back to that '91 

program. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture I think . . . the provincial 

Minister of Agriculture I think should have clearly got the 

message that farmers wanted the '91 program.  Or at least, at 

the very least they wanted an opportunity to choose between 

the two programs.  And what would have been wrong with 

that?  What would have been wrong with offering farmers that 

option of a choice? 

 

If your program is as good as you say it is -- and I don't believe 

it is; a lot of farmers don't either -- if it is truly as good as you 

said it was, offer farmers the option of '91 versus '92.  The 

federal government said they would help pick up the cost of 

administering two programs side by side, '91-92.  I think it was 

an offer that farmers in Saskatchewan would have appreciated 

their government picking up that offer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another rally held out front on the 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

grounds of this legislature.  And I think at that time it was 

clearly shown once again -- and all MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) who were present at that and I was 

present and I recall a whole host of government MLAs being 

present that day -- and we I think clearly were shown again, 

Mr. Speaker, that farm families do not believe that the 

government made changes that were in the best interests of the 

farming community. 

 

They may have made changes that were in the best interests of 

this government with respect to fiscal restraint, but they 

certainly didn't make changes that the farm community wants.  

There were changes, and I've outlined them earlier, that could 

have been made that farmers would have gone along with, but 

they will not go along with the wholesale gutting of a program 

just so a Minister of Finance can stand up a year from now and 

say, see, I brought the budget in exactly where I said I was 

going to bring it in.  But on whose backs is he bringing it in on 

that? 

 

And I suggest changes in this program, as well as changes in a 

whole host of government programs that this government has 

made, are changes that are not wanted in the farm community. 

 

When you look at the two programs side by side, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the shortcomings in the '91 program are there.  I think 

the shortcomings could have been addressed relatively easy.  I 

think the program changes in the '92 program, although it has 

some promise with respect to moral hazard, it certainly has 

some serious down side for the incomes of farm families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other area of my comments that I wanted to 

address were the changes in what I believe and what a whole 

number of people throughout this province and a lot of farmers 

believe were the illegal nature in which the farm program was 

changed.  And I think this, Mr. Speaker, comes down . . . And 

I've debated the '91, '92 program and now I want to turn my 

attention to the nature of the changes, the illegal nature of the 

changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all, as farmers in this province that were 

participating in the program, we all had signed a contract with 

the government.  And we expected, just as I'm sure the 

government of the day at that time expected, that farmers 

would live up to their obligations in the contract and 

government would live up to their obligations in the contract. 

 

And here is an example of the contract terms of the agreement.  

We all signed a document -- I forget, probably had to sign four 

or five times, something like that; I just don't recall any more -- 

and it lays out for both the farmers and the government the 

terms of that contract and its rather extensive changes . . . or 

terms, I mean, to the agreement.  And I think that farmers 

signed it in good faith and government signed it in good faith, 

suggesting that here is a program, although it may not be 

perfect, but here is a program that offers you a bottom-line 

guarantee.  And farmers all over the province took up the 

challenge and took up the cause, took up the contract by the 

thousands, Mr. Speaker.  They looked at it and said, well it 

may not be perfect but it's a pretty good program; we'll go 

along with it. 

So they signed a contract; they signed a contract.  And we've 

all done that.  People that aren't associated with the farming 

community, they have signed contracts in a lot of areas.  Most 

people have bought houses or they have signed rental contracts 

with apartments.  Or they have bought a car, and they have 

financed it through various institutions or the car 

manufacturer's finance companies themselves.  We've all 

signed contracts. 

 

And we know, we know that we're bound to those contracts, 

Mr. Speaker.  We know that we're bound to those contracts just 

as sure as our name is on the bottom of that contract.  We have 

an obligation that we must live up to in that contract.  And we 

believe the other party has an obligation that they must live up 

to in that contract. 

 

The contract set out the way in which one party -- not the farm 

community, incidentally -- but one way in which the 

government could make changes in that contract.  And the 

changes in the contract were to be done by a prescribed date in 

that contract.  And a date early enough -- it's March 15 of the 

year -- early enough in the season, I believe -- the upcoming 

production cycle . . . production season -- that farmers, if there 

were changes made in the programs, could adjust their 

practices if they wanted to, or they could continue exactly the 

way they were operating their farm. 

 

But they would set out earlier enough in the season that farmers 

could look at the program changes, if there were going to be 

any program changes, and adjust their farming practices 

accordingly to make the best use of their farm and, as well, 

make the best use of a program that was set out to help them. 

 

In article number 49 of the changes in the contracts: 

 

 Any changes in the contract shall be mailed to the insured not 

later than March 15 of the year for which the changes are to 

be in effect, and those changes are deemed to be part of this 

contract on and after April 1 of that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the obligation, that was the obligation 

that the government gave in their contract to farmers.  That was 

what they said would be the way in which changes in the 

program would be set out.  And farmers agreed to it and 

government agreed to it at that time and the changes were 

going to be set out and made in that way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture and his advisory 

committee, which I believe was set up to make changes in the 

program but were based on the premise that the government 

wanted to cut back the program . . . The government made 

changes all right.  They came in and announced . . . and there 

was an announcement in the legislature here on March 13 that 

the government was going to make changes. 

 

Well that's fine.  The Minister of Agriculture . . . It's two days 

in advance of the deadline.  The Minister of Agriculture is 

perfectly in his legal right, I believe, to make those changes on 

March 13. 

 

But he had one more obligation that he had to meet.  He 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

had one more obligation that the contract set out that he had to 

meet: and that was that contract changes are to be mailed to the 

insured not later than March 15. 

 

So anyone that wasn't able to or didn't hear or was away or 

whatever reason wasn't aware of the Minister of Agriculture's 

announcements on March 13 . . . and that's the reason for a 

registered letter going out to all participants in the program.  

That would be the reason for it.  We all recognize that the legal 

nature is such that the contract suggested that changes had to be 

mailed out to the insured. 

 

Well March 13, the Minister of Agriculture makes the 

announcement.  One has to wonder how much sooner he was 

aware of the announcement and how much time it took to 

arrange to make the announcement and all of those kinds of 

things.  My guess is it's a couple of days.  A couple of days in 

advance of March 13, he was aware that on March 13 they 

were going to make the announcements, make the 

announcement of changes. 

 

Well then why, why didn't the Minister of Agriculture live up 

to the other remaining term, the only other remaining term of 

the contact that his government had to and was obligated to live 

up to.  He had at his disposal all of the resources of 

government, all of the resources of government that could have 

been put in place, put into gear, to make those changes and to 

get letters out to farm families. 

 

(0930) 

 

There's something in the neighbourhood of 50,000 contracts, 

GRIP contracts, something in that order, throughout the 

province.  The Minister of Agriculture, he knows full well that 

as Minister of Agriculture he has all of the power necessary to 

enlist every single printing company in this city and throughout 

the province if necessary, to come up with 50,000 letters. 

 

I suspect in the government, the Minister of Agriculture's office 

alone, they've got a copier capable of putting out that many 

letters in probably a couple of days.  One photocopier, Mr. 

Speaker, could probably do that.  One photocopier could 

probably take care of that job.  And yet he had all of the 

resources at his disposal that he could have dealt with that 

problem. 

 

If it wasn't one copier -- the members opposite, they laugh at 

that kind of comment -- if it wasn't one copier, there's at least 

probably, in the government offices, 50 copiers, 1,000 copies a 

piece.  You can run them off in an hour on a good copier today, 

and send them out to producers. 

 

That could have been done.  You had all the resources at your 

disposal to do it.  You had all the resources at your disposal to 

do it.  And yet, and yet, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture . . . I don't know what he suggests.  Is he 

suggesting to the people of Saskatchewan, he forgot?  He 

forgot about that other obligation he had to make? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members of the advisory committee 

didn't forget.  The members of the committee that suggested 

changes in the program, they said time and 

time and time again in their deliberations with the Minister of 

Agriculture over changes in the program, they said to him, sir, 

we have contractual obligations to make changes in this 

program that have to be met.  It isn't good enough, it isn't good 

enough to say that we're going to make changes without giving 

proper notice.  And that's what they told the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture's response . . . and I think the 

farm families were absolutely shocked at his lack of respect for 

this contract, Mr. Speaker.  What did the Minister of 

Agriculture tell his advisory committee who said to him, you 

have an obligation to make changes properly?  He said to them, 

he said to the advisory committee, the Minister of Agriculture 

said, don't worry about that, Mr. Speaker.  Don't worry about 

that.  We'll get around it somehow.  We'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture has shown a clear disrespect for 

the law, I believe, a clear disrespect for the advisory 

committee, a clear disrespect for the contracts that farmers had.  

And symbolically, I believe, he broke the handshake with rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the members opposite, they laugh at that.  They don't care.  

They think they're above the law.  They think as because 

they're MLAs on the government side, they don't have to 

respect the law.  The law said you had certain obligations that 

you had to make.  And the member from Shaunavon, he had a 

rally in his constituency.  Twelve hundred farmers showed up 

at it.  And they said, Minister of Agriculture, you've made 

some mistakes in this.  You didn't abide by your conditions in 

your contract.  And the Minister of Agriculture brushes it off 

and says, we'll get around it somehow.  We'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

Well, sir, and members of the legislature, and particularly the 

members that are laughing and joking about a government that, 

I believe, thinks they're above the law; I think that what you 

will find is these farmers, although they have taken you to 

court, in spite of all the obstacles you've put in front of them -- 

a $750,000 bond that was placed in front of them to try and 

scare them off in their court case . . . That's what it was there 

for, Mr. Speaker.  We all know that that's the reason they did it.  

The farmers -- five farmers from the Melville area -- took this 

government to court over these changes.  Took them to court, 

drug them in there kicking and squealing, literally, and said to 

them . . . the government said to them . . . well I can just hear it 

in the Minister of Agriculture's office, along with a few 

lawyers: ah, we'll fix this.  We'll get around it somehow as 

well, Mr. Speaker.  Slap a bond on them.  Slap a bond, 

$750,000 bond.  That'll scare these guys off.  They don't have 

that kind of money. 

 

So that's what they did.  They went into the court in Melville 

and said, put a . . . you guys, if you want to show your 

sincerity.  Isn't that something, Mr. Speaker?  They want to 

show their sincerity in this case, put up $750,000 bond to show 

your sincerity.  Well where in the world would five farmers, 

particularly in the depressed economy that Saskatchewan has 

today, where would they have $750,000? 
 

Fortunately farmers all over the province rallied around them 

and they came up with that bond to be able to take 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

the government to court.  And they've proceeded with their 

court action.  And the government, I believe, again flaunted the 

law.  They came into the court and said in an affidavit 

presented by the deputy minister of Agriculture, that we will 

deem the provisions . . . that we will deem that the farmers did 

receive a letter as the contract sets out. 

 

Well the farmers didn't get a letter, and no amount of deeming 

on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture and this government 

will ever set that straight.  We all know it didn't happen.  Every 

single member of this legislature knows that that never 

happened.  They know in their heart of hearts that the 

government broke the contract, and now, as the Minister of 

Agriculture says, we'll get around it somehow. 

 

Well we're into the getting-around-it-somehow actions these 

days, Mr. Speaker.  And I think what's going to happen -- and I 

sincerely believe this, Mr. Speaker -- that the farmers of this 

province will do their best, do their best to stop a government 

that thinks they're above the law from getting around it 

somehow.  I think you'll see this law, this Bill, Bill 87, that's 

being being brought forward to this legislature, I think you'll 

see the farmers will continue with this court action.  I don't 

think they're going to give up. 

 

And members of this government, I think you're sorely 

mistaken if you think farmers are going to give up on this.  

From what I'm hearing, farmers all over the province are 

sending hundred-dollar cheques to those farmers in Melville to 

try and help them with their court action.  That's what's 

happening, Mr. Speaker.  Farmers aren't willing to give up on 

this.  They believe that the government has an obligation to live 

up to contracts. 

 

And the Minister of Rural Development and Crop Insurance, 

he may not believe that.  And the Minister of Agriculture may 

not believe that.  But I believe it.  I think we will see this court 

case continue.  I think we will see the farmers of this province 

go so far as to Supreme Court if necessary, to have their case 

heard before a court that this government fortunately doesn't 

have any jurisdiction over. 

 

They have jurisdiction over the courts in Saskatchewan and 

that's why in this Bill it says that no action can be taken or 

brought against the government on ongoing . . . or starting up a 

case.  They made sure they got the ongoing into this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, to cover off the court case that's already started.  They 

made sure that they put that in.  Oh they've been very, very 

thorough, very, very thorough with this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There was only two obligations that they had to meet in the 

contract that was originally set out and they didn't meet them.  

But when it comes time to getting around it somehow, this 

government is very thorough -- very, very thorough.  They've 

gone through every single issue that's been put before the 

courts, and they've made sure that they've covered off every 

single one of them in the legislation. 

 

Sections of the Bill void the requirement to inform producers in 

writing of all revenue insurance contracts. 

That's one of the provisions in the Bill.  They're trying to cover 

off that part of it.  It makes it very difficult for the continuation 

of any legal challenges since there is no requirement under the 

law for contract changes. 

 

And yet I have the copy of the contract right before me, and I 

see right there -- March 15 is the date.  And they say no, no that 

isn't a requirement any more, Mr. Speaker.  And yet farmers 

believe it was a requirement.  That's why they're in court. 

 

And as I say, the government -- we're into the getting-around 

phase now -- and the government is trying to cover off all 

avenues.  And the Bill goes on in certain sections to talk about 

taking away the legal-challenge right, against the Crown.  

They're taking it away.  They believe they're above the law, 

Mr. Speaker; above the law. 

 

As law makers on the government side, they all sit there and 

say: we'll do whatever we want in this legislature.  We'll do 

whatever we want to farm families.  We'll do whatever we 

want to these contracts.  And we're going to make it so they 

can't take us to court and challenge it. 

 

Well fortunately, Mr. Speaker, in this country of Canada there's 

a higher authority than these people that think they're above the 

law, and that's the Supreme Court.  And you're going to be, I 

believe, drug kicking and screaming into the Supreme Court. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture, hopefully he'll be called up on 

the carpet there, and hopefully the advisory committee will be 

called up on the carpet there.  And I suspect any good lawyer 

would look at them and say: you've got yourselves in a real jam 

here, sir. 

 

And I think that's exactly why the government has had to 

proceed with the kind of actions that have gone on to date.  The 

opposition right from the outset said, you're breaking a contract 

and we're going to try and hold you in this legislature to that 

contract.  And farmers have said that, Mr. Speaker, and that's 

why they're in court. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that in a democracy one of the 

fundamental rights that we have is the right of an individual to 

be heard, the rights of people to have their day in court.  And 

we should all respect that right.  We should all respect that 

right. 

 

And the member from Indian Head-Wolseley is shaking his 

head and he believes that he should all have his day in court.  

And he had his days in court when we talked about 

Rafferty-Alameda.  And what would he have thought of a 

government that would have brought in legislation that says 

your right to court is extinguished, sir?  What would you have 

thought of that?  What would you have thought of that, sir? 

 

Well I suggest he would have really been opposed to that kind 

of legislation.  And yet he sits there as a farmer and he has a . . 

. I suspect had a contract -- I'm not sure -- but I believe 

certainly constituents of his had a contract; certainly 

constituents of his had a contract.  And he's willing to . . . and 

my guess is he'll stand up in this legislature when it comes time 

to vote on this Bill and 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

he'll say he's in favour of taking the rights of individuals away. 

 

One has to wonder, one has to wonder how many government 

members will be in a position that day to vote on that Bill.  I 

hope the people of this province can get every single one of 

them on the record -- every single one of them.  We'll know in 

this province who believes in the rights of individuals and who 

believes in contracts that day.  And it's coming very soon and 

we all know that.  There's only a couple of days left on this 

legislation because you guys have . . . this government has 

forced through changes in the rules.  They've slapped closure 

on.  They want to muzzle the opposition.  They want to be 

absolutely sure that no one in this province can oppose their 

legislation. 

 

You people think you're above the law.  Well the Supreme 

Court will find that out very soon -- hopefully, hopefully, this 

fall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The opposition, we demand the rights of farmers to be heard in 

court.  We demand that right.  And in a democracy we 

shouldn't even have to ask for that right.  You people should be 

-- as government -- you should be willing to give that right.  

You should be willing and absolutely able, capable in 

suggesting in every piece of your legislation that everyone 

should have the opportunity to challenge it in court. 

 

Every fair-minded individual in this province, I believe, looks 

at this legislation and they say, it's wrong.  Why is it, why is it 

that a government has to go so far as to suggest that they are 

above the law and people cannot take them to court and have 

their case heard? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion -- and I want to move an 

amendment to this Bill and I'll do that in a few moments -- but 

in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe the government had a 

opportunity to live up to their obligations of the contract, and 

they chose deliberately not to do that.  The Minister of 

Agriculture chose not to do that.  Because I suspect, as a new 

minister, he got the advice, well we don't have to do that; I 

mean we can take care of that.  We'll smooth it over.  Don't 

worry about that, Mr. Minister from Rosetown-Elrose.  That 

was the advice -- don't worry about that; we'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

(0945) 

 

And so he took that advice.  And in spite of the opportunity 

that he had and the resources that were at his disposal to meet 

obligations set out in that contract, he chose, I believe, he chose 

not to do it -- deliberately chose not to live up to the 

obligations. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they're in court.  And I sincerely hope 

the farmers of this province can afford to stay there.  They 

know very well fighting government's not easy, and it's 

expensive.  But they know very well that they are right.  

They're on the side of right.  And in the end their right will be 

upheld, I believe, in a Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

You people are not above the law. 

None of us are above the law; none of us in this legislature is 

above the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farm families in this province want their day 

in court.  And this legislation takes it away.  And that's why I'm 

opposed to this legislation.  And that's why I believe every 

farmer in this province is opposed to this legislation.  And 

that's why the Supreme Court, I believe, will strike this 

legislation down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment to this legislation: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

"That" and substituting the following therefor: 

 

 That Bill No. 87, An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation, be not now read a 

second time but that it be read a second time this day six 

months hence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this motion, seconded by the member for 

Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I think it 

should be obvious to the government this morning that we on 

this side have chosen to give the government one more chance 

to do the right and honourable thing with regards to this Bill 

and the implications of the Bill towards all of Saskatchewan 

farmers, but in particular to those people who are involved in a 

court case in our province with respect to the matter within the 

Bill and those things that are being dealt with within the 

structure of the Bill. 

 

We've decided, Mr. Speaker, that the government of course is 

in a difficult position.  They themselves, I think will admit that 

they've put themselves into a corner where there are no doors 

and no windows and no escapes.  There is no chance for them 

to be able to back off of this Bill at this point and save face, so 

they will have to probably, as I said one other day, eat some 

crow on this matter.  But they could do it in a gracious manner 

by hoisting this Bill, if that's the right term, for another six 

months and allowing the process of justice to occur throughout 

our legal system. 

 

After that had happened, I think they could probably finish this 

Bill in the next session.  And in all fairness, by then the court 

system should have had time to work and it should be through 

the system and we would have provided them with the 

opportunity then to still deal with the Bill in future and at the 

same time allow justice for the people of our province and to 

allow the court system to work. 

 

In order to fortify my position and that of the opposition, I want 

to review briefly the chronological events that have led up to 

this whole confrontation at this particular time and on this day.  

And I'm going to do that, Mr. Speaker, by not trying to make 

up flowery phrases of my own, but rather I'm going to do it by 

using quotations from various sources of our news media 

throughout the period of time that has elapsed while this issue 

has been before the people -- before the people through this 

Assembly as well as through the various media forums. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in doing so I'm going to try to show the 

Assembly, as well as yourself and the rest of the 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

people, that the reading of the situation is not necessarily just 

our own but that of the people who report the news to the folks 

in the country, who I think, try to get a reading from their 

audiences as well as from those of us who make the statements 

that go into the news.  And with those kinds of reflections, they 

write their articles depicting what their feelings are about a 

certain situation, whether it be this one or some other one. 

 

Today of course I want to deal with the GRIP issue and the 

ramifications as they have unfolded through the eyes of various 

people in our media. 

 

I'll go back and I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I will be 

quoting the names of some of the members in my quotations, 

but they will only be in the quotes, they will not be my own 

words.  I will only be reading the quotes as they are from the 

various papers.  So if I start off a quote and say a name, I can 

assure you that when I finish the paragraph, I will be saying the 

name of the paper or the name of the radio station. 

 

The Speaker: -- Just for clarification, the member may only 

use the name if it's used in the quote.  He can't use the name 

beforehand and then use it in the quote as well. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That is the point I 

was going to make, is that I will be quoting at the end, for 

example, Star-Phoenix, so and so.  Or if you find the need as I 

progress, you can simply say so and I'll go to the bottom and 

read that first.  Okay.  This is a quote: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, Premier Roy Romanow 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP. 

 

 But just a few kilometres away, farmers remained oblivious 

to the message. 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," says Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just southwest of the Battlefords. 

 

That's a quote from the Star-Phoenix, July 31, 1992. 

 

The process at that point in July had gone to the point, Mr. 

Speaker, where some damage control, I think, was being 

looked at in terms of the government trying to say to folks that 

they had areas where in fact this program was going to be 

better than the old program.  And so obviously the Premier of 

our province went to an area where he thought the crops were 

the best, to try to spread the news that the new program would 

in fact be better. 

 

Obviously it is better for those people that have a bumper crop, 

and we've conceded that right from the beginning.  And so if 

they were going to sell their message at any point, they would 

have to sell that message in an area where there were good 

crops. 

 

And so that was the intent and that was the report by the media.  

Although local district farmers, as it was pointed out in that 

report, didn't agree even in that bumper crop area.  Another 

quote: 

. . . the argument of Premier Roy Romanow that the 

situations are not analogous is as vacant as the NDP's 

legislative morality.  He says that because the NDP 

campaigned to change the Gross Revenue Insurance Plan 

(GRIP) it has the democratic right to push through its bill. 

 

 But did the NDP campaign on the promise of making 

changes after the GRIP deadline and using the power of 

government to, as the Tories say, "tamper with the evidence" 

in a case now before the courts? 

 

 However the most offensive aspect to the government's 

behavior has been the way it's ramming through arbitrary 

changes to the legislature's rules. Ignoring the parliamentary 

tradition of all-party consensus on such changes, the NDP has 

applied 30-minute time limits to bell-ringing.  And to do it, 

the NDP brought down the heavy fist of closure to silence 

debate after only four days.  This can only be described as a 

tyranny of the majority. 

 

That's a quote from the Star-Phoenix, July 18, 1992. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that says a lot about how the process 

was unfolding through the summer.  Folks were saying through 

the media, just as we had pointed out, that the government was 

so intent on putting this Bill through that they were willing to 

sacrifice the very rules of this Assembly and the very traditions 

of the Assembly, the tradition of course being that changes to 

rules have always been agreed upon unanimously through a 

committee.  And these unanimous agreements through 

committee were done by all parties involved. 

 

Normally of course, the government has the heavy number on 

all committees, and naturally they can carry the vote if it's put 

to that.  But in this situation, it is my information at least and 

my understanding that it has usually been a total unanimous 

consent before major rule changes are made. 

 

So here we had a precedent established to change rules.  And as 

the press has reported, that was done simply to give the 

government the power to ram through this one particular piece 

of legislation that obviously the opposition party was going to 

dig in hard against.  And because they saw that opposition and 

didn't want to take the time to battle the good battle in the 

Legislative Assembly, they decided simply to change the rules 

arbitrarily and go on and ram through this legislation. 

 

Now there may even be people in our province that aren't 

particularly concerned about the GRIP program or this 

particular issue.  In fact I'm sure there are a lot of people that 

likely don't have any direct connection.  But the reality here is 

that once this precedent is established, once this rule change 

has been made in order to jam this piece of legislation through, 

how can it ever be stopped on any other piece of legislation 

that comes before this House, whether it be this session now or 

the ones in the future? 

 

And that's got to be the frightening part of it, Mr. Speaker, 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

for all of the people of Saskatchewan.  The fact is that now the 

government has the right to jam through any legislation they 

want with these rules all having been changed. 

 

And so what we're saying here is that this was wrong even 

though it's on one issue that doesn't concern a lot of city 

people, and it is done in order to sort of get it into place without 

them being personally affected.  At this moment in time they 

will be affected. 

 

I will go on with another quote in this chronological 

assessment. 

 

 While he said he can see the Tories' point, the premier said 

the government (wouldn't) . . . withdraw (this) . . . legislation. 

 

Now that's the Star-Phoenix, June 23, 1992.  And the Premier 

of this province admits that he sees our point.  And yet he won't 

withdraw the legislation.  And he won't give any consideration 

to changes either, as we will find out as we go through this. 

 

I quote again: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Quoted, Roy Romanow, Star-Phoenix, June 23, 1992. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, even the Premier of this province has 

admitted that we in opposition have a good point, according to 

the news media reports.  This is what the man has said.  And if 

we had good points, and if he understands that people have 

certain rights, then why are the people in this Assembly so 

intent upon taking those rights away from people? 

 

It seems to me that we have a division in philosophies within 

the party that governs our province.  This Premier goes to 

Ottawa to negotiate rights and freedoms in a constitution, and 

yet at the same time supports his colleagues here at home who 

take those very same rights and freedoms away from people 

with provincial legislation. 

 

It just doesn't add up to any sense.  There's something 

desperately wrong here in the consistency, and I will say the 

lack of consistency, in the way this government is approaching 

different problems throughout our society. 

 

I'll go on with another quote. 

 

 The substance of what we did is right.  And if it's the 

substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal picture and 

the like, process becomes a little less important. 

 

And that's from the Star-Phoenix, June 23, 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the process is a little less important, I think 

would be the key line that would bother me there.  Because in a 

democracy, process, while it is very boring at times . . . and I 

can assure you that I've seen that point of 

view, being here all through the summer.  Certainly it can be 

boring.  But if you're going to have a democracy that works, 

you have to allow process to work through itself in order to 

come to conclusions at the end that are not tampered by 

dictatorial approaches. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it's extremely important that we allow process 

to follow its full course, and not to chop it off in the middle 

simply because we think we're right and the other guys are 

naturally all wrong. 

 

(1000) 

 

It's unfortunate in life, Mr. Speaker, but most of us find, I think, 

that occasionally we are wrong.  I know that most people hate 

to admit that.  I happen to be one of those human beings that 

has lived long enough to be able to say in all honesty that I 

have been wrong sometimes.  And I have found myself very 

reluctant to want to admit it not only to myself, but even less to 

people in the general public. 

 

But when you're in public life -- and I've been there with the 

municipal structure for quite a while -- you find that you do 

make mistakes and you have to admit sometimes that you're 

wrong.  And when you do that, the people respect you more 

than if you dig in hard and never back off.  When you are 

wrong, the important thing is to recognize it, admit it, and 

change things so that they are right and then get on with the 

rest of life. 

 

And that's what we're saying to this government.  You may be 

making a mistake in eliminating the process.  Even if you're 

convinced that the GRIP program that you are introducing is 

the best one, by destroying the process, you are even doing 

more harm to society than you are by changing the GRIP 

program. Because this goes far beyond just one issue as time 

unfolds. 

 

I will quote again: 

 

 While the (GRIP) advisory committee had picked an arbitrary 

figure of 80-per-cent (drought) coverage, according to a 

committee member, the NDP cabinet only wanted 

70-per-cent coverage.  "We had to fight like hell to get it up 

to 80 per cent. 

 

 Leader-Post r, June 17, 1992. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the very committee that advised the 

minister has made that kind of a public statement, now you 

have to start to reflect on the possibility, how much pressure 

was there on that committee to make any of their decisions?  

How much pressure was on that committee to come with a 

decision of how to work a GRIP program that would fall within 

the guidelines and the perimeters set out by the government to 

begin with, which simply would have been this, Mr. Speaker -- 

and I can understand how it would be done -- the government 

would mandate that committee to work in the best interests of 

finding a new program under the following conditions: you 

must save us a hundred-and-some-million dollars.  And a 

program you come up with that will save that many million 

dollars for the government, we will accept from you as a 

committee. Otherwise you go back to the drawing board and 

you can sit here and redraw it all summer long. 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

So the committee immediately starts off its process and its 

work by being restricted, by being restricted in what they could 

come up with as a recommendation.  Their minds were made 

up for them before they ever sat down to start drawing up the 

new program, because the government mandated them to come 

in with a program that would only spend a certain amount of 

dollars. 

 

The committee could not come up with a recommendation to 

follow the old GRIP guidelines in any way, shape, or form, 

because it is far richer for the people on the land.  And that 

would of course cost the government more money and they 

wouldn't have had their program accepted. 

 

So what these people had to do was come in with a program 

that would suit the government's needs but at the same time in 

their own minds they would be saying, let's try to do it so we 

can get the best deal that we can for the farmers. Even though 

it's restricted, we'll do the best job we can of what we've got 

available to work with.  That's how that kind of a committee 

would work under those circumstances. 

 

I know, I've been in pressure positions like that in my life.  And 

you try to get the very best out of a bad situation.  And that's 

the kind of a situation that this government placed that 

committee in -- a committee that went to public meetings and 

shed real, live tears because of the decision they made and the 

public pressure that was upon them, because of those decisions 

that they were forced to make by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think they were wrong to do that to those 

people.  This government was wrong to do that to their 

committee and they were wrong to do what they're doing in the 

GRIP program. 

 

I'll quote again.  The quote is: 

 

 Romanow was mum on the issue Tuesday for a second day in 

a row and didn't stop to answer questions from the media. 

 

 "I have nothing to say," he said, walking past reporters on his 

way to his office. 

 

 Asked again about the walkout, he jokingly commented 

instead on the continuing constitutional negotiations. 

 

From the Leader-Post of June 17, 1992. 

 

It is disheartening to see that our Premier didn't even consider 

this to be an important enough issue to discuss during that 

period of time, during the month of June. 

 

We call it the green month in our area because normal years 

that's the only month of the year that we see very much green.  

This year the rains came a little later, so July became our green 

month, but that's really unusual.  That's almost a 

one-in-a-hundred kind of a happening. 

 

But here we were in the middle of the best month of the year 

that farmers and people will see as far as going out 

and looking at the beauty of our province, and the Premier 

didn't have time to bother talking.  He jokingly comments that 

we should be dealing with the constitution instead. 

 

Well I'll go on to quote again.  It says:  "Romanow still refuses 

to comment on standoff."  GRIP headline, Star-Phoenix, June 

17, 1992. 

 

Then we go on, and I'll quote another: 

 

 For the second day since returning from Eastern Canada, 

Romanow refused to comment on the standoff over his 

government's proposed legislation on the GRIP farm safety 

net. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 17, 1992. 

 

Then we go on with another quote, and this one is: 

 

  . . . Lingenfelter said the bell-ringing is costing taxpayers an 

extra $27,000 a day.  While NDP House Leader Dwain 

Lingenfelter says it's $27,000 a day, Legislative Assembly 

officials say the true figure is actually closer to $1,000 a day. 

 

The Leader-Post, June 18, 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of exaggeration that inflamed 

this whole, this whole issue.  We've had these kind of 

inflammatory remarks by the government claiming that 27,000 

was going to be lost every day, when in fact it was one. 

 

And that leads also into the inflammatory kind of a position 

that was taken on the very cost of the program itself.  The 

government has said that they couldn't afford GRIP '91 and 

they couldn't afford to amalgamate it with the good points of 

GRIP '92 because it would cost X number of dollars way up 

here. 

 

In reality you would have had to have a total crop failure for 

the absolute extreme amount of dollars to have to be paid out.  

The reality is that we don't very often have a total crop failure 

that would cost you that absolute total amount of money that 

you're guaranteeing to the farm community.  In fact the reality 

is that in Saskatchewan some areas may have a crop failure, 

while other areas of the province will have a super crop or very 

good crop.  And of course the bigger majority of the farmers 

will have an average crop.  That's just the way it goes. 

 

There's only been a couple of years in the last probably 85 

years where you've had an extremely wiped-out type of a 

situation.  And with any confidence at all, a government has to 

know that if that happens twice in 85 years, if you're using the 

monies through an insurance program, that money is borrowed 

through that insurance program to pay off the debts of the 

insurance company, namely the Crop Insurance company in 

this situation.  The Crop Insurance people would of course 

regain those monies over the next period years.  It's amortized 

over a period of time. 

 

And it would not become a debt, Mr. Speaker, to the 

government treasury for this year.  You would not be 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

running a debt in this year's fiscal figures that would show that 

the government had failed in its attempt to balance budget.  

That would be a debt to Crop Insurance that would be 

recovered through premiums over a long period of time, the 

same as any other insurance program works with any other 

insurance company. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I'm saying there is that the 

government should not use those kind of inflammatory tactics 

to distort the thinking of people as to how much these programs 

will cost.  Because the reality is that we most likely would have 

an average, and an average wouldn't have cost the government 

anything near the kind of dollars that they were saying might 

be at risk.  Of course they are at risk, but the odds of them 

having to be paid out are very slim. 

 

I'll go on with another quote: 

 

 . . . he (Lingenfelter) wouldn't commit to the ultimate 

removal of a clause that retroactively determines farmers 

received proper notice of the GRIP changes. 

 

The Leader-Post, June 19, 1992. 

 

Well of course if they had decided at that point, Mr. Speaker, to 

remove the clause of retroactivity, there would have been very 

little case for the farmers to fight in court.  And I guess they 

would then have gone on with the court process, and they 

would have been allowed then to carry on without the 

tampering effects in the evidence. 

 

And I expect that due process then would have followed 

through, and by now we likely would have seen a court 

challenge that would have been concluded.  And most likely by 

now the courts would have ruled or else it would be going to 

the Supreme Court for a ruling on whether or not the legislation 

was legal.  And of course the government didn't want to take 

that chance on losing so they refused to do that. 

 

And I'll go on with another quote. 

 

 The NDP House leader Dwain Lingenfelter admitted Friday 

the bill covers up for the fact that government missed a 

March 15 deadline to notify farmers about changes to the 

GRIP program. 

 

That's the Leader-Post of June 13, 1992. 

 

Now the government openly admitted in the press, Mr. 

Speaker, that they had done wrong.  And yet they insist on 

passing legislation that makes their falsehood a law.  And a law 

has to be dealt with by the court.  No matter if the law is good 

or bad a court has to deal with the law that is made by . . . on 

this case, the Assembly in the province, and of course on a 

bigger scale, the House of Commons in Ottawa.  If they make a 

Bill into law, no matter if it's good or bad, that's what the courts 

have to use as their rule to determine their decisions. 

 

And so it became quite clear that even though it was admitted 

by the government members that they were wrong, that they 

were going to jam this legislation through no matter what it 

took. 

I'll quote again: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens has threatened to bring in 

retroactive legislation changing the (GRIP) contracts, but he 

refused to comment on that Tuesday. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, April 29, 1992.  He said he's going to do it 

but he refuses to comment.  The man obviously knows that he's 

wrong when he refuses to make any comment to the press in 

this province. 

 

I'll quote again: 

 

 Agriculture minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to the 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 

15 deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

And so it comes together; go on with the quote: 

 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

That's the Leader-Post, June 17, 1992.  He told the committee 

that they would get around it somehow, so the committee didn't 

have to worry about that.  They were just to come in with this 

new program under the mandate that the Minister of 

Agriculture had put them under, the restrictions of his 

determination of what criteria would have to be met, as he had 

pointed out earlier in the year. 

 

I'll go on with another quote: 

 

 "Essentially, he (Wiens) didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not to be identified.  "He 

thought we could get around that (legal question) . . . He said 

he would get around it somehow." 

 

The Leader-Post, June 17, 1992  No matter what it takes -- you 

can see how this thing is developing, Mr. Speaker -- no matter 

what it takes, the minister had determined that he's going to 

force it through.  Nobody should worry about it.  He would 

somehow find the power and the dictatorial control over 

people's lives to get this jammed through. 

 

I'll quote again: some members of the GRIP advisory 

committee warned the government about the deadline, but were 

told it wasn't their problem. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 17, 1992.  I'll just go on and quote 

again: 

 

 Asked by reporters Tuesday if the members of his (GRIP) 

committee had raised concerns about whether changes to 

(the) GRIP after March 15 . . . had been raised, Wiens said 

that was not the case. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 17, 1992.  Now they're starting to argue 

among themselves, is the way this thing is developing, Mr. 

Speaker.  And as time went by it seemed like the minister 

would choose to hope that members of 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

the committee and the members of the public would forget in 

fact what he had committed himself to having said.  And so the 

whole thing's starting to unravel as we go through this. 

 

And I'll quote again: 

 

 The NDP government opened its first full legislative session 

Monday promising a more open, caring administration while 

outside the legislature, 500 farmers were hanging Agriculture 

Minister Berny Wiens in effigy. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, April 28, 1992.  Right at the start of the 

session.  And they quote 500, Mr. Speaker.  I suspect that it 

probably was closer to 700.  I didn't count them all, but there 

certainly was a large number of them out there.  And they left 

nothing to anybody's imagination in what they intended to pass 

on as a message to the Minister of Agriculture that particular 

day. 

 

But as time went by, folks tried to forget that those farmers 

were ever here.  And they act surprised sometimes now when 

we remind them of the meetings that were held through the 

spring period of this summer.  They say, well you don't have 

any public support.  Who's supporting your efforts to get this 

Bill changed? 

 

Well the support was definitely there.  And if we go through 

the time period and the time frame and remind folks, they 

remember, yes, those things did happen.  There was a lot of 

support out there.  People were at those meetings.  They did 

happen for sure. 

 

These are realities.  They're not like the retroactive part of this 

Bill that takes out the realities of life and transfers them with 

some other imaginary thing.  I'm not sure what the term is, but I 

think it's called fictitious rhetoric or something like that, that 

the legal profession uses. 

 

(1015) 

 

I want to go on with another quote: 

 

 After signing a contract with farmers on the GRIP safety net, 

the NDP is changing the rules of the game without providing 

the required notice.  Some farmers see that as a breach of 

contract and are suing.  The government response is to bring 

in legislation that will say the government has followed the 

rules.  In effect, Romanow and Agriculture Minister Berny 

Wiens are telling farmers "Yes, we broke our contract with 

you but here's a law that says we didn't." 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 15, 1992. 

 

I'll go on with another quote: 

 

 "It's a sad state of affairs when farmers have to sue the 

government for breach of contract." 

 

Boyd Charles, spokesman for the PAC -- Producers Action 

Committee.  Leader-Post, April 21, 1992. 

 

I'll just carry on with another quote, Mr. Speaker, because 

it sort of explains itself as we go: 

 

 It would appear that Saskatchewan's Crop Insurance has put 

the cart before the horse.  If the Crown and agencies of the 

Crown undertake costly system changes before effecting the 

necessary changes, they cannot defeat the rights of 

individuals affected by their conduct on the basis of costs 

which the Crown or its agents have voluntarily incurred. 

 

This is Judge Darla Hunter of the Leader-Post, May 13, 1992. 

 

Now we're starting to get some conflicting legal opinions into 

the process, Mr. Speaker.  GRIP court case continued.  I'll 

quote again: 

 

 The issue is compounded by the fact the government intends 

to use its (GRIP) legislation as a defence in court.  It will 

argue it did not break its contract, because the Bill says it 

didn't.  In effect, the government is changing the facts in the 

case. 

 

That's Star-Phoenix, quoted, June 15, 1992. 

 

Now the media are saying to the government -- for the people 

of Saskatchewan -- I believe that they were trying to say for the 

people of Saskatchewan to this government that what you are 

doing is wrong, that what you are doing is in fact you are 

making a law allowing you to break the law. 

 

I'll go on with another quote: 

 

 . . . a court affidavit filed earlier in the day from the deputy 

agriculture minister Stuart Kramer . . . suggested the NDP is 

about to introduce legislation to retroactively force farmers to 

accept changes to the GRIP . . . 

 

 Kramer's affidavit -- a response to a lawsuit filed against the 

government in a Melville court room -- stated Wiens intends 

to introduce legislative amendments "in which notice of the 

1992 changes will be deemed to have been given to 

producers by March 15, 1992 as required in their individual 

contracts." 

 

And here we see the first attempt, Mr. Speaker -- and that was 

quoted from the Leader-Post, April 30, 1992 -- that first 

attempt was made there to show the courts that they had better 

not bother ruling on this because the minister was intent on 

changing the law, to change the rules about what happened in 

the court system. 

 

And so it was actually filed in court as evidence at that 

particular time.  So later on when the government accused the 

opposition of not knowing what they were talking about, it rang 

very hollow because the fact of the matter was that if the 

evidence was going to be strong enough to affect the court as 

was stated when this application to the courts was made, if that 

legislation was going to be that strong, it had to in fact bail the 

government out because of everything that had transpired 

before and all of the facts that had been stated by different legal 

opinions. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

I'll continue with another quote: 

 

 The facts be known, the Tories are right on.  The NDP 

government is dead wrong. 

 

 And right now, the Tories' reasons for blocking the 

government's legislative agenda and effectively holding the 

province hostage is far more justifiable than the reasons for 

the NDP 1989 walkout ever hoped of being. 

 

 . . . the Tories have now walked out of the assembly over a 

matter of law -- one the NDP is now attempting to rewrite so 

as to appear as if they have done nothing wrong. 

 

 In changing the 1991 GRIP contract with farmers, the NDP 

government -- according to a court ruling this week -- acted 

illegally by failing to notify producers of the changes to the 

program by March 15 deadline. 

 

 The simple solution -- the government has obviously 

determined according to the court affidavits -- is to introduce 

legislation that will effectively say farmers were properly 

informed of changes to the GRIP before March 15. 

 

 It's ridiculous revisionism from an NDP government that's 

already put a gun to farmers' heads and said: "You either 

accept our version of GRIP or you will receive no GRIP". 

 

 This is why the PC's bell-ringing is completely justifiable. 

 

The Leader-Post, June 13, 1992.  Well, Mr. Speaker, these 

quotes are not the things that we as an opposition have put into 

the newspaper.  We didn't buy the space.  We only did our job 

in this Assembly as best we could and the media took what is 

said in this Assembly and they formulated it into their stories.  

And the story unfolds as they have told it.  And so far I agree 

with exactly the way they reported it.  I'll quote again: 

 

 The government says the old GRIP program that the PC 

government approved was badly flawed and they wouldn't go 

back to it or give farmers the option (between the GRIP '91 

and the GRIP '92.) 

 

The Leader-Post, June 12, 1992.  Now it was true that when 

the government said that the old program had some flaws in it 

and the media reported that they said that, and on this point we 

agreed with the government.  There were some flaws in the old 

program.  Most new programs that are as complex as this are 

bound to have some problems in them.  And we did agree with 

the government that there would have to be a re-study of the 

program and a reformulation to try to get the wrinkles out of it.  

But we also said that we would have to take some time and we 

would have to talk to larger groups of farmers.  I'll quote again:  

The NDP said, it needs retroactivity to close loopholes in the 

GRIP program. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 25, 1992.  Now we'll go on, Mr. 

Speaker, to some of the quotes from the papers about 

what farmers were saying.  It says here: 

 

 I don't think the government should be able to easily change 

something they set up like that. . . . I don't support a 

government that makes wholesale changes to programs 

people have . . . put their life into. 

 

This is from Bill Kesslar of Saskatoon; Leader-Post, June 18, 

1992.  The farmers were objecting through the media as well.  

Not just through public meetings, not just through petitions, not 

just through letters and phone calls to all of us as well as to 

members of the government, but they were lodging their 

protests, Mr. Speaker, through the media.  I'll quote again: 

 

 I think they (farmers) had a pretty good deal going and then 

Mr. Romanow turns around and tries to wreck it. . . . I think 

Devine had every right to walk out. 

 

This is quoted from Muriel Bowler, Palmer; Leader-Post, June 

18, 1992.  And it just sets up the same format, Mr. Speaker, 

that I was referring to, where it wasn't just the media now and it 

wasn't just the opposition.  Now the farmers were saying to the 

media . . . through the media to the general public, that they too 

were unhappy with this process.  I'll quote again: 

 

 Yes, I do support (the walkout).  The main reason is I believe 

last year when they (the government) initiated the program, 

they guaranteed us they would not change the program unless 

they gave us due time. 

 

This is quoted from Jerry Klimchuk of Canora, Leader-Post, 

June 18, 1991. 

 

Saying very much the same thing, Mr. Speaker, I'll go on to 

another quote: 

 

 Yes, I agree with them (the PCs).  Somebody's got to stop 

(the government), otherwise they'd pass laws and do 

whatever they want to do. 

 

Quoted from Ken Spicer of Moose Jaw, Leader-Post, June 18, 

1992. 

 

Already the people were starting to worry about the 

government getting out of hand with this massive majority and 

doing dictatorial things.  And so they were lodging their 

protests through the media, the only way they could now get 

through to this government, because the letters and phone calls 

weren't working. 

 

The government was refusing to acknowledge the fact that 

farmers were approaching them.  They in fact told us that they 

were getting letters of the opposite point of view.  So now the 

farmers found it necessary to go to the public media to get their 

point of view and positions known by the general public. 

 

I'll quote again: 

 

 . . . they (the NDP government) changed the program without 

doing it by the rules.  I signed a 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

contract for four years and they changed the contract.  If I 

wanted to change the contract, I couldn't. 

 

Cliff Delahey, I think it's pronounced, of Moose Jaw, June 18, 

1992. 

 

In other words, the government can change the rules but the 

farmers couldn't.  That's what he was saying, that he didn't like 

that. 

 

I'll go on to quote again: 

 

 "I'm just livid," says Norm McIntyre of Wiseton.  "I've been 

told that I can't bring the protection up to 80 per cent, but I 

have to accept the changes on the revenue side," . . . (Now) 

They're changing the rules to suit themselves.  I think I'm 

entitled to the old program.  The difference between the two 

programs is costing me $48 an acre." 

 

The Star-Phoenix, April 18, 1992. 

 

I'll quote another one: 

 

 . . . farmers in the Battleford area . . . warn the provincial 

government is courting political disaster by pushing its 

(GRIP) program through the legislature.  Joe Beckman, the 

reeve of the Rural Municipality of Battle River, said 

discontent with the program (GRIP '92) cuts across party 

lines. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, July 31, 1992. 

 

I'll quote again from another farmer: 

 

 . . . Boyd Charles said: "Farmers do business on a handshake, 

on a word of mouth.  Your word better be your bond and this 

action the government is taking now -- to make a . . . (I'm not 

going to say that word because I think you won't like it, even 

in a quote; I'll transfer this word for falsehood) a law -- is 

against everything agriculture believes in and is run on." 

 

The Star-Phoenix, June 15, 1992, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyone who wants to see what the real word in that quote was 

can read the Star-Phoenix on June 15, 1992.  And they'll see 

the actual words that Boyd Charles used to describe his 

feelings and frustrations. 

 

I'll quote again from another farmer: 

 

 One of the farmers involved in the case praised the 

opposition for keeping the Bill from entering the legislature.  

"They had to walk out," says Henry Ward in a telephone 

interview.  "They can't sit there and let someone admit a . . . 

(falsehood) into a law." 

 

I transferred that word falsehood for the other word again, Mr. 

Speaker, so it's not a direct quote right there.  But I know that 

people in this Assembly are nervous about certain words, so I 

won't use it.  But that quote was in the Leader-Post of June 13, 

1992. 

I'll go on to quote some more, because there's scads of evidence 

that proves that the farmers of this province were supporting 

the opposition position and that the government was not being 

enforced: 

 

 "The 1991 GRIP needed changes . . . it wasn't flawless. But 

the fact was I knew where I was for the next four years.  I 

could handle my payments," Ward said of the guaranteed per 

acreage payment. 

 

 Ward says . . . (the Crop Insurance) claims the new GRIP is 

better but he has his doubts: "If it's so much better, why can't 

they (the NDP) sell it on its own merits?  Why do they tell 

me they won't honor last year's GRIP if I don't take it (new 

GRIP) for the next four years. 

 

Henry Ward, Melville, Melville Advance, April 22, 1992. 

 

And so the thing solidified as time went by.  And we find, Mr. 

Speaker, that most of the farmers in the province were agreeing 

with what these farmers were wanting out of the GRIP 

program.  I'll quote again, Mr. Speaker, from another quotation: 

 

 It seems funny to me that Agriculture Minister Bernie Wiens 

can continue to stand up in the legislature and tell the media 

that farmers want the changes he has made to the Gross 

Revenue Insurance Program. 

 

 Obviously, the thousands of farmers who have held meetings 

all across this province mean nothing to this minister.  At 

every meeting, farmers voted almost unanimously to urge the 

government to reinstate the 1991 GRIP provisions and then 

consult with real farmers to find out what changes need to be 

made. 

 

 Farmers are angry because the changes to GRIP make our 

premiums go up drastically, while our coverage becomes 

almost non-existent.  Many farmers are being turned down 

for operating loans because the program isn't bankable or 

predictable any longer.  It is also no longer an affordable 

program, and it certainly is no longer an insurance program. 

 

 In addition, producers were told any changes made would be 

in writing and sent out to our homes before March 15. (And 

that goes on, Mr. Speaker)  Well, farmers heard from radio 

and television first about what was going on, and Wiens now 

seems to care less about the government's obligation under 

contract. 

 

 If Wiens thinks the program is exactly what farmers want, 

why not give farmers the option of choosing either GRIP '91 

or GRIP '92? 

 

 If this government won't listen to the majority of the farmers 

and their real needs, how can it claim to know about rural 

Saskatchewan's needs to survive?  Well I guess that answer is 

an easy one -- it can't. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

 This country is still a democracy even though our province 

has a socialist government.  It is time for the NDP 

government to really listen to the people like it promised. 

 

And that's from Gloria Baer of Southey, Leader-Post, June 19, 

1992.  That one covers some real interesting points, Mr. 

Speaker, in that here the implication was that we go to real 

farmers. 

 

I say that it wouldn't do any good to go any real set of farmers 

for opinions if you first of all said to those farmers, you can 

only come up with plans and programs that match our fiscal 

needs and you have a cap on how many dollars the program 

can put at risk or spend.  It wouldn't matter what farmer you 

put on that board, he wouldn't be able to come up with any 

other kind of a program that would help farmers genuinely with 

cash flow if the minister sets out a mandate to those people that 

make up the rules that says they can only come up with rules 

within his guidelines. 

 

And if his guidelines are so narrow and in such a small 

parameter that nobody could possibly move outside of them, 

then it is useless to have input from anybody because the input 

couldn't go outside of his parameters of what he's saying you're 

allowed to do. 

 

So I guess the logic there is that you can talk to all the farmers 

you like if you're going to say to them, you can't have any 

more; we're not going to give you any more, so come up with 

some other ideas.  There aren't any more ideas.  You've got the 

two programs; you could meld them together. But the reality, 

Mr. Speaker, is that you have to commit some dollars in order 

for this program to work. 

 

(1030) 

 

I want to quote again, Mr. Speaker, a little bit on some of the 

federal point of view on this matter.  It says here: 

 

 McKnight is still offering farmers $40 million in yield 

protection.  Farmers should not be penalized because the 

province changed GRIP. 

 

That's McKnight quoted from Star-Phoenix, July 17, 1992. 

 

So here we start to develop the case, Mr. Speaker, that we 

weren't altogether short of dollars in this process.  The federal 

minister is saying now that he has some money that's available 

and he's willing to give it to the Saskatchewan farmers 

providing that the provincial government plays ball.  And I'll 

go on and just quote a few more of these quotes, Mr. Speaker, 

because they make the case better than I can: 

 

 The difference between the old and the new plans is the basis 

for the federal offer. 

 

 Saskatchewan farmers lost anywhere from $20 to $40 per 

acre in coverage because of the provincial changes . . . 

 

Quoted from McKnight, Star-Phoenix, July 22, 1992. 

Next quote is: 

 

 . . . Wiens maintains Saskatchewan won't change its version 

of GRIP and believes any additional support should come 

solely from Ottawa. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, July 20, 1992. 

 

Totally washing their hands of all responsibility for 

Saskatchewan's major industry, the industry of agriculture.  

That's what this quote is saying.  They're totally washing their 

hands provincially of any responsibility to agriculture. 

 

I'll quote again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 I guess the provincial government has to ask itself how can it 

not afford to put up the money, $23 million.  What kinds of 

situations are a lot of farmers going to be in if the money isn't 

put up? 

 

That's Alanna Koch of WCWGA (Western Canadian Wheat 

Growers Association), July 28, 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, $23 million is a lot of money if it's out of 

your pocket or out of my pocket.  But the reality is that in the 

province of Saskatchewan we've seen a situation where interest 

rates have been falling, and I'll just make one small point here 

about that. 

 

The reality of life is that this government claims that we've got 

billions of dollars worth of debt.  Interest rates have dropped 

from 10 or 11 per cent down to between 5 and 6 per cent.  Any 

way you look at it, whichever figures you use, you've got about 

a 5 per cent, at least, drop.  If you've got a 5 per cent drop in 

interest rates on $14 billion worth of debt, that's 700 millions of 

dollars that will be saved this year on interest alone in this 

province as compared to what it appeared it would be last 

January and February when this government should have been 

drawing up its budget.  So the budgetary figures should include 

enough monies made available to pay off interest bills more 

than $700 million higher than what in fact it will cost them in 

the end. 

 

So 23 million out of there shouldn't have hurt the government 

very much, to put fuel into the engine that sparks the entire 

economy of this province.  And that engine of course, in 

metaphorical terms, is the engine of agriculture and the engine 

of farming and getting cash flow that would work through the 

entire system and through all the tax bases of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I'll quote again: 

 

 . . . the (NDP) government seems prepared to use every 

weapon in its armory to force its agenda through the 

assembly. 

 

The Leader-Post, July 31, 1992. 

 

 Provincial government officials confirm that farmers who 

planted fall crops last year are getting a raw deal under the 

revised GRIP. 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

The Star-Phoenix, April 18, 1992. 

 

And I'll quote one more out of this sequence: 

 

 "A significant number of lenders are refusing to accept the 

revised GRIP as collateral for farm operating loans this year," 

says Swift Current lawyer Neil Gibbings.  "They are most 

certainly not accepting it," says Gibbings whose law firm 

deals with a large number of farm clients.  The general 

coverage is down substantially and it's unpredictable. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, April 18, 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the case for the need continued to build and 

the case for the government refusing to help people in our big 

industry was obvious. 

 

I will quote again: 

 

 The 1991 version of the GRIP would have given solid, 

bottom-line protection to farmers and that's what attracted 

them last year. 

 

 But the Saskatchewan 1992 version ended that backing . . . 

 

 "It rewards you when you have a crop, but it doesn't protect 

you when you don't have a crop." 

 

Bernard Kirwan, president of SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), Leader-Post, July 29, 

1992. 

 

That said it all as far as the farmers were concerned, Mr. 

Speaker.  You're guaranteed to get money if you got a crop, 

and you're guaranteed not to have money if you don't have a 

crop.  What kind of an insurance program was it anyway? 

 

I want to quote one more: 

 

 The NDP has got to give in.  That is the government's only 

viable option to save face. 

 

The Leader-Post, June 26, 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll repeat that quote: 

 

 The NDP has got to give in.  That is the government's only 

viable option to save face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that says it all.  And nobody could say it any 

better than the last two quotes that I read into this Assembly 

and into the record.  And if nobody else could say it any better, 

why would I stand here and say it any more. 

 

So I thank you for your time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to first of all 

say that our speakers this morning have dealt with GRIP from 

two aspects, one dealing with the area of the changes and the 

implications that are made in relation to that -- the implications 

to the farmers, the implications to 

rural Saskatchewan.  The member from Maple Creek has 

outlined how the media have moved through the process in 

establishing the basis for the observations that they make, and 

in light of that, the observations that many of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan are also seeing in what's going on. 

 

I want to take it one step further today and say that at the 

beginning of this session, the Lieutenant Governor rose in her 

place in this Assembly and from your chair, Mr. Speaker, said 

to all of us, as there was a demonstration going on outside: 

 

 A community that has lost faith in (its) elected 

representatives will not flourish.  People want my 

government to be open, honest and fully accountable. 

 

That was the statement made by Her Honour on behalf of the 

executive branch of government.  The executive branch of 

government is outlining its process of how it's going to involve 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  They want the 

government to be open, honest, and fully accountable. 

 

The second point that was made: 

 

 A community without compassion will not know true 

progress.  People want my government to be fair and 

compassionate in all its actions. 

 

That's point number two.  Point number three: 

 

 A community divided will not succeed.  People want my 

government to rekindle the Saskatchewan spirit of 

community and co-operation. 

 

Three points, Mr. Speaker, that clearly are in conflict with the 

legislation that we have before this Assembly today -- clearly 

in conflict with every detail of that function.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan I don't believe ever in 

our history witnessed a Bill that deals with the rights of 

individuals to this extent. 

 

There are a number of areas that I want to point out, and I will 

get to them and I will point out where there's no openness, no 

honesty, and no accountability. I will show that they're not fair, 

they're not compassionate, they don't have a spirit of 

community and co-operation.  And I'll demonstrate that as I go 

through the things that I have to talk about. 

 

And that's why we think that we should defer this decision until 

the court has made their decision.  And we will rest our whole 

focus on that decision, and that's what we want to do. 

 

This began, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 on the basis that farmers said, 

we need to have a time line where we can say to ourselves and 

prepare and plan for the future of our year to manage the things 

that we're going to be doing. We need a time line and the 

government has to fit into that time line.  Because we're 

making management decisions based on programs and based 

on all of the factors that play into the normal pattern of 

farming. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

And so in that process the farmers asked us to put into place a 

deadline when changes would not be able to be made after that.  

We put into a deadline of March 15 of the year under review.  

And any decisions made after that would not be a part of the 

program.  We made that as a part of the commitment in the 

contract to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the validity of the argument of the contract was 

made when the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 

decided to take the province to court on that basis.  And the 

validity of the argument is the very fact that the Minister of 

Agriculture asked the deputy minister to place as evidence 

before the court, a document, a sworn affidavit that says: 

 

 I am aware and do verily believe having been advised by the 

Honourable Mr. Wiens that in addition, he intends to 

introduce legislative amendments in the current Session of 

the Legislature.  These amendments will include a provision 

in which notice of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have 

been given to producers by March 15, 1992 as required in 

their individual contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a direct admission of not only the date, 

but a lack of involvement to the point to provide to the court 

this information that dealt with this item.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

where we're at today.  That's why we're asking for a deferral on 

the basis of where we're going. 

 

The contract said March 15.  The deputy minister of 

Agriculture under the direction of the minister said that we will 

provide a piece of legislation and amendments to this 

Assembly that will say that the date never occurred, and that 

prior to that date we will deem to have sent out letters that said 

we didn't have to send out letters, or that the information 

provided prior to March 15 was adequate.  That's what the 

affidavit says.  And this is an affidavit provided by the Minister 

of Agriculture through his deputy minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that fully open, honest, and accountable?  Is 

that fair?  Does that show compassion?  Does that show a spirit 

of community and co-operation?  I say no, Mr. Speaker, it does 

not. 

 

At the time when that affidavit was provided, the court in 

Melville made some decisions.  The court in Melville said: 

 

 What is clear from the affidavit of Kramer is that notice was 

not given to the farmers on or before March 15, 1992 as 

required by their individual contracts of revenue insurance 

under the GRIP program.  Further, the federal-provincial 

agreement has not been amended to provide for the changes 

to the '92 GRIP program as proposed by the government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That is a fact as a presentation by the deputy minister of 

Agriculture in the court in Melville at the first hearings that 

they had, the hearings to establish whether the farmers had a 

case -- whether the farmers had a case to take it to court.  That 

was what was established, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The second point I want to make in the statement made by the 

court was this: 

 

 As it stands today there are only proposals as to the terms of 

the '92 GRIP program.  According to the affidavit filed by 

Kramer, both the legislative amendments and amendments to 

the federal-provincial agreement are required to implement 

the '92 proposed changes.  These proposals may not come 

into effect. 

 

 The plaintiffs argue that they should not be required to make 

decisions reflecting their individual farming operation and 

their participation in the GRIP program for the next two to 

five years until they know the actual terms of '92 GRIP 

program. 

 

 While there may have been public statements that there will 

be now a group risk coverage rather than an individual risk 

coverage for farmers, in the written information filed before 

me, little explanation is offered as to the effect of this change.  

This makes it extremely difficult for farmers to make 

reasonable decisions with respect to whether to opt out of the 

GRIP program before May 15, '92. 

 

 Further it was acknowledged in the argument that by the very 

terms of the '92 proposed changes it is impossible to calculate 

the return to the farmers until the end of the crop year. 

 

This is the Justice of the court making this decision and these 

are the statements of fact as she outlined them to the court. 

 

Further to that, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

 If participation in the program is terminated, the producer 

would not be eligible to re-enter the program until two full 

years have elapsed from the day such termination becomes 

effective.  Following re-entry, the producer shall be 

responsible for the full amount of the premiums due each 

year, but shall be eligible for only 50 per cent of any benefits 

in the first year of re-entry and 75 per cent of the benefits the 

second year of re-entry. 

 

(1045) 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, from the above, it would appear that 

if the Government of Saskatchewan is successful in having the 

federal-provincial agreement amended to make the changes in 

'92 GRIP as set out in the aforementioned literature, then the 

effect on farmers will be for a two-year period rather than a 

five-year period as shown in the '91 contract of the revenue 

insurance. 

 

This clearly shows the difficult current situation for the farmers 

because they do not know with any certainty the terms of the 

GRIP program for '92, i.e., will the '91 contract terms prevail or 

will the necessary steps be taken 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

to revise the '92 GRIP? 

 

That was the point that the justice was making in outlining why 

the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan had a legitimate 

case, a prima facie case to be heard in a court in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say: 

 

 The question of irreparable harm must not be interpreted too 

narrowly in the instant case.  This is not a situation of private 

rights as between two equal contracting parties, but rather 

involves contracts affecting nearly 50,000 farmers in this 

province and the Crown as represented by its agent, 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  Individuals must be given the 

opportunity to challenge the government conduct which they 

believe is unlawful, and a right to interim relief so that their 

rights are not abolished prior to a decision on the merits. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, are the statements made by the justice in the 

case when the farmers made the case. 

 

The point I want to point out, the point I want to make, Mr. 

Speaker, the government said they were going to be open, they 

said they were going to be honest, they said they were going to 

be fully accountable.  They said they would be fair, 

compassionate, have a spirit of community and co-operation.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, as we go through this item by item we're 

going to see evidence that it didn't do that at all. 

 

The justice continues: 

 

 Surely the proper legal foundation for such changes should 

have been undertaken, i.e., amend the federal-provincial 

agreement, pass the necessary legislation to effect the 

changes in the 1992 GRIP program.  If the Crown and agents 

of the Crown undertake costly system changes before 

effecting the necessary legal changes, (Mr. Minister) they 

cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown or its agents 

has voluntarily incurred. 

 

That is a very significant statement, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister.  It is significant because she said: 

 

 If the Crown and agents of the Crown undertake costly 

system changes before effecting necessary legal changes, 

they cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct . . . 

 

You, sir, have taken those rights away in this Bill 87.  You 

have voided the contract.  You have voided all of the items that 

occurred, the dates that they occurred on.  And you say, I will 

put into regulations saying this is what I expect it to be.  You 

have, sir, contravened the very fundamental rights of 

individuals in the province of Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

And I'll repeat this again: 

They cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown or its agents 

has voluntarily incurred. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you'd wanted to make the changes, you should 

have made them prior -- prior, Mr. Minister, to dealing with 

March 15. 

 

And what is your observation about that to various people?  

Well we'll get around it somehow.  We'll get around it 

somehow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, that is what I point out to this 

Assembly and the members of this Assembly and ask the 

question, how open is that? How honest is that? How fully 

accountable, fair, compassionate?  It doesn't represent any of 

that. 

 

And the last item I want to raise is this.  The justice in the court 

said this: 

 

 The plaintiffs have established a prima facie case and have 

satisfied me they will suffer irreparable harm if a limited 

order request is not made, and that the balance of 

convenience is in the plaintiff's favour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, she decided, on the basis of 

information provided to her, number one, you cannot defeat 

individual rights by changing rules, by deeming.  You cannot 

do that.  You didn't comply with the basis of the contract, and 

therefore, sir, your actions are illegal. 

 

So then we come to the next stage in this process, Mr. Speaker.  

The next stage in the process is a debate on various aspects of 

incidents that have occurred in this Legislative Assembly.  And 

I want to talk about that a little bit. 

 

We talk about how this process has evolved -- the bell-ringing, 

the closure on the Rules Committee recommendations.  All of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to quote observations made from the member for 

Moose Jaw Wakamow -- very clearly an impassioned speech 

on the day it was delivered.  Mr. Speaker, the impassioned 

speech talked about democracy and using closure to bring to an 

end the very fundamental options that we have to debate and to 

provide argument in the cases that we're talking about, and 

Bills and motions before this Assembly.  The very essence of 

democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow had this to say: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, democracy can withstand every attack except 

neglect, except a government that will so neglect the 

traditions of democracy.  Mr. Speaker, they do this.  Why?  

(And they're talking about closure.)  They do it for short-term 

political gain.  For their short-term political gain, they are 

willing to neglect a century -- almost a century -- of 

democratic tradition in this legislature. 

 

That was August 7, 1989. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow went on to say: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, democratic tradition, the traditions of this 

House, the traditions of this parliament seem to mean nothing 

to the members opposite, seem to mean nothing at all to them 

if those traditions happened to get in the way of their political 

agenda.  Those traditions can be cast aside if, in fact, they 

would stand in the way of what this government wants to do 

in Saskatchewan.  I tell you, Mr. Speaker, democracy can 

withstand every attack except this kind of neglect. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and he puts it very, very well, 

and that's why I want to lay it before this Assembly: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that on this side of the 

House, democratic traditions do matter, the traditions of this 

place do count.  Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not once in 

all the years of CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) or New Democratic Party administration in this 

province, not once did we seek to stifle the free speech of this 

legislature; not once did we seek to limit debate in this 

House.  Not during the heated debates of the late 1940s, not 

during the medicare crisis, not during the time when the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was being formed, not 

once did we seek to limit the rights of the opposition to speak 

in this legislature. 

 

In the last three weeks, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's five times -- 

five times.  Here's a member who voted for this over and over 

and over again over the past month. And he said, in 1989 he 

said this is what he thinks of the rules, and in 1992 this is what 

he does.  Five times he has stood in his place and said yes, 

stifle democracy.  He said no in 1989. In 1992 he says ah, but. 

 

Is that open, honest, and fully accountable?  Is it fair and 

compassionate?  That's the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that's the question we have to ask. And that's what we're 

asking. 

 

 Well, Mr. Speaker, if I were a back-bencher (and this is the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow in 1989) . . . Mr. 

Speaker, if I were a back-bencher on that side of the House, if 

I were a back-bencher over there I would be absolutely 

ashamed to be voting for this motion.  I would be absolutely 

ashamed to be counted in with the first government in 

Saskatchewan history to limit free speech in this House.  I'd 

be absolutely ashamed to stand up with that front bench and 

do as they beckoned me to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he's done it five times -- five times.  Not 

once, not twice -- five. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this motion is proof positive of the arrogance of 

this government, proof positive that theirs is the attitude: if 

we want it, who is there to stop us?  Well, Mr. Speaker, let 

me pause here and say, they will be stopped; they will be 

stopped. 

 Now this motion may pass.  I expect that enough of the 

back-benchers will fall in line some time today, this motion 

will pass, and free speech and debate in this House will be 

stifled.  Their potash privatization legislation (will go ahead) 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, it did.  Closure twice; in the last month, five 

times.  Fairness, openness, accountability -- all of those things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to point out another thing that the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow said: 

 

 . . . they may be able to stifle speech, free speech in this 

legislature.  They may be able to silence this opposition.  

They may be able to deny members of this House the right to 

speak, but they will not silence the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, they will not silence the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  They will not. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, one only needs to look just beyond the borders 

of our own nation to see how precious and how fragile indeed 

is parliamentary democracy.  One needs only to recall the 

sacrifice of my father's generation on the battlefields in 

Europe to realize how precious is the rights of free speech 

and the right of parliamentary democracy and the right of a 

legislature.  We need only to recall and to look beyond our 

borders to know just how fragile this parliamentary 

democracy of ours can be if treated with neglect or treated 

with indifference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's absolutely accurate.  Absolutely accurate.  

And what have we got here today?  Closure on a discussion 

that contravenes the legal rights of individuals to be heard in a 

court of law.  It says, voiding the information, extinguish the 

action, all of that, Mr. Speaker, flaunts the law, flaunts the law 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow goes on 

to say: 

 

 . . . I stand to oppose this action to limit debate in the 

Saskatchewan legislature.  I stand to oppose the silencing of 

an opposition.  And I stand to oppose this motion, not simply 

because it is the means by which this government wishes to 

privatize the potash . . . I stand to oppose this motion because 

it limits the freedom of speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member, that member said, the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

 I'll put my name on record against this limiting of free speech 

in the Saskatchewan legislature.  And when that day comes 

and I no longer have a right to sit in this legislature and to 

speak here, when that day comes, I will at least not go away 

with the shame of knowing that I was a part of a group of 

men and women who sought to limit those rights in this 

House. 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

Five times, ladies and gentlemen of this Assembly, five times 

in the last month that member has had to stand in his place and 

say, I'm going to contradict which I said in 1989.  That, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is why we are at the place where we are 

today. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are some other items that I 

want to raise.  And they deal with a proposal presented to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  And the member from Maple Creek 

has discussed this morning about what some of these members 

had to say about how the Minister of Agriculture dictated to 

them what the program component was going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what is evidenced by other documents that 

we have.  The member of the committee from the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), Mr. 

Sinclair Harrison from Moosomin, had this to say in a letter 

that he provided to all of the reeves and councillors and 

administrators, it's re: SARM involvement update on GRIP. 

 

Point no. 3 in that letter says: After the committee report had 

been drafted, the SARM voiced five major concerns.  Five 

major concerns with the recommendations of the report.  And 

by written letter as well as a meeting with the minister 

February 13, '92, at that point the five concerns that SARM had 

were added to the GRIP review committee report. 

 

They had five concerns, Mr. Speaker, five of them.  They said, 

Mr. Minister, these are five -- this was on February 13, a whole 

month before the information should have been provided in a 

detailed program revision to the farmers of the province. 

 

(1100) 

 

At that point the five concerns SARM had were added to the 

GRIP review committee report.  These concerns were: time 

limitations, one; bankability; federal and provincial agreement; 

lack of a broad-based producer input; and significant changes, 

change violates the contract.  That, Mr. Speaker, were . . . those 

were the five items that SARM put before the minister on 

February 13, a full month before he was required to make a 

decision. 

 

And you know, the line that says it all in this:  The report was 

then signed.  It was then signed by the SARM as a participant 

and submitted to this minister -- not a supporter, a participant, 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Not a supporter of the 

program, because they had outlined five of the major concerns 

that the farmers across the province had been talking about, 

five of the major concerns that they said are a part of the 

problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those five . . . We have tried to tell the 

minister from this side of the House, those five are as real 

today as they were on February 13, and the report was signed 

by the SARM as a participant and submitted to the minister. 

 

So that, Mr. Minister, is why some of the committee members 

finally asked the minister: what are you going to do with the 

15th date?  What are you going to do with the March 15 date?  

And then, Mr. Speaker, the minister said: "We can get around it 

somehow."  And that's a quote from Leader-Post, June 17, 

1992.  The Minister of Agriculture said: "We can get around it 

somehow." -- referring to changes after the date of the 15th.  

We saw that in the court, the presentation made to the court. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government had to do that for a 

number of reasons.  And I want to outline a few of those here 

this morning.  The government made those decisions to change 

the legislation in Bill No. 87 in this Assembly because, number 

one, they were afraid to go to trial.  They were afraid to go to 

the court room to testify on the basis that they did not . . . they 

knew they were at fault for this.  They knew it.  Because they 

very emphatically stated it in a document they submitted to the 

court itself.  They were afraid to go to trial. 

 

Second point, Mr. Speaker, is they were afraid to go to trial to 

face a jury.  They were afraid to go to trial to face a group of 

peers that said, you're right or wrong.  Whether the jury 

would've been 6 or 12, they were afraid to face that jury. 

 

The third reason, I believe, that they were afraid to go to court 

is that they would've had to testify under oath that they 

understood and knew that the time line was there. 

 

The member from Maple Creek showed how members of the 

committee that was established and reported to the minister, 

how they had told the minister that March 15 is the deadline; 

you can't avoid it.  And he said, I'll get around it somehow. 

 

Well here we have Bill 87 somehow getting around it; 

somehow getting around it by putting a thumb down on all of 

the actions, voiding all of the dates, the actions, the plans, all of 

that.  All of the regulations, all of the functions of the contract 

are voided.  And then I, as a minister, will determine what it's 

going to be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, under oath that minister would've had to 

testify.  Under oath, Mr. Speaker, the minister would've had to 

testify; under oath the members of the committee would've had 

to testify to the very fact that the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose would've said in a court: I said I'll get around 

it somehow. 

 

Another reason why they don't want to go to court is they don't 

want the people who they fired out of Crop Insurance, who 

know what was going on, people out of the Department of 

Agriculture who have been relieved of their responsibilities, 

they didn't want those people testifying to the very fact, their 

essence of the fact that they did not meet the requirements of 

the dates of March 15. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also don't want to deal with it on the basis 

that they have not set up a GRIP review committee to hear 

about forfeiture of rights of the province of Saskatchewan.  It's 

outlined in 18.1 of the agreement, the federal-provincial 

agreement that says that this minister is supposed to put into 

place a committee that deals with the forfeiture of rights of the 

individual farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It would have dealt with the March 15 deadline.  The 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

minister hasn't done that.  He hasn't done that.  He has a review 

committee to change the program, but he has not got a 

committee to hear the rights and concerns of the individual 

farmers so that they know that their rights are being dealt with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're afraid to go to court because they did not 

have signed agreements from the other provinces nor the 

federal government in relation to the agreement with the 

federal government.  Because they'd have to testify to that.  

They didn't want to show that the provinces are required to 

inform producers of all terms and conditions of the agreement 

with the federal government.  They didn't want to do that.  

Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because they didn't want to have this 

Minister of Agriculture or any of the other people who were 

involved in the program, on the stand to defend it. 

 

There are some very significant items that I want to point out in 

the Bill that I think, as I conclude my remarks, I will make.  

There are some very significant things, and I find this very 

disturbing. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, that this 

Bill should be given an opportunity to go to the lawmakers of 

the province of Saskatchewan and to the country of Canada to 

have a reference.  I believe that.  Any time that you infringe on 

a right of an individual, he should have access to the court. 

 

This Legislative Assembly, through the Minister of Justice and 

the Premier, is setting up a constitutional committee, a 

constitutional committee that is going to go around the 

province and talk about the new constitution.  And that's going 

to cost $200,000, as the budget has pointed out.  That 

$200,000, Mr. Speaker, is going to ask the people of the 

province, how do you like your constitution?  How do you 

want it built?  Very important question. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, the matter 

before this Assembly today is of as vital importance as that 

constitution question is, because it deals with the basis of 

taking away constitutional rights.  It takes away my right 

before my peers in a democracy to be able to say, I did or I did 

not comply with the actions that I am accused of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill takes away those rights.  Takes away 

those very fundamental rights and I think that the individuals in 

this Assembly should reference this to the Appeal court and 

ultimately to the Supreme Court for a ruling on this.  I believe 

that it could be done.  It could be done with some haste.  That's 

why we have a delay as suggested in our amendment. 

 

This Bill takes away the opportunity for a cause of action 

against . . . a cause of action and it describes it here: 

 

 . . . means any claim, cause of action, suit, debt, account, 

demand, claim for damage, loss, cost, expense or interest, of 

any nature, whether arising in or imposed by law, equity, 

statute or otherwise and includes any judgement or order of a 

court. 

 

Above the law, Mr. Speaker, above the law.  I will not allow an 

opportunity to be presented in a court of law to 

deal with this kind of a function.  And he says it right there: I 

won't allow it. 

 

But that's not even as bad as it gets.  The Minister of 

Agriculture is going to determine within himself what 

happened from January 1, 1991 until today.  And he's going to 

set this down, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, in 

very precise terms, what happened from January 1, 1991 till 

now. 

 

I have a question.  Is he going to place before this Assembly 

those regulations to show what happened?  I want to know how 

he's going to define those terms and conditions and regulations, 

because he's going to void all of what really happened and then 

tell everybody in the province of Saskatchewan what he thinks 

happened. 

 

That's what's going to be there.  And that's why it's wrong.  

You have no right to change facts of history as a presentation 

before a court of law. 

 

The third point I want to make is that you extinguish all of the 

rights as outlined in the page that I gave . . . or in the contract 

that I provided to the member's attention earlier.  And the 

member from Kindersley pointed it out, section 49: 

 

 Any changes in the contract shall be mailed to the insured not 

later than March 15 . . . 

 

That's voided.  Under this Bill it never happened.  This contract 

was never a part of the process. 

 

Now is this a contract or isn't it a contract?  This, I personally 

picked out of the rural service centre in Swift Current.  It is 

made available to the producers.  Lots of them got it in their 

mail; most of them got it one way or another, and now know all 

about it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, you're voiding -- all of that 

information, saying it never happened.  Farmers didn't come 

and ask me for the March 15 date.  It never happened.  So I 

guess I can exclude that. 

 

The fourth item that is of serious implication here, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown or a Crown agent based on any 

cause of action arising from, resulting from or incidental to: 

(this '91 GRIP) 

 

No right or cause of action.  You can't take this to court.  Every 

action, every cause of action against the Crown or a Crown 

agent arising from, resulting from, or incidental to anything 

mentioned, those rights are extinguished.  Right in the Bill, the 

rights are extinguished.  That is the reason why we have a 

problem with this.  That's why it should have a reference to the 

Court of Appeal and to the Supreme Court.  You're taking 

away individual rights, individual freedoms. 

 

 In any action or proceeding against the Crown or Crown 

agent, a court shall not consider any principle of law or 

inequity that would require adequate, reasonable or any 

notice with respect to amendments or changes . . . 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

All of the opportunities for any farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan is wiped away to have any involvement in court.  

It's all gone. 

 

Now the Lieutenant Governor made the commitment of the 

executive branch of government: people want my government 

to be open, honest, and fully accountable.  Well put your 

money on the line, Mr. Minister.  Put it on the line and say, I 

will be prepared to give this a reference to the court. 

 

Your Premier has said the court will decide; you have said the 

courts will decide.  Then why, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

are you so hidebound to make it absolutely not available in a 

court?  If you're prepared to do that -- and you said that, Mr. 

Minister, and the Premier said it -- but you don't live up to it.  

What is that? 

 

One of the articles in the paper said it's hypocritical.  It's 

hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, that that would be done.  That's not 

all it says.  It goes on to say: Any person whose revenue 

insurance contract is not terminated on or before May 15 and 

who on or before July 20 terminates . . . Now that's interesting.  

Mr. Speaker, we've got two interesting dates there.  This Bill 

was put on the order paper some time in June.  And here, Mr. 

Speaker, after a decision was made by . . . The minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance made the statement in this 

House that on July 20 is the last day you can get out of this. 

 

He made that decision after the Bill was intended to be 

introduced in June.  He made that decision after that.  So who 

made the changes?  Did the minister of Crop Insurance make 

the changes after the Bill was intended to be introduced in the 

first place?  That's the question I'm going to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture.  When did you decide to put July 20 in there?  

Was it after the Bill was supposed to be submitted in the first 

place?  I don't know what the implications of that are, but I'm 

sure going to ask the questions. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the reasons why we have a problem 

with this.  The minister said, we'll get around it somehow.  

Well he's been getting around it and getting around it, and he's 

been dragging himself into deeper and deeper mud all the time.  

When he pulls one foot out of the swamp, Mr. Speaker, the 

other one just goes deeper. 

 

Now when you've got all of this said and done, this is all 

retroactive to January 1, 1991.  And all of it, Mr. Speaker, is 

voided.  He will make regulations determining what's going to 

be paid.  That minister is going to make a decision on how 

much we're going to make in January on our 1991 contract.  On 

our 1991 contract, this minister will determine that no, you 

don't get paid X amount of dollars as your contract said; I will 

decide what it will be. 

 

Have you ever thought of that minister saying it's going to be 

nothing?  Is that, Mr. Speaker, what this minister is going to do 

in regulations?  He in this Bill has the power to do that.  He has 

the power to do it because he voided all of the items in the 

contract and said, I will determine what's in that contract. 

My question is going to be, how much are you going to prepare 

to pay on the basis of the '91 contract to the farmers in January 

when they're due their final payment?  Are you going to say no, 

can't afford to do it, not going to do it.  Is that what he's going 

to do?  Well he has the right to do it.  And I don't even, as a 

producer with a contract, have the right to take him to court if 

he says, I'm not going to pay you.  I don't have that right.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is what we're talking about.  This whole thing is a 

way to get, I'll get around it somehow.  That's the process that 

we're going to be taking this thing into. 

 

This Bill doesn't say it once.  It doesn't say it twice.  It says it 

four, five, and six times.  We'll get around it somehow.  It's 

glaring all over -- I'll get around it somehow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does that represent open, honest, and fully 

accountable kind of a government?  We'll get around it 

somehow, skirt the issue, void the contracts, and extinguish 

rights.  That's how we'll get around it.  Fully open, honest and 

accountable, fair, compassionate.  That's compassion all right.  

A spirit of community and co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my view that this minister is seriously out of 

order.  And it's been my view that there is only two ways that 

he could have done it.  Mr. Speaker, he chose the wrong one.  

He should have acknowledged his error.  He should have 

acknowledged what he did wrong, and we would have had a 

whole different ball game in this place, Mr. Speaker.  We 

probably would have been out at home already in this case.  

And there are two options that he could have had, and I'm 

submitting to this Assembly that he chose the wrong one. 

 

He decided he was going to change his road program from 

pavement to gravel.  He decided he was going to change the 

program . . . or the executive branch decided on changing the 

pension plan, made a decision to change that, has made a 

number of other changes that have cost the taxpayers money.  

And, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of a right of an individual, he is 

not going to make any changes to this.  And that's where the 

problem is. 

 

And as I submit to the Assembly here today, I do not believe 

it's honest, I do not believe it's open, I do not believe it's 

accountable, I do not believe it's fair or compassionate in any 

way, shape, or form.  And thereby, Mr. Speaker, I rest my case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 11:20 a.m. until 11:29 a.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

Britton  

-- 7 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

Nays 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon McPherson 

Atkinson Stanger 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Hagel Jess 

Bradley  

-- 29 

 

The division bells rang from 11:32 a.m. until 11:54 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Roy 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon Stanger 

MacKinnon Keeping 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Hagel Jess 

Bradley  

-- 29 

Nays 

Neudorf Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

Britton  

-- 7 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 

 


