




















































Hansard: June 08, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 967 

 June 8, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I was watching, Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, the minister was quoting from a paper earlier when 

we convened.  I wonder if she can table that document 

concerning the Oxbow School Division please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, since I read the paper 

in its entirety and it will appear in Hansard tomorrow, I don't 

see the necessity for tabling it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister has 

tabled all of the other documents that we have requested from 

her, and I request that she table that one also please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to undertake to 

the member opposite since we had some extensive discussions 

on the paper that we were reading from and we made some 

notes on it, and I'd like to undertake to give him a clean copy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, that would be fine.  Mr. 

Chairman, was the minister going to provide that copy now or 

later? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- We would undertake to provide it 

later, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate it if I 

could have it though as quickly as possible.  I was wondering if 

the minister would also provide the same document for the 

Arcola School Division that she had been quoting from prior to 

our discussions on the Oxbow one. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will make that 

undertaking. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, another school division, Humboldt Rural No. 47, had 

a decrease on your list here of 238 students and yet we see a 

decrease of just over $100,000.  Can you explain that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer with respect 

to the member's question on Humboldt Rural would be the 

same as for the others, the other divisions, that the funding 

formula is extremely complicated and takes into account a 

great many factors besides the enrolment or enrolment change, 

including the equalization factor based on the assessment and 

the average weighted provincial average assessment, the 

transportation factor, and all of the other factors in the formula 

that were mentioned previously. 

So the information that's provided on the summary sheet, as 

we've explained previously, which notes the enrolment change, 

is not the only factor that relates to the change between the 

numbers provided for 1992 budget as compared to 1991. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I find it very 

strange that in one case we have a school division that dropped 

one student, according to your enrolment, and you went on to 

explain about the tuitions coming in and out. 

 

In Oxbow we have an increase of 30 and in Humboldt we have 

a decrease in student population of 238 students, and yet in 

proportion there's not that much change in the foundation 

grants to each of those school boards.  The Oxbow one, in fact, 

has a larger decrease in their foundation grant, with a 

30-student increase, compared to Humboldt that had a 238 drop 

and had less decrease in their foundation grant.  And I just don't 

understand why that should be happening. 

 

Perhaps you can explain the priorities that you have done in 

your department.  We're having one student decrease for 

$90,000 approximately; 238 student decrease for $100,000 in 

their foundation grants.  I just don't understand where you're 

getting your numbers from and how you're calculating your 

formulas. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I regret that the 

member opposite doesn't understand the formula system, but as 

we stated earlier, all of the school divisions . . . each individual 

school division has a complete explanation and understanding 

of the very complex factors that have been used in arriving at 

the funding that they received.  Those school divisions all 

understand that. 

 

We've attempted to explain how we did change the small 

school, the sparsity and the transportation factors, to try and 

make sure that we achieved our objective and the objective of 

the education system of providing for equality of opportunity 

for students no matter where they are, with particular attention 

to those rural school units that have had changes in population 

and other factors that affect them. 

 

We've done our best to explain the complex formula.  The 

school divisions do understand it.  I'm aware that the member 

opposite did circulate a letter to all the school divisions in the 

province asking for that information.  I'm not aware, of course, 

what kind of responses were received.  But we would certainly 

be glad to discuss or answer any questions that school divisions 

have.  But we have had none, so we assume that those people 

that are affected have a complete understanding of how the 

formula works. 

 

The one thing I can assure the member opposite is that the 

formula is applied in an even-handed way across the province 

so that every school division receives equal treatment under the 

formula. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may not 

have received any letter from the school board saying they 

don't like the way the formula is in place, but I am 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

sure you have probably received some for the amount of 

money that they are receiving.  In fact, I will read a letter to 

you which was addressed to you so you will be aware of it.  

This is from Jim Wilm, chairman of one of the school boards 

up in P.A. (Prince Albert), a local board at Wesmor School. 

 

 Please find attached a letter that our Local Board of Trustees 

sent to the Chairman, Prince Albert Rural School Division 

#56 Division Board re the above topic. (It's the proposed 

closure of the Wesmor school). 

 

 The proposed closure of Wesmor Junior High is devastating.  

(Those are his words, not mine, his words -- devastating.)  

This school allows our children from rural schools to adjust 

to coming from a small rural school into a larger rural school 

within the city of Prince Albert.  Thus preparing them for 

entry into a large high school. 

 

The second part of his letter, I will quote from him: 

 

 We recognize that costs have to be reduced in our school 

system, but not at the expense of education.  We could accept 

low enrolments or a condemned school, but we cannot accept 

that this is due to dollars only. 

 

This was a letter sent to you, Madam Minister.  How do you 

respond to that?  It's your priorities, your decisions to close 

these schools.  Okay, I shouldn't say your decision to close the 

schools.  It is your decision not to give the school boards 

enough money to operate these schools.  It should be the 

priority of everyone in this province, your government, the 

people at large, and this opposition, that the students in this 

province receive the best possible education they can receive. 

 

The members opposite, while they were in opposition, hollered 

and screamed continuously that the government of the day was 

underfunding education when they were receiving increases -- 

3, 4 and 5 per cent increases a year; over 70 per cent increase in 

the 10 years that this administration was in power.  And yet 

your first year you come in and give them a 2 per cent cut and a 

2 per cent cut next year. 

 

How do you justify that after going around the province in the 

last 10 years and saying that education was totally 

underfunded, that you would do more and better, Madam 

Minister, when you've just given them a 2 per cent cut this year 

and a 2 per cent cut for next year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member opposite, I would remind him that the closure of 

schools or the configuration of the school system within a 

division is the responsibility of the division board. 

 

I would appreciate if the member opposite would table the 

letter that he did read from.  And I notice that the letter made 

reference to the fact that the decisions being made by the local 

board as outlined in his letter were not as a result of dollars 

alone.  That was the words that was quoted from the letter. 

I would also like to point out that in the 1992-93 school year it 

is projected that only . . . in the whole province only seven 

schools will close, whereas in the last year of the 

administration of the members opposite, 20 schools closed; the 

year before, 18; the year before, 13; the year before, 20.  So we 

have less schools projected to be closed in this fiscal year than 

have closed on an annual basis for the last five years. 

 

I would also like to say to the member opposite that we have 

done, as I pointed out earlier, our very best within the funding 

formulas to recognize the value of small schools, schools with 

isolated locations.  And we also have some initiatives in the 

distance education with SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 

Network Corporation), the correspondence unit of the 

Department of Education, SaskTel, and the audio-visual 

departments of the universities and SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology), working 

together in a project to try and consolidate their efforts so that 

we can provide a better range of programming at lower cost to 

help the rural school system in providing a wide range of 

curriculum and learning opportunities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that 

it's required of opposition to table any documents that they may 

have before them in the House. That is the necessity for 

ministers, mind you.  But since this letter is addressed to Ms. 

Teichrob, I'm more than willing to give her a copy of it.  But I 

assure you -- or I would hope -- that she has a copy of it and 

would have read this letter when it arrived in her office.  It was 

sent on June 2, but I have no problem giving her a copy of it at 

all.  And I'll quote again, Madam Minister, from what the letter 

said: 

 

 We recognize that costs have to be reduced in our school 

system, but not at the expense of education.  We could accept 

low enrolments or a condemned school . . . 

 

It didn't say that that's what was happening.  They said they 

could have accepted that. 

 

 . . . but we cannot accept that this is due to dollars only. 

 

And that's what they're implying in this letter, that the only 

reason their school is being eliminated is because the 

Department of Education did not provide enough money to 

keep that school in operation.  If the minister wants a copy still, 

she can have one. 

 

Madam Minister, the Estevan Rural School Division had over a 

25 per cent decrease in its funding, yet it had a 44 per cent -- 

excuse me, not 44 per cent -- a 44 student increase in its 

enrolment.  What particulars were involved in that cut?  Why 

was that one cut so heavily? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer with respect 

to the Estevan School Division would be exactly the same as 

for the others, although the effect of the formula is not the same 

in all cases.  It depends upon all factors: transportation, 

sparsity, local assessment, the whole range of factors that are 

used, of which the school enrolment is only one. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

The one thing I repeat that the member opposite can be assured 

of is that the formula is applied in a completely even-handed 

way throughout the province in each and every school division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, will you give us 

a breakdown of all of the changes involved in the Estevan 

School Division that caused their funding grants to drop so 

dramatically? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as in the previous two 

school divisions that we did go over in detail, we can undertake 

to provide the member opposite with that analysis at a later 

date. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Will the minister give an undertaking to 

provide that information for every school division throughout 

the whole system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in the interests of 

saving the forests of Saskatchewan, we were hoping to provide 

explanations of how the funding formula works that would 

satisfy the member opposite, but we certainly can undertake to 

provide that information because it is a matter of public record. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We too 

have a concern over the forests of Saskatchewan but there's 

also jobs involved here which are very important. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You could use recycled paper. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And as my colleague here says, you can 

use recycled paper to give us the information on. 

 

Madam Minister, one of the new announcements that you made 

when you first came into office concerned French education 

and French governance.  You put out a news release on 

February 17 of '92, indicating that you were going to go ahead 

with funding to a third school board in this province 

exclusively for francophone students.  You also indicated in 

that news release that this school board would not create any 

additional funding costs to the province because of an 

agreement with the federal government. 

 

Is the minister aware that this so-called federal agreement is 

signed in 1988, runs out at the end of 1998, and that it calls for 

decreases in federal funding levels in each of the last five years 

of that agreement?  That there is currently no federal agreement 

in place to replace the existing agreement and that the federal 

government has made no indication that it is willing to fund 

this third school system beyond 1998, and that historically the 

federal government has not carried on such funding 

arrangements indefinitely? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the member opposite regarding the matter of 

governance for francophone schools, as the member opposite 

knows, there was a decision of the Saskatchewan Court of 

Appeal some time ago, in 1988 as a matter of fact, which states 

that it is a constitutional right of section 23, francophone 

parents, to have provided for 

their children this kind of education.  However, we did say that 

we were willing to obey the law.  Our government is willing to 

obey the law, which your administration was not. 

 

The funding agreement that you refer to is a subsidiary 

agreement to a federal-provincial languages protocol.  It did 

provide for the incremental funding and to incremental costs of 

introducing a francophone education into the system.  The 

previous administration did not keep their commitment to 

institute francophone governance in 1988, so the first four 

years of federal funding were forfeited by this province. 

 

We have been negotiating with the federal government, and 

negotiations are still ongoing, to provide for an amendment to 

that subsidiary agreement.  And we have made it perfectly clear 

to the federal government and to anyone else who is interested 

in this issue that we will not proceed unless . . . at this time, 

unless we receive a commitment or a new agreement from the 

federal government which will pick up all the incremental costs 

for providing this form of government so that now or in the 

future there will not ever be a provincial incremental cost over 

and above the regular pupil cost in the public system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe that the 

previous government was willing to go ahead with the school 

governance if money had been available. 

 

I don't believe that what you have just said is any change to 

that; that you're saying, yes, we'll go ahead, but only if the 

federal government will pick up all the costs over and above 

what the normal cost would have been in any other school 

system. 

 

Has the minister made any studies or done any consultation 

with any of those groups concerning the funding for the 

francophone school boards? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had very 

extensive consultations with the parties concerned with this 

issue.  We have initiated by ministerial order earlier this year 

the implementation task force which is working out the details. 

 

But I would like to correct and make an observation on one 

comment by the member opposite, that their government . . . 

their administration was willing to go ahead with this if the 

money had been there.  The money was there; the money was 

there in '88, in '89, in '90, and '91, and it could have been done 

with no incremental cost to the province. 

 

It was misrepresented, and we intend, providing that the 

funding that your administration forfeited can be put back in 

place so that we can demonstrate that there is no incremental 

provincial cost in this initiative, that we will proceed with it. 

 

But it wasn't lack of money that prevented your administration 

from proceeding with it -- it was lack of courage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you talk about the 

previous government not going ahead when the money was in 

place.  There were costs involved to the province which the 

province didn't feel at that time it could carry. 

 

You're talking about giving up federal monies, and yet your 

colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, is giving up $200 

million this year in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program.  Madam Minister, there's where the money 

is, not the little bit that was in the federal budget for 

francophone schools in this province. 

 

Madam Minister, can you table any of the reports or studies 

that you did your consultations with any of the groups 

concerning the francophone school question? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The consultations consisted of 

responding to requests to reinstitute the implementation task 

force.  Those requests might have been made in verbal form 

from the people who support this initiative, being the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association, the league of administrators of education 

in Saskatchewan.  Those are the members, in addition with 

representatives from the francophone community, who make 

up the implementation task force. 

 

Now their deliberations are done in committee and we haven't 

received their report as of this time; they're still working out 

details.  So their deliberations are not a public process, but their 

recommendations, when they come forward, certainly will be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you stated that those 

you consulted with might have supported the third school 

board, francophone.  How many of them did and how many of 

them didn't, of those people you consulted with? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose it 

would be possible to table again the Gallant report, which was 

the consensus report of those education partners that I referred 

to that are members of the implementation task force.  Beyond 

that, I can't imagine what further information the member 

opposite might desire. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, how many 

letters of support have you received from the province 

concerning a third school board, and how many letters in 

opposition to that have you received? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have received some 

representations from both points of view, for or against.  But I 

think that is not the issue.  The issue is that the Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal has said that in order to fulfil the constitutional 

rights of section 23 parents, that the province must provide for 

education for their children.  We intend to obey the law. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you talk about section 

23 parents, and by that I'm assuming you mean francophone 

parents.  I have a stack of letters in my office, approximately 3 

inches high, from exactly those parents from the Gravelbourg 

area who do not support the idea of 

a third school board. 

 

Madam Minister, have you received that kind of representation 

from Gravelbourg? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I know that there are 

differing points of view on this issue.  The fact is that there is 

also a law and we intend, I repeat, to obey the law. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- It sounds to me, Madam Minister, like 

you intend to go ahead with this project irregardless of its need, 

its cost, or its desirability in view of the parents in question. 

 

Madam Minister, how much is it going to cost once the federal 

government will no longer fund the third school board?  Have 

you done any studies to judge the capital costs and the 

operating costs of that school system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that this an 

example of the gross misunderstanding of this issue.  

Francophone school governance would be available only to 

those parents who qualify under section 23 of the charter, of 

which in Saskatchewan there are a very limited number.  I 

think that we have to keep a reasonable perspective on this and 

realize that a lot of those people who write in opposition or 

who speak in opposition to this initiative do not understand that 

it is limited to a small number. 

 

And in terms of the cost, the amount . . . and the members 

opposite should know this because the subsidiary agreement 

providing federal funding for the francophone governance 

initiative wasn't negotiated and provided for during their 

administration.  There will be incremental costs, costs above 

the recognized costs of educating a student in Saskatchewan, in 

the implementation phase only, perhaps in teacher training, 

perhaps in the acquisition of textbooks and resource materials, 

but once those are all in place within the six- or ten-year time 

frame, the implementation costs will be over and the cost then 

of educating a francophone student will be the same as the cost 

of educating any other student.  So it's the incremental cost 

only that will be provided by the federal government and that is 

why when the agreement expires there will not be an additional 

financial contribution from the province required at any time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I have to 

disagree with you.  I'm from a community and a constituency 

that has a large number of French . . . Je suis . . . je peux parler 

un tout petit peu de français aussi.  (Translation:  I am . . . I can 

speak a very little French, too.)  And those people are not in 

favour 100 per cent -- some are, some are not -- of the third 

school board.  And they have some very serious concerns as to 

what this third school board means to them. 

 

You say there will be no additional costs.  I would suggest, 

Madam Minister, that when it comes time to regulate the tax 

base there will be additional cost because that tax base will not 

be lumped together as the current school divisions are.  It will 

be scattered out -- a piece here, a piece there, and a piece some 

place else -- and it's going to take additional costs to regulate 

that and to administer it. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

The transportation costs, Madam Minister.  Not all of these 

students come from one central location and go to school there.  

Currently in my constituency there are students travelling 20, 

30, 40 miles, past a half a dozen schools, to get to the French 

school and it is the only school in this province that goes from 

K to 12 in French totally.  Those people have some concerns, 

Madam Minister, about this French school governance issue. 

 

They want to know what effect it's going to have on their 

school if you implement this program.  Their school is in place 

and what effect is a third school board going to have on it? 

 

(1920) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, I'd like to 

say that we will have the same number of pupils that we have 

now, the same number of schools that we have now.  The 

francophone governance model does not contemplate -- in fact 

prohibits -- the francophone governing body from having any 

direct access to the tax base.  And this is why it's so important 

that we understand that it is a consensus model, and in the 

limited areas where the numbers of francophone students, 

where they exist, there will be an arrangement made between 

the school division and the francophone governing body, based 

upon the consensus, based upon the report of the 

implementation task force and the Gallant report. 

 

There is one area that you refer to where it's somewhat unique, 

where the people eligible for this type of governance don't 

agree 100 per cent with each other.  On the other hand, there 

are some areas of the province that have a much more 

concentrated francophone population than the area you 

mention, and they are anxiously awaiting the establishment of 

this form of governance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, they may have a 

larger concentration than what they have in my communities, 

but yet my communities do have a K to 12 French school 

within an existing school division. 

 

You say that the tax base will not be involved.  How will this 

third school board be funded?  Will it be funded 100 per cent 

with federal money, will it be funded 100 per cent with 

provincial money, or a combination of that?  Or will there be 

any reliance on the tax base of the area as the local school 

boards do currently? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in order that I might 

understand the question better and make sure that we're talking 

about the same thing, because I would like to explain that there 

are two separate, completely separate types of francophone . . . 

Francophone governance contemplates the education of those 

people whose mother tongue is French who wish to maintain 

their language.  And it's a totally different approach from the 

French immersion program; it's not the same. 

 

But would it be fair to ask the member opposite if it's the 

Bellegarde school that's he's referring to?  That's helpful if it is.  

He indicates yes.  That those . . . there will not be an additional 

cost to that system because those students are already in the 

system, they're already in a school, and the 

only thing that would be changed is the governance.  And there 

wouldn't be, beyond the incremental cost which would be 

picked up by the federal government, an additional cost.  There 

wouldn't be any change in the configuration of students and 

there is no -- if people understand how the French governance 

component would work -- there is no reason for those people to 

be apprehensive about its effect. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, maybe there's no 

reason for them to be, but they are.  I talked to the chairman of 

the local school board last week.  I talked to that school's 

representative on the Arcola school board.  And they're both 

very apprehensive about what this would mean to their school.  

They feel that they have the proper system in place currently, 

that it's working properly, that their students are going up, and 

they're very afraid that if this third school board comes into 

place, they're in a position where they will lose their funding.  

And they like being where they're at, they like being in the 

Arcola school division, and they do not want to leave. 

 

They want . . . they are concerned, Madam Minister, as to 

whether or not -- if the third school board comes into place -- 

whether or not they will lose their funding, their federal 

funding that they do currently receive now, under the third 

school board system. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there is no 

reason for the people in that area to be apprehensive about what 

francophone governance would . . . what affect it would have 

on them.  For one thing if this component were to come into 

place, it is entirely voluntary and if the people in that school 

district, the parents in that district, are satisfied with the 

arrangement they have now then nothing would have to change 

for them.  And I think, with respect, if the member opposite 

would examine and make sure that he completely understands 

how the francophone governance structure would work that it 

would be more productive for him to meet with his constituents 

and explain it to them to allay their fears. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would believe 

that since you're the Minister of Education and you're the one 

who is working towards the implementation of the French 

governance, that it should be your position and your job to 

make that representation to the people of Saskatchewan to 

explain it.  I'm certainly more than prepared to meet with my 

communities, and I already have, to discuss this very issue. 

 

The one issue that they are very concerned about at Bellegarde 

has absolutely nothing to do with French governance.  What it 

has to do with is the cuts that you have made to the Department 

of Education and whether or not they can get an auditorium for 

their school, and that's their prime concern.  They believe that 

they have a very good school in place providing the type of 

education they want and the type of education that the people 

in their communities want. 

 

Madam Minister, how many students across the province 

would you estimate would be involved in a French governance 

school board? 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member opposite's last direct question, the maximum number 

that could be identified that would be eligible to be served 

under this type of governance in the province would be 

approximately 800 students in probably not more -- more than 

likely less -- than a dozen locations.  And that would be the 

complete extent of it unless we have a mass immigration of 

section 23 eligible people. 

 

I guess I would just like to add that the task force, in response 

to the question, that the task force, the implementation task 

force, will be meeting with representatives from the schools 

that could have a potential to be affected.  And they certainly 

have met on many occasions with the ACFC (Association 

Culturelle Franco-Canadienne) and the French parents' 

association.  There will be ample consultation prior to any 

implementation. 

 

And with respect to their fears about funding and the effect it 

has on their school, I can only say that the effects of the 

devastating budget and the devastating financial situation that 

we inherited from the previous administration cuts across all 

lines and everyone in the province is affected regardless of 

nationality. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the previous 

administration made those kind of judgements and choices 

also.  They decided that they would continue to fund Education 

rather than cutting it as you have done. 

 

You mentioned that the schools such as the Bellegarde school 

could voluntarily join the French governance school board or it 

could voluntarily stay out.  What about all the other 

francophone communities around this province.  Would they 

also be given that choice, to voluntarily join or stay out? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the model that is 

contemplated would make access to this system entirely 

voluntary by all schools and all parents. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What manner would you choose to test 

that, whether or not the people in that area wish to go into it?  

Will the parents be allowed to vote, or will it simply be a 

matter of choice of the school board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the elements of 

the proposal that's now being worked on by the implementation 

task force contemplate that there would be a general council, a 

provincial board, which would establish criteria against which 

requests from local school divisions or local schools would be 

tested.  And that would include a financial viability test and the 

warranting of the numbers, the numbers of students. 

 

So it will vary on a local basis.  How they canvas the 

population; whether they have a vote.  It will be up to the 

eligible parents in the local district that is applying, how to 

prove their case to the provincial council. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what is the 

requirements to be an eligible parent? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, eligibility is spelled out 

in section 23 of the Charter of Rights. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you mind 

explaining what that is so it's on the record in this House? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question.  In brief, a summary of the requirements to be eligible 

under section 23 of the Charter of Rights would be that the 

language first spoken and still understood is French; that 

children are being currently educated in French, or have 

brothers and sisters who are being educated in that system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well using that as a guideline, Madam 

Minister, I think there is quite a large number of people who 

are currently taking French, including in my school of 

Bellegarde, that would not meet those requirements.  I myself 

attended a ACFC school for 12 years, excuse me 10 years, 2 

years I didn't.  And yet my mother tongue did not start out as 

being French but I still understand it and I still speak it.  I took 

it all the way through school. 

 

And there's quite a number of other people in our communities 

who may have learned French at home but have not used it 

since then and may no longer understand it, but who now wish 

their children to go and learn French.  And you would be 

excluding them from that system to which they are paying their 

taxes, either federal or provincial, and you never did answer 

how that funding was going to happen, whether it was all going 

to be federal money or provincial money, or whether there was 

going to be any local tax money involved in it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the section 23, where 

it's language first spoken and still understood, as where French 

is the mother tongue, and that is the limiting factor. 

 

And it's very important to note the distinction that I outlined 

earlier, where the francophone governance model contemplates 

the maintenance of that mother tongue.  The immersion system, 

the French immersion system where people such as you 

referred to as yourself whose language first spoken was not 

French, but the immersion system is for anglophones who wish 

to acquire a knowledge of French, and they're two different 

instructional practices. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I have a large 

number of people in my constituency who would dearly love to 

change your mind on the fact that their mother tongue is not 

French.  Even though they may never have spoken it, they still 

consider themselves to be French. 

 

Madam Minister, would you please answer the question for the 

school boards as you see them: will they be totally funded by 

federal government?  Will there be any provincial money 

involved or will there be any local tax money involved? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have difficulty 

accepting that one's mother tongue can be a language that they 

have never, ever spoken.  Extensive surveys have 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

demonstrated that a maximum number of approximately 800 

students in the province in a dozen or less locations would 

come close to qualifying for this form of governance. 

 

As to the costs, I've said and I repeat that we are negotiating 

with the federal government.  We need to have a commitment 

that all the incremental costs of introducing this type of 

legislation will be provided for through federal funding.  And 

once the system is in place, I repeat again, there will be no 

provincial cost over and above what any other student in this 

province receives. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Therefore, Madam Minister, the 

province will be paying a portion of the costs.  There must be 

some money coming from the local tax base then also, is there? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I must correct this.  I 

did say that there will be no access to the local tax base and 

there will not be additional costs.  The federal funding is to 

pick up the incremental costs of the introduction, the new 

textbooks, perhaps a few new teachers in the francophone 

model of instructional practice which as I point out is different 

from the immersion.  The federal funding is to pick up all of 

those incremental costs. 

 

And beyond the implementation phase, those students are 

residents of Saskatchewan now; we're educating them now, 

wherever they are, in whatever kind of school they are.  They're 

now eligible for the basic per-pupil grant and they're counted in 

the foundation grant that every student is entitled to. 

 

Beyond that, the federal government will be picking up the 

incremental costs, so I repeat:  there is no additional provincial 

money involved in this initiative, not 1 cent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Not 1 cent of additional provincial 

money.  Who is going to pay for the additional transportation 

costs to transport those students in from their homes and 

communities over a greater distance than what they would 

normally be transported if they were going into the regular 

system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, all of the 

students that are contemplated to be eligible for that system are 

in the system now, are being transported now.  There will be no 

-- I repeat -- no additional provincial costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Those students who are in the system 

now, indeed their costs are being covered for transportation by 

the federal government and you have said that that is an 

incremental cost which will be for the start-up phase of the 

program.  What about the long term.  What about 15 years 

from now, Madam Minister?  Who's going to be picking up 

those transportation costs at that point? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the transportation of 

school children in Saskatchewan, whatever their origin or 

destination within the province, is now a provincial cost, 

totally.  So that will not change. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I find that very surprising, 

Madam Minister, when there are people in my own community 

who are transporting children from Alida to the Bellegarde 

school and who are receiving a federal subsidy to do so.  Are 

you saying that you are now going to pick up that cost or are 

you not going to pick up that cost? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to our knowledge there 

is no federal subsidy for transportation and the transportation of 

school students, K to 12, in Saskatchewan is the responsibility 

of . . . is a provincial responsibility, or the responsibility of the 

local school division. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm sure the people of my 

community are going to find that very interesting. 

 

Madam Minister, including all of the federal government costs, 

what is your estimate of the capital costs involved in the French 

school governance and the operating costs for the school 

system, all the costs -- federal, provincial, and local? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

should know if he could find out from his colleagues because 

they were in the administration when the original subsidiary 

agreement to the federal-provincial languages protocol was 

negotiated, the one that was put in place at the time that their 

administration committed to proceed with this initiative. 

 

There's different components in the subsidiary agreement for 

the incremental costs.  Part of it is capital cost, which would 

relate to the renovation, for instance, of existing class-rooms.  

There is not a lot of capital cost contemplated in this initiative.  

The total amount that would be required for implementation in 

the six-year period that's remaining in the subsidiary agreement 

is estimated to be approximately $27 million.  And that is the 

amount that we are requesting from the federal government and 

that is the amount that we expect them to commit. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And what is your estimate of the annual 

operating cost for that whole system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the operating cost is 

included in that figure and would not deviate, in the long run, 

from the operating cost of any school.  In the short run, as we 

said, there might be some teacher training, some extra resource 

materials.  That is what is provided for in the additional federal 

funding. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I still 

believe that there are going to be some additional costs 

associated with the French governance school system over and 

above the costs that you have today. 

 

But we will go on to another issue now.  Madam Minister, how 

many people have been fired since November 1 in your 

department, and how many of those positions have been 

refilled? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there have been since 

November 1 only one separation that could be described as 

involuntary; there have been 41 permanent, and six and a half 

non-permanent person years.  This has 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

impacted . . . these were all budget driven and have impacted 

13 permanent employees, 10 of whom were out of scope and 3 

in scope; 4 non-permanent employees, and 2 people have had 

their hours reduced.  There was also a reduction of 10 

secondments to the department, mostly in the curriculum area 

where, as we said earlier, the level of activity has been reduced. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

apologize to the Minister and her staff that I was not quite 

aware that my colleague was going to divert momentarily to 

the more traditional questions. 

 

I just wanted to pick up on the topic that you were on previous 

to his question.  Madam Minister, you were talking about the 

third governance, the French school board and so on, and I 

would like to ask you one question:  when are you as a 

government planning to implement a third school board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier to your 

colleague, the implementation task force is working on the 

model, making some refinements.  We are negotiating with the 

federal government in terms of the funding agreement, which 

must be fully in place before we proceed.  So I simply suggest 

that the legislative schedule would be impacted by both of 

those processes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, my understanding is, during 

the discussion and so on that you've been having with my 

colleague, is that you are anticipating that when the 

implementation will occur, it will be done as you've just said -- 

after the agreement is in place.  And what is the time frame that 

you're anticipating that to be?  In other words, are we looking 

at a smoke-screen here that's going to take five or six years to 

accomplish, or it something that we could be looking forward 

to in the fall of 1992? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as we understand, there 

has been an indication that the federal House may rise 

approximately June 22.  We hope to have a confirmation from 

the federal cabinet of an approved amendment to the subsidiary 

funding agreement prior to that time.  That would still, if the 

implementation task force is able to complete their work and if 

we're able to accommodate the legislation in this session, it 

would make it possible for some -- at least some -- schools to 

be organized to elect their local boards and so forth by the 

opening of the 1992 school season.  However, if that time limit 

passes, for instance if we don't receive that confirmation during 

this sitting of the federal House, we would not be able to put 

the governance structures and the required legislation in place 

in time for 1992. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you were talking about the 

agreement that you're rehashing with the feds.  Could you give 

the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan an idea of what 

you're talking about, this agreement that you're referring to. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, I think that 

the member opposite should be intimately aware of the details 

of this agreement, since it would have been negotiated in 1988 

by the administration that he 

was a part of.  What we refer to is a subsidiary agreement to the 

federal-provincial languages protocol that provides for some 

funding for the French immersion program.  The subsidiary 

agreement was an agreement that was side by side with the 

main protocol, which is the reason it has the same expiry dates.  

Those agreements would have both been renegotiated when the 

previous administration would have been in charge of the 

negotiations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, as you are no doubt aware, 

the agreement that we're talking about is an agreement that 

from 1992 to 1993, each year thereafter for five years, you're 

going to have a 10 per cent reduction every year on the federal 

government's willingness to pay the cost of this implementation 

of this program. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, after 1998, what then?  There is no 

more agreement after 1998.  It was a five-year agreement that 

was reached.  Having said that, you talk about incremental 

costs and so on.  Who's going to pick up the tab for this third 

board after 1998, because there is no further agreement at that 

stage? 

 

What I'm anticipating, Madam Minister, that this is going to 

have a dramatic impact upon the taxpayer of Saskatchewan, 

because with the trend that the federal government is in, with 

off-loading and so on, what guarantees would you have, 

Madam Minister, that the federal government is actually going 

to continue to pick up their fair share of this particular cost? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm very glad to see 

that the members opposite share our concerns with the lack of 

responsibility that the federal government shows in a great . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh don't get into that now.  Let's stay 

with the issue. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- The member opposite is the one who 

raised it. 

 

Also you refer to a five-year agreement and I'm not . . . and I 

really do believe that from 1988 to 1998 is 10 years; it used to 

be. 

 

I think that the member opposite should be aware -- and it's 

unfortunate that there was only one representative in the House 

at the time the questioning started so we have to repeat all these 

answers over again -- but I think that you should be aware that 

the federal contribution is in three parts.  It is for the 

incremental costs in the implementation of this style of 

education that there will be . . . It is acknowledged, and that's 

why this subsidiary agreement is in place, it is acknowledged 

that there will be some start-up costs in terms of teaching, of 

training some teachers; of acquiring resource materials and 

textbooks; and some capital costs, mostly in the form of 

renovations to existing buildings.  Those are the costs that are 

identified that the federal government will pick up. 

 

At the time that the system is fully implemented and those 

small number of schools that are eligible to be established in 

the province are operational, then the per-pupil costs in that 

system will be the same as they are in any other part of the 

system.  So the need for supplementary funding 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

from the federal government, while always welcome, will not 

be necessary and there will be no provincial costs associated 

with this system.  And there will be no access to the property 

tax base by this form of governance. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So you're telling me, Madam Minister, that 

there will be no cost to the Saskatchewan provincial taxpayers.  

The provincial taxpayers also pay to the federal government as 

well.  These are my tax dollars just as well as if I'm paying 

them to the provincial government.  So let's make sure that we 

understand that, and keep that in mind while we're going 

through this. 

 

And talking about costs, Madam Minister, would you explain 

to me how you propose to implement this system?  Does this 

mean now that an entire school and its entire population is 

going to be deemed to have been put into a third governance?  

Or will there indeed be people brought from neighbouring 

schools, collected in the central system, which would of course 

mean an additional busing and transportation problem? 

 

The. Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

some guests tonight. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, in the Speaker's 

Gallery are several friends of the members of the Assembly.  

Chief Roland Crowe of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indians, Ray Ahenakew with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 

and Percy Derocher, who are here tonight to observe the 

workings of the committee of Education.  I'm sure all members 

will want to join with me in welcoming them here tonight and 

wish them an enjoyable stay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and on behalf of 

the opposition, I would also like to welcome the distinguished 

members here this evening.  I've had -- I know with Chief 

Roland Crowe -- many occasions to meet with him and we've 

had some interesting sessions together, no doubt.  So welcome 

here gentlemen. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I asked you a question prior 

to the introduction.  I would now wait for the answer. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce 

guests as well. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you.  I would also like to welcome 

especially the two members . . . or two individuals from my 

constituency, Mr. Ray Ahenakew and Mr. Percy Derocher, and 

also Chief Roland Crowe as well.  Welcome this evening . . . 

(inaudible) . . . If we get a chance to chat with you later.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question of the member opposite just prior to the break, we had 

answered these very same questions previously actually. 

 

With respect to transportation and the responsibility of the local 

taxpayer, this form of governance doesn't contemplate any 

access to the local tax base, which is why it's so important to 

note that this is a consensus model.  Because in the limited 

number of areas -- less than a dozen are contemplated 

throughout the province -- where this type of a school would be 

established or has the potential to be established, the funding 

would be worked out between the local elected francophone 

governance board and the existing local school board.  There 

would be no access to the local tax base. 

 

In terms of the transportation factor, let us not forget that all of 

these . . . any of these students that are potentially eligible for 

this style of education are already in our system.  They're 

already occupying class-rooms.  They're already being taught, 

and they are in many cases already being transported. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, could you indicate to the 

Assembly the 12 schools that you are referring to as being 

potential candidates for this new third school board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question:  I said maximum of potential, and some of the 

locations might not have been identified.  We're just looking at 

where there is population.  But it would be entirely on a 

voluntary basis. 

 

The ones that have expressed . . . the areas that have expressed 

the most interest and the ones that we would expect to receive 

applications for this style of education from would be 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, North Battleford, 

Gravelbourg, Belbutte, Vonda, and perhaps Bellegarde -- it 

would be one that would be eligible. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You didn't answer the other part of my 

question, Madam Minister, which was: is this going to then be 

one school that is already in existence with the population, for 

terms of reference let's say 250 kids, that those 250 kids then 

would become part of this program? 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it's possible, but 

because it is voluntary at the local level, it would . . . And I 

think it's premature until the task force reports, until the parents 

and students that would be eligible can see exactly the kind of 

framework that's recommended, so that they would be in a 

position to know whether they wish to participate.  Once that is 

all in place, then we'll have a better indication. 

 

We have an indication now identified for us by the 

francophone organizations -- how many, what the maximum 

potential number of students who would be eligible in the 

province are.  But whether they would all volunteer or want to 

be part of this system would be up to them, and they won't be 

in a position to make that determination until they know what 

all the rules are, when the implementation task force has 

completed their work and made their recommendations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In our hypothetical school of 250 kids from 

grades 1 to 12, Madam Minister, let's say there are 13 that don't 

want to; the other 237 say, we want to.  What happens to those 

13 kids? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, it's difficult to deal with hypothetical situations, but if 

there were an area where there were some people, students that 

didn't want to volunteer into the system, they would go to the 

regular existing school.  And part of the test as to . . . that the 

provincial governing body for this system would apply, would 

be the viability of the school system upon the approval of the 

application. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not sure I follow the last part of that 

question, but, Madam Minister, I'm assuming that this is the 

regular existing school that has now voted -- the parents, except 

13 kids -- that they're going to go to this third French 

governance type of school board.  What happens to these other 

kids now that are not going to it, whose parents don't want to 

be part of that system? And there's only one school in this 

small town.  Now what are you going to do with them?  Are 

you going to bus them?  Are you going to bus others in?  How 

do you propose to handle that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again we're 

dealing in hypotheticals and I'm not sure that the potential for 

the situation that the member opposite describes exists.  But if 

it did, there is very likely . . . and if it was that kind of 

community that was limited to that population, then it's highly 

likely that a number of those students are being bused now so 

that the transportation cost would not be an incremental 

increase; it would be there now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You keep talking about the fact that this is a 

hypothetical situation, but it's hypothetical until you start.  But 

what I'm asking you is, what is your plan?  How are you gong 

to be handling these kinds of situations?  Because surely, 

Madam Minister, you will admit that there's not that kind of 

homogeneity throughout Saskatchewan that you're going to get 

one particular community that's going to be entirely willing to 

go over to the French population. But there's only one school 

there.  Now what are you going to do with the others? Are you 

proposing to do busing back and forth, or how will you handle 

that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the reason 

why the work of the task force is so difficult and detailed, and 

it is the reason why it's so important that the members of the 

task force, being the major partners in education, the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation, LEADS (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), why all of 

these important stakeholders in the education community are 

involved in designing the model so that it will be flexible and it 

will be able to accommodate the kind of situations, if they 

arise, that the member opposite is describing.  How, I can't 

specifically answer the question on this hypothetical basis until 

we receive the report of the implementation task force; until 

their work is complete and they have determined, in their 

wisdom and with complete consensus and agreement by all the 

parties, how these cases will be handled as they arise. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'm still trying to get my 

head around the fact that you said a few moments ago that the 

implementation could start as soon as the fall of 1992.  And for 

someone who's planning to embark on a rather ambitious 

program, it seems to me that you're tremendously void of some 

pertinent answers here.  And that is a concern that I would 

have.  Because surely you would admit, Madam Minister, that 

once you do one school for one community in the province, 

you're committed to a course of action here that you're going to 

have to follow up all over. 

 

And that's why I'm kind of surprised that you haven't got some 

more firm answers for us here today, given the fact, by your 

own admission, that you're contemplating very well, very 

likely, that you will begin this program in the fall of '92, unless 

I misunderstood you.  But to me it seemed as if you said it 

could start as soon as 1992 in the fall. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the member opposite, previously when he asked 

about the expected time frame I said that subject to the work of 

the implementation task force being complete, subject to 

receiving written confirmation and a signed agreement from 

the federal government, that the fall of 1992 was the earliest 

that could possibly happen.  So the qualifier was that the work 

of the implementation task force and their recommendations 

would have to be complete in time for those details that the 

member opposite refers to, to be in place. 

 

I think that we have to remind ourselves that if applications 

were received from school divisions for the establishment of 

this type of governance prior to September, that they would 

likely be from schools that are fairly well established and 

operational now, and there wouldn't be incremental costs 

associated with those. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you enlighten the House and the people 

of Saskatchewan what your driving force is.  What is the 

motivation behind the course of action that you're 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

contemplating now in pushing the third governance. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite should be very well aware because the Court of 

Appeal decision in Saskatchewan, the Wimmer decision, was 

rendered during their administration, I believe in 1988.  And in 

response I would simply say that while their administration 

declined to obey the law, this government believes in obeying 

the law. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- At what cost, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we've addressed 

this in several different ways in responses prior.  We have said 

that the implementation of this model is subject to an 

agreement, with the subsidiary agreement, with the federal 

government which will provide for all of the incremental costs 

so that there will not be a provincial cost component in addition 

to what a regular student would receive. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's a bunch of nonsense, Madam Minister, 

and I think the people of Saskatchewan recognize that and 

realize that.  It's a smoke-screen.  There's going to be a lot of 

incidental costs.  And I know that you're not an educator and 

perhaps you don't understand what kind of cost this is going to 

have to the kids. 

 

How can you, for example, take some kids out of one 

class-room -- two here, three there?  What impact is that going 

to have on the teacher-pupil ratio for example?  What's going to 

happen to the quality of education in the class-room or in a 

school that has lost one teacher because they've lost kids that 

have gone to somewhere else?  What happens to the 

pupil-teacher ratio there?  What happens to the abilities of the 

teachers to deliver programs when the staff has been cut and 

there are no longer 12 teachers on staff to deliver the program, 

but now only 10? 

 

Madam Minister, I've taught in situations like that and I know 

the impact that that can have, not only on the morale of the 

teachers that are now teaching eight subjects instead of the five 

that they were before, picking up subjects that they don't have a 

specialty in.  It creates a lot of stress and a lot of strain.  And 

you're going to be busing people all over.  I suggest to you, and 

I think if you look at the situation, there's no other way in 

which this can happen, that that is exactly what's going to 

happen. 

 

So there are costs involved.  There are costs involved to the 

quality of education that the kids that remain behind.  There 

has to be.  That's part and parcel of the component of teacher 

training, of teacher ability to access relatively small classes.  

And if you're going to start cutting out the kids, you have small 

classes all right but you have them grouped together.  I suggest 

to you you're going to have schools where grade 6 and 7 and 8 

are together instead of separate grades.  There's a lot of cost 

involved.  And I'm not only talking about the monetary cost 

that's going to be involved here.  Have you considered those 

options and those implications? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite is drawing a pretty long bow here in 

looking for obstacles, the kind of obstacles that would have 

prevented them from obeying the law.  We have complete 

confidence in the excellent educators and qualified people who 

are members of the implementation task force, who are 

diligently working to work out exactly this kind of detail.  And 

we will certainly pay heed to their recommendations.  I 

certainly as a taxpayer am sensitive to the need to demonstrate 

to the people of this province that there will not be an 

additional tax burden; that the quality of education will be 

enhanced by this initiative. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I spent over two decades in 

the class-room, and I think you're the one that's drawing the 

long bow, if you're trying to pretend that this will not have an 

impact upon the quality of education.  Now, Madam Minister, 

would you tell the Assembly how many letters you have 

received in your office that oppose this initiative. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have not kept count 

of the numbers of letters of representations . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . no, I can count higher than you can.  But I 

have not either a number of the expressions of support that we 

have received, and they are legion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What is the location in the province where 

you would have received most of the letters urging you not to 

go ahead with it?  Is there a concentration of letters? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response, I would 

say that we certainly haven't done that kind of a survey.  But it 

was interesting that the letters, both pro and con, come from all 

parts of the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So you're saying that there's no one 

community that's more interested in this issue than any other 

community; they're all scattered across the province evenly.  

Because in my short tenure as Education critic I know that I 

have received -- and this is a ballpark figure, I could be out 10 

or 20 -- I must have received at least 150 ,if not more, letters 

that were addressed to you, Madam Minister, and I got a 

carbon copy as a critic. 

 

And they were all -- the ones that I'm talking about right now -- 

are all from the Gravelbourg area, concentrated in 

Gravelbourg.  And almost invariably, they all had 

French-sounding names.  I'm not a Frenchman but I think I can 

spot a French name pretty easily.  And they were all from 

people living in the area who said, leave us alone; we have 

immersion classes; we're doing very well, thank you; we don't 

want this place, or this thing being uprooted and changed.  

How did you respond to those, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

members question, our responses to all letters, either favouring 

or questioning the wisdom of this initiative, were replied to on 

the basis that we would and were re 

_implementing the task force, and that we would take careful 

note of their recommendations and the concerns that were 

expressed to us in their letters before making a decision on this 

issue. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Since, Madam Minister, you received the 

original of which I receive copies, I'm in the ballpark, 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

would you admit, when I say 150 letters coming from that one 

community.  And you can correct me if I'm wrong.  That's the 

impression that I had; it was a three-inch pile of letters. 

 

Madam Minister, what does that do to you?  What does that do 

to your line of reasoning when you say, we're going to 

implement this.  When from one of the most renowned French 

communities, one of the most renowned French communities in 

our province, we have 150 families saying, no, we don't need 

this; we don't want this.  Doesn't that tell you something?  How 

are you reacting to that kind of thing?  I'm surprised that you're 

just kind of ignoring that particular community and its wishes. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think it's very 

important that the member opposite should study the model 

that was previously recommended and be aware that the 

implementation of this model of governance and the 

participation of a community in it will be entirely voluntary. 

 

So if there is a community in Saskatchewan where there are 

enough section 23 parents, as defined in the charter, to 

constitute a viable unit under this system of governance and 

they don't wish to do so, then that is their option.  It is entirely 

voluntary. 

 

So if there is a community where there's a preponderance of 

feeling that they don't want to change the style now, that they 

have now, and they don't want to take part in the new 

governance if it's available, then that will be their choice.  

There certainly will be no pressure upon them. 

 

It's incumbent upon us in keeping with the Court of Appeal 

decision to provide the framework for the governance and 

beyond that the participation of any community will be entirely 

voluntary. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, to another topic.  I want to 

talk a little bit about a few of the schools that I have in my 

constituency.  And as you may be aware, although there is 

some concern, the French governance is not a major concern in 

terms of it being implemented in that area.  However, there are 

other concerns and I want to deal a little bit about the capital 

projects in my area.  When schools are decided, when it's 

decided for example that Martensville got a new school which 

just opened last year, I'd like you to go through the process that 

determines the priorization procedure that the Department of 

Education has in order to determine, yes this school is a 

priority, it's going to be in the "a" budget, it's going to be built 

this year, and no it's not, it's in the "b" and so on down the line.  

I'd like you to go through that process for me and don't . . . I 

know what it is but I'd like you to verbalize it for me from your 

impressions. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the Minister of Agriculture on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would like leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we're honoured by the 

presence of some friends and guests and public-minded citizens 

who are with us tonight.  Marj Skotheim is the chairman of the 

Ag Credit Corporation Board, and Muriel Conacher with her is 

a member of that board and Muriel's son Quinn Conacher, who 

is a student and presently working in the city of Regina for the 

summer, is with them.  Welcome to the legislature and hope 

you enjoy your stay in Regina on your business. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I'd like to introduce Mr. Brady 

Salloum who is the director of the operations of student aid 

within the Department of Education.  And I would like to say 

that within the last few days we have had students coming into 

my office thanking us for the turnaround time on student loan 

applications which has been reduced to mere days and I think 

the efforts of Brady and the people in the student aid 

department are worthy of note. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 D 

 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- In response to the question from the 

member opposite regarding the procedure for capital, I would 

like to comment.  I think it wouldn't be necessary or desirable 

for me to describe the convoluted process that has been used in 

the past, including the approval in principal of $51 million 

worth of projects just prior to the election for which not 1 cent 

was budgeted, Mr. Chairman. 

 

What we do have now is a proposal that is being circulated and 

discussed within the education community and the stakeholders 

who are interested in the allocation of education capital, which 

will create a funding model, if approved, that will be a great 

improvement, a vast improvement over the procedure that was 

previously used -- will completely depoliticize the process; and 

will do completely away with the different schedules and the 

process that the member opposite refers to that has been in 

place in the past; and, if approved, will rank projects as the 

applications come in with a single number system so they'll 

know whether they're number one or number ten on the list, 

and depending on the capital that is available, how soon they 

might be able to proceed. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, that will require a 

little beefing up on your part to explain to me exactly how you 

mean.  The way I read what you just said is that the people will 

be ranked according to the time, chronologically speaking, of 

their application, as opposed to someone else.  And then they 

would be ranked.  Or is there a different criteria of the ranking?  

And if there is, would you please expound on that a little bit. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, bearing in mind 

that at the moment this is only a proposal, it's been 

approximately a month now, I think, since we started the 

consultations with the people in the education community and 

who would be interested in the allocation of capital for 

education.  But there will be a different kind of criteria applied.  

And the date or chronology of the application will certainly not 

be the major criteria.  There will be such things as need, 

enrolment, for example. 

 

There will be, in this proposal -- and I stress it's strictly a 

proposal at this stage -- there would be points or warrants, if 

you like, that the application would be judged on, the need 

based on enrolment and perhaps overcrowding of an existing 

facility, something like that.  There would be extra points 

awarded for the joint use of a building or a multi-purpose 

facility, for example.  There would be points awarded for a 

relocatable type of construction, and so on.  There are a number 

of criteria.  I hesitate to spell them all out because as we're 

doing our consulting within the community that's interested in 

this, they may indeed have other ideas and they may add other 

criteria. 

 

It will also be in the proposal, judged in a regional context 

rather than within a school division, so that the facilities in a 

region and the rational use of capital throughout a region will 

be not only more possible but will receive more points and 

move up in priority, rather than having one school division 

making a decision in the absence of knowledge about what the 

neighbouring school division is doing just a few miles down 

the road.  We think it's important to do it in a regional context. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It sounds like greater centralization to me, 

Madam Minister, and I would have some concerns expressed 

with such type of a blanket statement as you're making now.  

I'm at least pleased to hear that ranking in terms of 

chronological application dates is not going to be a major 

factor, which obviously it should not. 

 

You made a startling statement, Madam Minister, that you are 

going to completely depoliticize the process.  Now according 

to that statement, what you are telling the House is that up until 

this point schools have been built on a political basis.  Is that 

what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only judge 

by events of the recent past.  But when I look at what we 

inherited being approval in principle or commitments, promises 

made, just prior to the election by the previous administration 

for almost $51 million worth of new school construction, I can 

only assume that there had to be some politics involved in this. 

 

And the ranking system that we are proposing would not allow 

for approval-in-principle announcements to be publicly made 

until the ranking had been done and until funding arrangements 

were complete.  We don't intend to spend money that we don't 

have. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Heaven forbid, Madam Minister, that you 

would ever play politics with anything.  Your party has never 

done anything like that. 

So having said that, Madam Minister, you have just outlined 

some of the variables and some of the options that would be 

considered in terms of ranking a capital project.  How does this 

differ from what you just told me from the existing system of 

ranking of priorities, where my information is that in order for 

a school or a school division to be eligible for a building 

project, it would be based first of all on need?  If there's no 

school and there are kids, you obviously need a school. 

 

A second criteria high on the list was safety factors.  If the 

building was dilapidated, if the building was creating some 

hazards or dangers for the staff and for the students, that an 

upgrade, renovation, or a new building would be in order.  So 

there were points allotted in that system as well. 

 

Now what you told me, overcrowding, extra points for 

multi-purpose; these were factors I believe that were always in 

place.  We've had over the last number of years a lighted school 

house program, which was an effort on the part of 

communities, spearheaded by the Department of Education, to 

utilize to the full extent public property such as schools; where 

people in the communities would be invited and in fact 

encouraged to use the school facilities for meeting places and 

so on, so that we could avoid having to build extra buildings to 

accommodate that kind of need. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm not quite sure what you're just saying 

now that this depoliticization has taken place.  What you're 

telling me now is that the Department of Education is not going 

to have any say as to what groups get or do not get, what 

communities get or do not get new schools -- that will be out of 

the hands of the Department of Education. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not saying that at 

all in response to the member opposite.  I am saying that 

Saskatchewan Education, the department, will always, by 

virtue of the large role that they play in providing funding for 

these facilities and the limitations of that funding, which the 

previous administration had little regard for, and by setting the 

criteria of course, we will always have control over the 

allocation of education capital. 

 

But I would also like to remind the member opposite that in 

their lighted school houses, some of the lights are already out.  

And we have got schools -- not even relocatable construction -- 

schools built of concrete and block that are less than five years 

old that are now closed because of low enrolment. 

 

Now I'd like to know, you know, what kind of projections were 

made in the allocation of that capital.  That's the kind of 

planning that we're not going to do. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, my constituency over the 

last four years, if I am correct, I could be a year out . . .  

Martensville, for example, has had two new schools built in 

that location.  Warman has had a new school being built.  

Hague has had major, major renovations.  So there has been a 

fair amount of construction in the Rosthern constituency as far 

as educational facilities are concerned. 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

And, Madam Minister, those schools are full.  As far as the 

Rosthern constituency is concerned, Madam Minister, I really 

don't know what you're talking about. 

 

Furthermore, when I take a look at a news release that you . . . 

on June 2, your news release: "Emergency repairs for 64 

schools announced," Madam Minister, you were just now 

condemning this previous government for making 

commitments that in your opinion were not necessary, that 

your opinion . . . in your opinion were just window-dressing for 

an election. 

 

When I take a look at the 64 schools, and I've gone down this 

list very, very carefully, and unless my eyes deceive me and 

they're growing dim as my age increases here, but I can't find 

one school -- and I have 10 communities in my constituency -- 

I can't find one school here, one community that is affected in 

the Rosthern constituency on this so-called . . . what do you 

call that here?  In emergency repairs and so on. 

 

One of the schools that we were committed to spend money on 

last year was Waldheim, and yet when I look, I can't find 

Waldheim on here.  And the reason Waldheim was included on 

it was because the board members in the Rosthern constituency 

-- made up of the 10 communities in my constituency -- 

decided Waldheim was indeed in desperate need for 

renovations and additions because of some of the problems that 

they were . . . health hazards, quite frankly, Madam Minister.  

Yet I don't see it on here.  For the sake of the people in 

Waldheim, could you explain to me why they have been 

omitted on this list . . . from this list. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I'm 

very glad that in the Rosthern constituency and the area north 

of Saskatoon that the population is growing and that there is a 

need for schools, which has been fulfilled, and there are many 

good schools that I am very familiar with in that area.  But 

since most of the schools have been replaced it seems as if 

there might not be an imminent need for repairs. 

 

However, the announcement that we made on June 2 is only a 

partial list or will likely be a partial list.   We did budget a total 

of $14 million this year for maintenance and repairs to the 

school system; 3 million of that being to the universities and 11 

million being available for the K to 12 system.  What we did 

was select from the applications that we had, the most 

emergent cases of occupational and safety health issues and we 

announced $8.8 million in total.  That included the local 

contribution.  So there is approximately . . . between 3 and $4 

million left of the provincial contribution to allocate before this 

fiscal year end. 

 

So as other projects emerge, we will be in a position to meet 

those from current approved funding.  There are projects 

included on the list -- well you've seen the list -- things like the 

situation in Eston, Assiniboia, and those emergency repairs.  

But we do have remaining a contingency to take care of 

situations which might arise in the balance of the fiscal year of 

which quite a fair amount is left.  So we felt it was sensible and 

reasonable to not allocate all the funds at this time in case 

situations 

occur that require immediate attention. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Was your decision to omit Waldheim from 

this list based on your new guidelines or on the old guidelines? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated there is 

still a balance left to be allocated and it's a possibility because 

Waldheim was identified earlier as a reasonable priority. 

 

But the things that we had to do were real emergencies where 

there were already citations by occupational health and safety, 

such as I mentioned the Eston situation, the Assiniboia 

situation, and the Pike Lake situation, where there were two 

very old buildings and they are being replaced.  They were 

ordered to be closed and there's a substantial population at the 

resort village of Pike Lake, so arrangements were made to 

move the relocatable school from Fulda, which closed 

voluntarily, to Pike Lake.  Otherwise those children would 

have had to be bused, primary children K to 4 would have had 

to be bused a fair distance to Delisle.  So those were the kind of 

emergency situations that have been addressed in this first cut. 

 

(2045) 

 

But as I say, there is a balance left and we'll be ranking these 

situations.  Occupational health and safety, the safety of the 

students and staff in the schools will be paramount.  And the 

other consideration will be whether substantial deterioration 

will occur if repairs are not made. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 

confirming the fact that the decision was made based on the old 

system, that highly politicized system that you were just talking 

about, that your new method is going to avoid.  So I would 

assume, Madam Minister, that that perhaps could have been 

part of the reasoning for your decision since you were using the 

old system of this politicized mechanism. 

 

And I certainly hope, Madam Minister, that I don't have to 

report back to Waldheim that they were victims of some of the 

ideas of this present government here. 

 

Madam Minister, I would like you to tell me now, when will I 

be able to bring back a response to Waldheim saying that, yes, 

their deplorable conditions in their school are going to be 

rectified, and yes indeed, you are going to live up to the 

commitment to allow for renovations and for the new addition 

that those people so desperately need. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we have tried with 

great care to go over the list of applications.  Where there is -- 

and I'm not aware at this moment whether that's the situation in 

Waldheim -- where there is a citation or an order to close from 

occupational health and safety, it has to take precedence over a 

situation where there is simply some discomfort and a wish of 

the local board.  We have to look after emergency situations 

first. 

 

As I say, there is a contingency left.  We want to make sure 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

that we don't spend the allocation before the year is out.  There 

may be other situations that we don't foresee and we want to be 

prepared for those.  So we will be reviewing the availability of 

funds and the applications and the situations that arise with 

school capital and maintenance, and we will do our best to be 

fair and even-handed no matter what system is applied.  We 

hope to . . . What we're talking about in the new system, which 

is still a proposal at this stage, is the allocation basically of new 

capital. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question to 

the minister will be with one specific school.  However, I 

would like her to . . . I listened with interest to your comments 

on the different criteria that would occur on having a capital 

plant either renovated or replaced.  What does a negative report 

from the Fire Commissioner usually do within the department?  

If the Fire Commissioner comes in and says that a building is 

basically unsafe for human habitation, what is the normal 

process? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, on the basis that the health and safety of the staff and 

students in our schools is of paramount importance to us, if we 

. . . Similarly to the health and safety inspections and reports, 

we would act on a report from the Fire Commissioner's office 

to try to rectify the situation and to make it safe as 

expeditiously as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you probably know 

the school that I'm referring to.  It's Mortlach.  I'm sure your 

officials told you about it.  That particular school has been 

trying for, I believe, it's about the last four and a half years to 

have the old 1911-12 wing replaced. 

 

There's no point in renovating it because it's a fire trap, and I 

think the Thunder Creek School Board went through the 

appropriate motions of attempting to make their arguments.  

They did have the Fire Commissioner's letter in order to have 

their structure rectified. 

 

I doubt if you've had the opportunity to be in there, but I have 

many times and I can tell you that since that initial report there 

has been nothing done.  The kindergarten class in that school is 

up on the third floor of a long, winding staircase.  That 

particular school has three heating plants in it, if you can 

believe it or not.  I found it utterly bizarre that you would have 

three separate heating systems in a building that you could fit 

into one wing of this legislature. 

 

And that is what the concern of the, I'm sure, Fire 

Commissioner was, and it's the concern of every parent that in 

an unforeseen situation there's no way to evacuate that place 

other than throw the kids out a third-floor window. 

 

And I know they were granted . . . or were led to believe last 

year that they were one of the very few, and I believe there was 

only two or three in the province, of capital projects of that 

nature that were on the drawing boards.  Now they've been told 

that they're on hold.  My information is of last week that 

they've been told that there is no hope. 

 

And I would just like to know from you tonight, a structure 

in that type of condition, that has had many independent 

verifications of the state that it's in, why they would suddenly 

be removed from the list?  They aren't on the press release.  I 

checked it out, and they're not there. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to 

the member from Thunder Creek, if the need is as urgent as he 

is describing, that under the new proposed system a school with 

needs of that nature would rise to the top through the 

measurement in those criteria very quickly.  If emergent repairs 

were required, there is nothing to preclude the local board from 

undertaking some remedial action on their own in the interim. 

 

But this year we will not be expending any new capital; that the 

maintenance and repairs is the only amount that we're able to 

allocate and because of the desperate financial situation that we 

were left in, we simply don't have the money. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think the 

considerations last year when this particular project was 

discussed were in the view of most people, at least within the 

Department of Education, just as desperate, as far as funding 

went, when they were facing a modest increase in budgets. 

 

This particular school went through all of the hoops that the 

department could put in place, and at the end of the day was 

one of a few, a very, very select few that had that need attached 

to it.  There was nothing there to repair.  They've had engineers 

in, they've had all sorts of people in looking at this thing.  It 

would be an absolute waste of the taxpayers' money to put a 

dime into that place. 

 

What needs to happen is the old wing has to go.  We have a 

disaster waiting to happen there.  It's gone through the hoops.  

It was judged as being that high on the priority list, and now I 

find that all of a sudden it's shuffled off to the side again.  And 

you're absolutely right, Madam Minister, it isn't on the repair 

list because I would be ashamed of the taxpayer putting any 

more money in a repair of something that can't be repaired.  

That wing has to come off of there. 

 

And at least find other accommodations for those students 

somewhere else in the vicinity if you can't fix the school.  

That's the situation they're in.  I am having phone call after 

phone call on a continuous basis from parents in that 

community who are afraid to send their children to that school 

because of the hazards. 

 

And I just invite the minister to go visit it, see for herself the 

situation they have before them there, and know that there has 

to be some mechanism for a decision that was already made to 

be carried on.  And I would hope, Madam Minister, that the 

fact that Mortlach is in my constituency has nothing to do with 

it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure 

the member from Thunder Creek that the location of the school 

in a constituency is not a consideration.  I've received many 

letters from the member's constituents in the Mortlach area 

with respect to their school.  And I repeat that if the need is as 

described, that when our new criteria or the new capital plan is 

in place, that it should 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

rise to the top fairly quickly. 

 

But this year . . . In fact it's possible -- and I don't know 

whether the school district has generated that kind of a request 

-- that it might be a consideration for, under the emergency 

funding, for a partial . . . For instance relocatables instead of 

taking on the whole project. 

 

We are not expending, as you can see in the budget, any new 

capital at all this year.  We're using this time to re-evaluate the 

way we allocate capital.  But the member opposite refers to the 

school situation there being a disaster waiting to happen.  And 

unfortunately the economy of this province brought on by the 

actions of his administration is a disaster that has already 

happened. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you and I can 

probably stand in this legislature and debate various economic 

initiatives of the past government or the one before that, and 

I'm sure we can all find fault with those initiatives.  But one 

thing is for sure: that when we're talking about our children and 

their education, the former government in that area maybe was 

a little too loose with the change. 

 

Now that's not what I used to hear from the members of the 

New Democratic Party but at least there were increases in 

education on an ongoing basis.  And I would like to think that I 

might go short somewhere else as a taxpayer to make sure that 

my kids got a good education and they weren't going to school 

in a school that might burn down around their ears.  Those are 

the kind of priorities that you sometimes have to put above the 

political rhetoric in this place or anywhere else, Madam 

Minister. 

 

I'm not going to belabour the point tonight, but when you're 

back again before us in Estimates I would like you to bring all 

of the analysis that your department has done -- the analysis 

that they, I'm sure, have been aware of, both by the Thunder 

Creek unit, the Fire Commissioner's office -- and bring it back 

to table in this legislature when you come back to Estimates at 

the next available opportunity.  Because I would like to be able 

to assure the people of Thunder Creek, and particularly 

Mortlach, that their interests aren't being subverted in some 

way when they were already at the threshold of having a new 

facility, or a partially new facility, built in their community.  

And I would ask, Madam Minister, that you have that 

undertaking to bring that information here. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in the interests of the 

honest and open government that we are committed to be, we 

have no hesitation in undertaking to table the relevant 

information that the member opposite requests. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

while we're talking about capital funding and capital 

construction, and certainly the fact that there are very few 

dollars . . . in fact most of the dollars possibly given to 

emergency aid. 

 

And I think members on this side of the House and people 

across Saskatchewan have for the last numbers of years this 

idea of capital and funding for capital in the province of 

Saskatchewan has been something that has raised a lot 

of concern in light of the fact that a number of schools in rural 

Saskatchewan are certainly facing situations where major 

renovations are taking place.  And I think some of my 

colleagues have mentioned the fact -- and I don't know; maybe 

you agree, Madam Minister -- that when we start looking at 

renovations, in some cases it might be a lot more efficient use 

of the taxpayers' dollars to look at new construction rather than 

renovation. 

 

And I note that through the school districts that I represent 

there has been substantial dollars in renovations.  Mind you, 

the structural . . . a number of schools that were structurally 

sound, although back in the early '60s and '70s there were a 

number of designs and schools, flat-roof schools that certainly 

created a problem, and over the period of the '80s substantial 

dollars were needed to address the fact that these flat-roof 

schools were creating a problem, were leaking, and we had to 

take a fair number of dollars and put them into redesigning or 

reroofing these schools. 

 

And I guess at the time it probably would have been more 

appropriate if officials that were designing the facilities would 

have taken a more serious look at the environmental conditions 

in our province.  I'm not sure where the flat-roof system came 

in, but we see it in a lot of our buildings and it creates a 

problem. 

 

In a situation that has arisen is the school in Kennedy, and the 

area I happen to live in, we have two small schools that have 

amalgamated to actually form one of the larger schools in the 

division as far as numerical numbers within the school, Madam 

Minister, and up . . . at least the last figures that we've got laid 

before us in the neighbourhood of 18 to 23 students in the 

kindergarten system right through till 1996. 

 

(2100) 

 

But, Madam Minister, it took a number of years for the people 

of these two communities to finally come together and realize 

that it would be more beneficial for the education of their 

students to combine the two schools into one and maintain the 

facilities.  Langbank actually did have adequate, more than 

adequate, facilities for the student population base at the time. 

 

However after the amalgamation we all of a sudden found the 

numbers on the lower levels increase quite dramatically in the 

K to 6 system and two years ago an add-on class-room was 

developed with the fact that down the road maybe the numbers 

wouldn't be there and an add-on class-room would be 

something that would be transportable to another location. 

 

The problem arises however with the Kennedy School with the 

grade 7 to 12 where we have an older facility that has . . . 

structurally is not that sound a building.  I guess it's still usable; 

but it has been creating problems.  They've been having 

problems with the sewer, and problems with -- I'm not exactly 

sure all the details behind it -- with regards to gassing problems 

within the school. 

 

And over the past number of years we've been working with 

the department and many officials have been out from the 

department to bring the concerns . . . or to listen 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

to the concerns of the school in Kennedy.  And I understand as 

of last year it had been gradually been moving up, but of course 

with the capital funding in other areas and certainly based on 

the emergency needs that were . . . and I would also probably 

differ with my colleague from Rosthern in suggesting maybe 

my school is in greater need than his is. 

 

But what I'm wondering, Madam Minister, is where the capital 

funding for a school like the high school in Kennedy would be 

sitting at the present time.  If the minister would have an 

answer for that question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to 

particular projects, there is a backlog in the current process of 

applications for allocation of capital, to the Department of 

Education, of some $350 million.  That's the backlog of current 

applications that we already have on file and that are being 

ranked, and will be re-looked at within the parameters of the 

new proposal when it's approved. 

 

So just exactly where Kennedy School is in the scheme of 

things, I wouldn't be able to tell you at this point.  But I think 

this is an example of where . . . And you did mention the value 

of relocatable construction, especially in rural Saskatchewan 

where the school populations are fluctuating, that in many 

cases it's a good solution.  And that's why in our proposal 

relocatable construction, which can be very attractive and 

versatile, is given extra points, if you like, in the ranking 

system. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, I 

understood you to mention that there's something like $350 

million in requests that basically are sitting with the department 

-- or certainly facilities, the structural facilities that possibly 

would be needed in the rural areas. 

 

You've also been talking, Madam Minister, about an overall 

plan, and I'm wondering if you have some thoughts in mind, or 

if the department has anything in mind, or what's the process 

the department and your government is taking right now 

regarding the ongoing capital costs.  Certainly we have the 

ongoing capital costs, but certainly structural costs that we will 

be possibly getting involved in. 

 

What is the government looking at down the road to address 

like the Waldheims, and the Kennedys, and these schools?  

Because we all realize it can't be done in one year, but certainly 

you must be coming up with some kind of a plan or maybe you 

have something in mind of how we address some of the 

problems.  I realize you acknowledge that relocatables is 

certainly one avenue to follow, and I believe that as well, and 

the fact that a relocatable was put into the Langbank School to 

accommodate the student enrolment at the present time. But 

what's the ongoing plan for say the next three, four, five years, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to 

the member from Moosomin, it's difficult at this point in time 

to talk exactly about the plan for the next three or four years in 

terms of specific numbers, but what our plan is from here 

forward, as far as we can project, is for the 

$65 million this year that is budgeted which is the contribution 

to capital that's already been spent, if you like, the mortgage 

payments on building that was done prior to this year.  And 

then there is the $14 million that we talked about that is for 

emergency repairs and maintenance for the post-secondary and 

the K to 12 system.  That is a total of 79 being the provincial 

contribution.  There would be local contributions added to the 

$14 million or to the 11.  Local boards would put up something 

in addition to that. 

 

So those projects are being tendered now so there would be 

some level of activity.  We have our new proposal for future 

allocation of capital, is out in the community being discussed 

and refined and hopefully will be approved by the caucus and 

cabinet in the early . . . well before fall so that we can take 

those applications that are now in the system, those 350-odd 

million dollars worth and we could begin to rank them 

according to the new criteria.  We would be able to, by the time 

the fiscal year is, say half over, October 1, November 1, we 

should be able to project how much capital will be available.  

Then we should be able to notify those projects that have come 

to the top of the list, that they can go ahead with the balance of 

their planning so that construction can start in '93-94. 

 

So we have sort of an even flow of projects tendered now and 

work being done through the summer; people employed, 

materials being bought; then in the fall architects and planners 

can be employed and getting ready for the following cycle. 

 

Hopefully as the economy improves, as our economic 

development strategies begin to take hold and as the current 

annual requirement goes down from the $65 million as more 

commitments are fulfilled, there'll be money available and we 

plan to keep renewing the capital in the education system in 

this province on a rational basis as expeditiously as we are able 

to with the dollars available. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I want 

to go back to the governance, French governance third school 

-- school governance program and talk to you a little bit about 

that.  On the south side of my constituency and on the west side 

of my constituency are significant French communities.  What 

both the member from Rosthern and the member for 

Souris-Cannington were asking you were questions as it relate 

to additional costs and this, as you indicated earlier is not 

hypothetical. 

 

If Gravelbourg becomes a centre of that focus and as it 

becomes the school where French has the majority of students 

for your third school division then we're going to have some 

very major transportation problems from Cadillac through 

Ponteix, all the way east, through Lafleche and into 

Gravelbourg.  And all those people there will say, well I want 

to participate in that school.  So then what we've got is we've 

got maybe 75 per cent of the kids in Ponteix leave to go to 

Gravelbourg; then Lafleche, let's say 50 per cent of Lafleche 

goes into Gravelbourg to go to school.  What is the 50 per cent 

in Gravelbourg who are perhaps not willing to participate in the 

French, are you going to ship them to Lafleche or are you 

going to ship them to Kincaid or Glenbain or to Vanguard?  

How are you going to deal with that? 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

And that, Madam Minister, is where the increased costs come 

from.  You now are transporting students 30 miles.  You could 

be transporting kids 60 miles one way and that is where the 

additional costs come in and I want to point that out, that unless 

you're going to put a school in Ponteix and one in Kincaid and 

Lafleche and in Gravelbourg to handle all the French students 

and then you're going to turn around and deliver the education 

in the English system through Vanguard, Kincaid and Glenbain 

. . . Is that what your plans are or how are you going to handle 

that?  Because there is a significant change in venue for those 

people in those school divisions today and it will be a 

significant one if you want to implement that kind of a process 

in those communities. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Morse refers again to the third school division as if the 

proposal for francophone governance model is an exact parallel 

of the systems that we have now and it is not.  It is entirely 

different and it is entirely voluntary.  And if there are as many 

negative effects as the member describes by adopting this 

model in the area that he describes then surely the people in 

that area will not volunteer to put themselves in that situation. 

 

We are not, you use the word implement, we are not planning 

to implement this style of governance anywhere.  It will be if 

the framework of legislation is provided for.  That's the end of 

what our actions will be.  Whether people in local communities 

want to avail themselves of that style of governance will be 

optional and will be their choice.  We will not be doing any 

implementing. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Where then, Madam Minister, will the 

children in Ponteix go to school? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I have travelled in that 

area and I've been in all the towns that he mentions.  I'm not 

exactly sure where the school division lines come with respect 

to all of the towns he names.  They may not all be in the same 

division.  But with respect to the situation in Ponteix, they have 

a school there now.  They're perfectly happy with their school 

now.  I don't know of any reason why, if they're content with 

the situation the way it is, they would want to volunteer to put 

themselves into a situation such as the member describes. 

 

And I think that we shouldn't be shadow-boxing with problems 

that hypothetically could occur.  We should rely on the 

implementation task force and their expertise to try to provide 

us with advice that will lead to as flexible a framework as 

possible so that wherever people -- parents and students -- 

volunteer or opt for this form of governance, that it will be 

flexible enough to accommodate their wishes. 

 

But there has to be a proviso that there has to be financial . . . 

The numbers of section 23 students has to be warranted and 

they have to pass a financial viability test and it has to be 

optional. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, they are 

probably going . . . You could probably have, let's say, 10 

families from Ponteix deciding to send their children to a 

governance school in Gravelbourg.  What are you going to do 

with those people when they decide to do that?  They're going 

to travel to Gravelbourg -- or when you have 10, are you going 

to set up a school in Gravelbourg to handle those 10 and 

deliver the classes the way you anticipate in that governance? 

 

And just to show how complex it is, Vanguard is in Swift 

Current rural, Glenbain is in Wood River, Ponteix is in 

Shaunavon, and Gravelbourg is in Gravelbourg . . . or Wood 

River.  And so you've got a corner there with at least three 

school divisions and perhaps even the fourth one coming from 

Thunder Creek, coming from the top end, and so you're going 

to cause a very serious concern to the two groups of people 

who you're prepared to serve.  One is the regular . . . And three 

I'll grant you.  One is to the system, the public system, one is to 

the Roman Catholic system, and one is to the French one.  And 

you're going to create the third one in that group. 

 

And what it has caused in the southern part of the province 

there, in Mankota and Ferland and those areas, is a very, very 

serious problem in transportation.  Because the buses pass each 

other travelling to deliver education when one family insists 

that their education is supposed to be delivered in a different 

format than is being delivered in the school that they're 

adjacent to.  And so they travel that extra distance. 

 

So you're going to say to me that the French governance isn't 

going to be allowed to travel from Ponteix to Gravelbourg.  

Now you choose which it's going to be because you're going to 

have to make that decision. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

prefaces all of his comments and his very long question -- I 

think it was a question -- with probably.  And I think it's not a 

productive use of our time to try to invent problems that haven't 

happened.  And he talks about problems that we are going to 

create.  We are not going to create those situations.  What we 

will create, if we do, we will create the umbrella under which 

those communities can find solutions to accessing the style of 

education to which the law says that they are entitled. 

 

And many of those students are being transported now.  It's the 

responsibility of the local school division to arrange the 

configuration of their education system, the capital, the 

transportation, in the most effective possible way in the 

interests of the people in the school division who elected them 

to serve them.  We do not interfere with those decisions.  We 

are not planning to impose any style of education on anyone.  I 

repeat, it would be optional and voluntary, and surely no 

sensible, rational people, which I know the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan all are, would want to inflict the situation, such 

as you describe, upon themselves. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, if I hadn't lived there as long as I have, 

and understood the situation . . .  And my brother has been the 

chairman of the Swift Current Rural School Division for many, 

many years, has served on that for 17 years and probably 

provides me with the most basic information about the kinds of 

things that go on down in 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

those school divisions, and understands it.  And the 

fundamental problem is this, that there will be families who 

will say to you, provide me with that education at any cost, and 

then you just told me that the school division will make that 

decision.  Earlier you said that the federal government would 

carry it, or the taxes would not carry it.  But they're carrying it. 

 

If they have to deliver that student from Ponteix to Lafleche or 

Ponteix to Gravelbourg, they're carrying the cost.  Those school 

divisions are carrying the cost.  They did it in immersion 

classes from Mankota to Ferland and back and forth in that. 

 

And, Madam Minister, there were serious, serious problems 

develop between neighbours that had significant impact and 

caused a whole lot of irritation when that was there.  And I am 

just telling you that there is a problem.  And you better be 

prepared to deal with it, not only in the way that you conducted 

yourself to this point, but you better be prepared to deal with it 

in the context of what is there.  And this is not hypothetical, 

because it's been going on for the last 15 years. 

 

It's not hypothetical.  There are parents there who will want 

their children educated in the language of their origin in 

Ponteix.  And what are you going to do with them?  And what 

is that school division going to do with them?  Are they going 

to say, we'll room and board them in Gravelbourg because the 

transportation costs aren't high enough?  Will we pay tuition in 

delivering those students to Gravelbourg, to have the education 

costs decrease so that they won't have the transportation? 

 

All of those questions, Madam Minister, you better have some 

answers for, because those people down there are going to 

demand that from you.  Because I live down there and I know 

them and they've told me this. 

 

In fact, one gentleman told me, he said, I wish . . . and he's 

French and his mother language is French and he told me this 

in 1988 when this ruling came down.  He said, I wish you 

would leave me alone, because I love my mother tongue, I love 

my French heritage, but leave me alone.  And he's a business 

man in the community and he understands that sense of 

urgency and dealing with the kinds of things that you're talking 

about.  He doesn't want irritations to come. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what is going to cause an irritation is 

the imbalance between the delivery of a service for one person 

versus another person, and that's the cause of the problem.  And 

you better have a solution to that because it is going to create a 

major problem for you in those areas. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I repeat again 

that access to this system and this form of governance, should 

the provincial government provide the framework legislation, 

will be entirely optional.  And I think that it's important to note 

that the member has acknowledged that there are problems; 

there are transportation problems.  There are problems in rural 

Saskatchewan with the changing demographics, of making sure 

that rural schools can remain viable.  And I just hope that when 

the time comes that we introduce the legislation with respect to 

the francophone governance 

factor, that the members opposite don't try to visit all the ills of 

the system, that they say have already been apparent for more 

than 15 years, upon the implementation of an initiative this 

year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, I have some very, 

very strong supporters who are French Canadian, and I am 

representing them here today.  And they say to me, don't 

change what we've got.  If you make too many more changes it 

will upset the balance that has developed between the 

well-meaning people in the community.  And what you're 

doing by putting this in there is setting different standards for 

different people; and what is, is going to cause a very serious 

problem if you have 10 students left in Ponteix. 

 

Now Ponteix is the majority French-speaking; in fact it's their 

mother tongue.  They have learnt it right from childhood, and 

in fact lots of them go to an English school -- they have to learn 

English.  And so you're going to take and that's going to 

become a French school.  If you move that, are you going to 

pull all of the English-speaking children out of there because 

they're not going to be allowed to be funded?  So you've got to 

deliver a different service. 

 

And I'm asking you to absolutely, seriously, consider and 

reflect very seriously on exactly what you're doing.  I think 

you're causing more division in the communities than you're 

really helping.  And I have had this expressed to me by people 

who are in those areas, and that's why I raise it to you.  I know 

them, I understand them, and they tell me this over and over 

again.  And I have . . . I could list you names of people -- I 

won't do it here -- but I could list you names of people who 

have told me that they do not want to have it changed.  And yet 

there are people who will say yes, I want it.  Okay.  Now what 

do you do with them when they've got 60 miles to drive to 

deliver that child to that education system?  And that's what's 

going to cause a problem in a very serious way. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question specific to Ponteix, the people in that area have access 

now to a type A immersion program if they desire it.  And they 

have opted not to take that opportunity. 

 

We will not be imposing anything different upon the students 

and parents in that area.  We will simply be providing a 

provincial framework for them to opt for that kind of system if 

they want it.  If they don't want it, they won't be asking for it.  

If they do ask for it in an area where it can't meet the numbers 

warranting and the financial viability test, they won't have it. 

 

We will be changing nothing at the local level.  We will simply 

be providing for people at the local level who want to volunteer 

for that type of governance, to have it available to them as the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal has said that the Government of 

Saskatchewan must do.  Your government heard that decision; 

you did not heed it.  This government intends to obey the law. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, the criteria that you've 

described to me, if 10 people from west of Cadillac, and then 

the next town is Ponteix, if 10 people from there decide that 

they want to have a school, are you going to 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

deliver them to Gravelbourg? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- At what volume of students is it going to be 

made viable?  When is this going to be a viable condition that 

exists, that there then becomes a school there? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure how many 

times I would have to repeat this as members opposite go in 

and out and we have to keep saying things over again. 

 

But we will be providing a framework; we will not be forcing 

anybody at the local level to opt for anything that they do not 

want.  There will be a two-tier system, if it's established, 

according to the recommendations of the implementation task 

force. 

 

And actually I would really urge the members opposite, before 

they get worried about hypothetical situations that might 

develop, for them to wait until we have the recommendations 

of the task force, because those are precisely the kind of 

questions that they're addressing themselves to, is how much 

flexibility will be available and how it can be exercised. 

 

But there will be  . . . it's proposed that there be a provincial 

council which will receive applications from the limited 

number of local areas where there are eligible parents.  And 

they will be the ones who will determine whether the numbers 

warrant, and whether the local situation that would be created 

by the approval of the application would be rational and 

reasonable and whether or not it would require a contribution 

of additional provincial cost, in which instance it would not be 

approved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, you go round and round.  That's why we 

have difficulty feeling that we've got the answer.  You just skirt 

some of the basic problem areas.  And I think that you need to 

rationalize them out in your own mind. 

 

And as relates to obeying a law, Madam Minister, you're going 

to ask, your Minister of Agriculture's going to ask this 

Assembly, and all of the members opposite are planning on 

voting in favour of something to break the law.  Are you going 

to stand in this Assembly and honour the decision by the 

Minister of Agriculture to break the contract and say he 

deemed to send out 50,000 . . . (inaudible) . . . letters that 

wasn't, they weren't sent out?  You're going to validate that and 

break the law. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is what we're concerned about.  

You can talk all you want about breaking the law and 

upholding the law.  There's a contract with 50,000 producers 

that that minister is going to ask you to change a contract on 

and he's going to deem to have sent a letter out and this 

Assembly's going to vote on it and that, Madam Minister, you 

better have a clear conscience when you sit down or stand and 

vote in favour of that. 

 

(2130) 

 

I go to another question.  The Swift Current rural school 

division have asked, there was a Cabri school is on that list of 

improvement.  They've also asked for a school to be built at 

Vanguard.  They have a high school and elementary school in 

separate buildings.  The elementary school is almost in exactly 

the same condition that the member from Thunder Creek was 

describing Mortlach.  Only these kids, these kindergarten kids 

are in the basement. And the floor probably has about as many 

levels in it in the basement of that school as this building right 

here, and this was designed that way. 

 

Not only that, Madam Minister, the electrical is in very serious 

condition and I would like to ask you to provide to this 

Assembly the same assessments that they have been provided 

with regarding fire, electrical, the potential for leaving the 

building and the opportunity for avoiding a major disaster.  

And I would like to have that tabled here as well as what the 

member from Thunder Creek asked. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, before we make any 

undertaking, could I just clarify?  Was the member opposite 

referring to the Vanguard school or the Cabri school in terms of 

their condition? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Vanguard. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Vanguard, okay. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you provide that for me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- We undertake to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there any construction in new schools going 

on at all this year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that this 

could possibly be a serious question.  Perhaps the member 

opposite hasn't noticed that we don't have any money.  And 

we're not going to spend money we haven't got.  We're 

committed to make a $65 million contribution to past financial 

commitments for new capital in the education system, but we're 

not planning to . . . there is no provision in this budget and no 

plans to do any other new capital construction this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a question as it relates to the 

observations made by the member for Thunder Creek and the 

observations from Rosthern and my constituency: who carries 

the liability of a serious incident happening in one of those 

schools if in fact it would happen, that one of those schools 

would collapse or burn down? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the school divisions, of 

course, carry appropriate insurance coverage on all of their 

buildings.  And we do and we are . . . this is why we have the 

new proposal for the allocation of capital and why we have 

provided in the budget for $14 million worth of emergency 

repairs, because within the fiscal framework that we were left, 

which was full of a lot of holes, the health and safety and 

providing a good atmosphere for our students and the staff 

people who work in our schools is a very high priority for us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I just want to indicate to you, Madam 

Minister, that some of these schools are in very serious 

condition.  And it wasn't a matter of we wanting to 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

spend money just because we thought it was necessary to do.  It 

was a matter of significant urgency that some of this money be 

put into the educational system out in rural Saskatchewan 

because it wasn't being done.  And that Madam Minister, is 

why we decided to do that. 

 

In fact I'll give you an example of one of the schools.  One of 

the lady teachers there taught at that school for 32 years, and I 

won't tell you which school it was, but it was the first, in 1989 I 

believe it was, the first time she ever had the opportunity to 

teach in that school where all the classes were in one room, or 

in one building.  That was the first time in 32 years. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I was honoured to be a part of that 

opening ceremony in that school area, and that was the kind of 

thing that was necessary to be done, and I'll tell you why, 

because in 1970 to 1982, there was nothing done, and prior to 

that, there was nothing done.  So what did you have?  You had 

some urgency.  You had some relevant urgency in delivering 

some of the construction projects that were delivered.   And as 

I said before it was based on an investment.  That's what it is -- 

it's an investment in the future of your children and my children 

and that's what's important in this discussion too.  You always 

have to remember that.  And dealing with education has far 

more return than any other area and we have to always consider 

that. 

 

And, Madam Minister, that's why it's of significance to us as 

members on this side of the House that some of these 

construction projects be very seriously looked at. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't believe, or find 

it difficult to believe, that the member opposite is suggesting 

that we totally renew all of the capital in the education system 

every 10 years.  I thought that was what I heard, that 10 years 

previous . . . or did he mean that in the 10 years previous 

nothing was done in one particular school?  We can't replace 

every school every 10 years if that's what the member is 

suggesting. 

 

And with respect to some of the conditions that are being 

described in some of the schools, unfortunate as this is, this 

degree of deterioration didn't happen in the last seven months 

while we've been in office.  There must have been some need 

for some repairs and replacements in some of these situations 

that are being described and perhaps the criteria for the 

allocation of capital could have been included, those situations 

that are being described prior to 1991. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, I didn't say that.  And 

if you check of Hansard, you'll probably find out that I didn't. 

 

However I will make this point:  there has to be an investment 

in the future.  And in the '70s in the south-west part of the 

province there wasn't an investment made outside of the city of 

Swift Current in the future education of the people of that part 

of the province.  And that, Madam Minister, is a fact and that is 

necessary to have some adjustment made and that is the reason 

why it was done. 

 

You have to think about it as an investment, as I said 

before.  And if we don't invest, then what's next to go in those 

rural communities in the south-west? 

 

And we're going to be talking with the Minister of Health about 

the same kind of problems with our hospitals and the criteria 

she's going to push down our throat in level 2 care funding and 

all of that.  And that's going to erode more of that out of the 

south-west. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is what we're talking.  We're 

talking about an investment in the future made by those people 

who are living there today, and they're very serious about it and 

they want it to continue. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well we certainly agree, Mr. 

Chairman, that educational spending should be regarded as an 

investment.  It's a very high priority for us.  It's very important 

for the education and training of our young people in 

Saskatchewan, is the key to our economic recovery and 

survival.  And we recognize the importance and it remains a 

very high priority for us. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, my colleagues have been talking quite a bit and 

asking a lot of questions about building programs and schools 

and what not and renovations and things like this.  I want to get 

into something a little different. 

 

I do have . . . in my line of questioning tonight I do want to talk 

a little bit about what's become a crisis now and what I was 

talking to you about the other day about the Loreburn, 

Strongfield, Elbow area.  At least they think it is, and we have 

to do some discussing on that because they're having a meeting 

there tomorrow night. 

 

But first, Madam Minister, I'd like to ask you this question.  

Education is costing a lot of money in this province of 

Saskatchewan.  A question I ask,  like many people when I'm 

speaking to them at meetings, what not, openings of schools or 

whatever, wherever I be, I ask this question: do you think that 

we're getting a bang for our buck for education?  Our children, 

when they're through grade 12, are they educated in a right and 

proper manner?  What's your views on that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that 

judging by the demand for the graduates from our education 

system, both our university and at the post-secondary technical 

level, speaks for itself.  At our universities, many of the 

undergraduates in a number of the colleges are already being 

recruited a year or two before graduation.  So I think that we 

have a very fine long-standing tradition of quality education in 

this province and I certainly think that we are committed to 

continue that. 

 

I think evidence of that would be that we are reviewing the 

operations of SIAST as mandated in The Institutes Act, 

provides for a review every five years.  The review panel is 

working now and will be reporting likely to me approximately 

the end of July. 
 

We have announced that there will be a panel reviewing the 

operations of the universities.  We also . . .  We haven't 

provided for it yet, we haven't named people to it, but The 

Regional Colleges Act also provides for a review every 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

 five years.  The Act is five years old.  We plan to carry that 

out. 

 

We are doing a review of the high school curriculum to address 

the articulation between the high school and the post-secondary 

system to make sure that the high school graduates have the 

proper kind of training to access the post-secondary education 

where they will have the best and most relevant job 

opportunities. 

 

We are also . . . As indicated earlier today, we have developed 

a new timetable to complete the implementation of the core 

curriculum in the K to 12 system, with a view in this era of 

scarce resources, and it being a resource-based curriculum, to 

make sure that we do that job of moving into that type of 

instruction wisely, better than quickly. 

 

And we announced in the throne speech, the creation of the 

Premier's educational council which will be an umbrella 

organization with representation from the whole education 

community -- from students, from business, from labour -- to 

take a comprehensive look at the results of all these reviews 

and their recommendations and to develop a new strategic plan, 

if you like, for the whole education system in Saskatchewan, 

with a view to continuing the tradition that we have of good, 

solid education. 

 

But in the era of having scarce dollars and resources available 

to make sure that, yes, the students of this province are well 

served and that the dollars that we have available, scarce 

though they may be, are appropriated as wisely as possible and 

that we get the best results for the clients of our education 

system, being the student. 

 

I would also add in this respect that although the funding that 

was available to the third parties, being the K to 12 system, was 

reduced by 2 per cent; the universities by one; regional colleges 

and SIAST, pardon me, by three; that we are trying to reorder 

the priorities.  And we are trying to send a message to the 

education system in this province, being all of those 

institutions, to try and make sure that they arrange their affairs 

in such a way that as many dollars as possible find their way 

into the class-room and the program level and that we don't 

spend unnecessary dollars in the governance structures and in 

the administration and the delivery system. 

 

So I think that our commitment to our education system at all 

levels, I think, should be clear and we certainly intend to make 

it a high priority. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I agree with the things 

you're saying that's happening.  There's so many things 

happening out there in education.  But I ask you: is our 

students, when they're through grade 12, have they got a bang 

for their buck for education? 

 

Now there isn't any place you can go in Saskatchewan and you 

can talk to parents, after they're through grade 12 or anywheres 

from grade 1 to 12, you ask them . . . What I call education is 

the basics, and that's reading, writing, arithmetic, and spelling. 

 

We teach so many things.  And I'm not blaming you 

people as government because you're just a new government 

here. 

 

(2145) 

 

I asked this question when you were in government before and 

this was something we discussed very readily the nine years 

that we were in government, that maybe we've got to change 

our curriculums, do something different, because we're 

teaching so many things to our children. 

 

There's so many programs.  Because you spent a long time 

going through all the programs of all the money spent, and 

that's what I'm saying.  You won't find very many . . . there's 

always some exceptionally good students out there that will 

learn and have help at home and they'll make sure that they 

understand the basics, but the majority do not have the basic 

education. 

 

And to back up my statement, there was a university professor 

from the University of Toronto came out to Saskatchewan, I 

believe it was '83 or '84, 1983 or 1984, and he did a study that 

summer in education in Saskatchewan and the headlines in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix -- some of your officials may perhaps 

remember this -- when he said: grade 12, grade 4 level. 

 

And that's just about where we're at, because when I went to 

school -- I finished school in 1949 -- and myself and my 

colleagues, or my fellow students, we called ourselves well 

educated when it come to the basics.  We were all drilled and 

well drilled. 

 

Then I can take you to my oldest son who is 23 years younger 

than I am, and he's pretty good, but not quite as good as his 

father.  Then I've got another son that's 10 years younger and 

he's almost a disaster; it's almost a disaster.  And then I've got 

grandchildren that don't even know the phonics in school. 

 

And I don't mean to say to you, Madam Minister, that this is, 

that this is a problem with the government of the day.  It's been 

a problem we're facing all over North America. 

 

We're teaching so many things to our children that I'm asking 

my question to you now, Madam Minister: is the department -- 

because I've talked to many people in the department through 

the years, and so have many of our colleagues and many of 

your colleagues, and this is a serious word because no matter 

where I speak, I've opened a lot of schools and have been at a 

lot of functions at schools in the last 15 years and no matter 

where you say it -- do you people think you're getting a bang 

for your buck for education, and boy I tell you, you've got the 

people on your side that we're not. 

 

Because wherever you go -- and I'm not blaming you, Madam 

Minister, because you're a new minister any more than the past 

-- but this has been a build up for the last 30 or 40 years, that 

we're teaching our children so much in school that they end up 

coming out of school knowing very little about the basics. 

 

Now you yourself would be the age group that would be taught 

how to add, read, write, and spell, but you're much 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

younger than the generation that I am, Madam Minister, so you 

can smile.  I'm talking about this last 20 to 30 years, especially 

the last 10.  Our curriculums have changed so badly that you 

will not see the teachers take the time to teach phonics to 

children and teach the soundings, so they can read properly.  

Unless they have special studies at home and special 

consideration, they're not educated when they get out of grade 

12. 

 

Now what I'm asking you, Madam Minister: will the 

department or is the department looking at the serious threat?  

Not just Saskatchewan, it's upon us, all around us, and you 

can't overlook it.  You can't get up and say we're spending all 

this money for this and all this money for that -- And I 

appreciated what you said.  I did, I truly did, because it's right.  

We're spending a lot of money.  But I'd just like you to answer: 

are we looking at something to look at this serious situation 

that's being talked about out there in the basic educations? 

 

I have delivered a paper to the Commonwealth when we met in 

Saskatoon on education.  And when I talked about this, the 

professors from all over that came to that meeting, they said: 

you know what you just said nobody wants to talk about; that 

we're so overly educated, we don't want to talk about these 

little things, but it's time we did.  So that's why I bring that to 

you, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to what I 

think might have been a question, I hesitate to comment on the 

effects of heredity on the ability to learn and I regret to hear 

that the member opposite's grandchildren are not able to read 

and write, but I have five grandchildren and they have no 

problems at all. 

 

I think one must be . . . And I'd like to make a further comment 

on the quality of graduates.  As an employer in this province in 

several different areas and pursuits, I have had occasion to hire 

a number of students, high school students, university students 

and graduates from our system.  And I have never found a 

deficiency in any of the graduates that would make them less 

than highly suitable employees.  So where all these people are 

that can't read and write, that graduate from our system, I'm 

really not quite sure. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're all in Arm River. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- They must be all in Arm River, my 

colleague points out.  I think this bang for the buck business is 

something that we have to be very wary about.  I think when 

people have been around as long as the member opposite from 

Arm River and myself, we have lived long enough to see a 

number of fads come and go.  And we see these hobby-horses 

go by every once in a while and people feel compelled to get 

on them. 
 

And I think we have to be very careful because the latest one in 

the education field is, get a bang for your buck.  And if you 

recall, the latest report was the Economic Council of Canada, 

which talked about having longer school days and chastising us 

and telling us that we needed to get back to basics and all of 

this and it was . . . I'm old enough to remember with great 

clarity that this very same body, made in their second 

recommendations after the Economic Council was formed in 

1966, they 

issued a report that ranked the spending of education in Canada 

and compared it with other countries.  And they chastised 

Canada and the education community and said, you're not 

spending enough money.  And so everybody heeded that call 

all across Canada and it became obscene to even question a 

cent of spending upon education because it was so stylish to 

keep throwing money at it. 

 

Now that very same council comes back 26 years later, they 

didn't mention that it was at their recommendation that we 

started spending money, but they said, oh, now you're spending 

so much money and you're not getting results, so we want you 

to have a longer school year.  Well we're saying, that if it's true 

that we're not doing some of the right things with all that 

money, well then is the answer to do them longer?  Perhaps we 

should have a better analysis of what it is that we're doing. 

 

And so that is the reason that we are . . . we're not spending 

inordinate amounts of money on these studies that we're doing.  

They come with relative economy.  But they're good people 

doing them that are working very hard. 

 

But I would like to raise another example of these 

hobby-horses that go by.  And one of them was, if you recall, 

the new math that came out in the 1960s whereby people were 

going to be taught . . . students were going to be taught to 

reason their way through all their problems.  And it wasn't 

going to be necessary for them to learn anything by rote. 

 

And so we produced . . . it was a few experts got on this 

bandwagon and everybody became afraid to bell the cat and to 

say . . . to admit that the emperor had no clothes.  And all 

across North America this system was adopted for math and a 

whole generation of students was totally ruined because they 

were, unless they got their schooling at home, because they 

were taught that they could reason their way through problems 

and they didn't have to do boring things like learning the 

multiplication tables.  And in the early '80s finally an 

announcement was made that this initiative was dead, that it 

hadn't worked. 

 

So I think you have to be very careful not to adopt something 

just because it's new and not to discard something just because 

it's old.  And that's why we're looking carefully at our 

education system through all of these reviews to see how we 

can improve upon it and how we can assure people that we're 

getting the most value for the education dollar that's spent and 

how we can make sure that the outcome for the student, who is 

the client of this system, will be the best there is. 

 

But it's very important, we feel, not to jump on these 

bandwagons that go by, but to do the analysis very carefully 

and implement on the basis of good study and good judgement.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Madam Minister, as you recall when I 

was speaking before, I spoke to you in a very nice manner and 

said it's not blaming your government.  I was only talking 

about the basics of education.  And when you get up and made 

the statement that you said, that means that I misjudged you.  I 

misjudged you completely.  That 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

means that you must have been in a real young group of the 

younger generation because I don't think you're educated at all. 

 

You haven't even got any manners.  You haven't even got any 

manners to get up and say that it's too bad that my 

grandchildren can't read or write.  So I mean if you want to 

give out insults, Madam Minister, you'll have to take them 

back.  You'll have to take them back . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes, and takes a long time at it too.  But I'm quite good at 

taking a long time too. 

 

If you didn't understand my question, then you don't understand 

what people all over Saskatchewan are talking about, is basic 

education.  Now I was able to sit down with your last minister 

of Education -- and I forget who it was -- back in early 1980s 

and talk about these things, and they agreed.  And I talked to 

our ministers all through the years.  And we could talk about it, 

how we're going to deal with the basic education so our 

children and our students, when they graduate, know how to 

read, write, spell, and add. 

 

And I'm telling you that our children can learn all these 

educational things out there. They can go to all the extra 

curriculums that we have -- everything that you talked about -- 

but they still don't know the basics. 

 

I very nicely asked you, Madam Minister, your view on just the 

basics.  But you had to get up and get sarcastic, and go on into 

a long speech, and you won't touch the basic education -- the 

basics.  Now you can't find . . . you go out and drop an 

umbrella on 1,000 homes in Saskatchewan just at random and 

ask 1,000 people in the city of Regina if they agree with what I 

said, and they said yes, our people are not educated in the 

basics. 

 

And as I said, I was not being political to blame this 

government.  I'm saying that that's been something that's been 

creeping upon us for a good many a years.  It's been coming 

upon us that our children and students have not got the basics 

when they're through.  They have to go to . . . when they go to 

university, they've got to go back, because that . . . I'm sorry, I 

can't remember the name of the professor from the University 

of Toronto that spent his whole summer in Saskatchewan, and 

it wasn't me saying it -- it was him that said it, after a whole 

year's study, or a whole summer's study.  Grade 12, grade 4 

level -- that when your students go to university they have to 

go back and learn the basics. 

 

That's all I was talking about, and that's all we need to talk 

about, Madam Minister, is just those basics.  And will you and 

your officials look at something to answer the real question out 

there?  We can talk about all the money being spent on 

education, the schools being built, and how wonderful facilities 

we've got.  We can teach welding to a boy over here, and how 

to a girl cook over here.  And we teach all these things, but 

some of those things could maybe be better taught at home and 

teach them how to add, write, and spell.  Those are some of the 

things that I call the basics. 

 

And that's what you didn't respond on.  You just went on about 

all the money that your goverment's going to spend -- the same 

thing as we did, and the same thing as the 

government before you and the government before them.  And 

nobody here, not one person sitting in this here room, will not 

agree with me and haven't said it themselves.  They've all said 

that statement, that our kids are not educated when they come 

out of a grade 12.  Now as I said before, not all, because some 

get special training at home and some pick it up, and some . . . 

But the average student going to school has to be pushed a 

little, and you know that.  You went to school -- you all know 

that you have to be pushed a little bit to learn. 

 

Nowadays the philosophy out there is to, here it is; take it or 

leave it.  You learn it or leave it.  You didn't get a little bit of a 

paddling when you didn't get your exam, you didn't get a 

decent exam, or a decent mark on your exam.  Now that's 

happening out there.  It's happening all over, and we're all 

going to suffer for it.  Because I don't care whether you go to 

Manitoba, Alberta, or across the line -- you're seeing it all over. 

 

(2200) 

 

And it's the basics I was talking about, but we have the leader, 

the member from Estevan wants to ask some questions, so I'm 

just going to go on and ask you about Loreburn and Strongfield 

school, Madam Minister.  This is after I met with you, I met 

with the people in the area.  I see it to be maybe a crisis 

coming.  It's going to cause a whole community uproar.  And 

I'm going to be going through something here, so I'm going to 

ask the page to deliver what was faxed to me tonight from 

Elbow.  If you'd give that to the minister, please. 

 

Madam Minister, the philosophy of your government and any 

government is to have schools out there as reasonably . . . 

spend as least reasonable money as possible.  We all know that.  

But in this case, what's happening at Loreburn is, in Loreburn, 

Saskatchewan they're in a little, dying town, and they admit it.  

Elbow is in a growing town and that's to the south, and 

Strongfield is to the north and it's only got one business left -- 

20-some students.  And they have an elementary there; and an 

elementary school, 1 to 6, in Elbow.  Loreburn has the 7 to 12. 

 

Now that's been a good arrangement.  But what's happened, 

Madam Minister, in that community is what is happening in 

several communities in the province, where you have your unit 

director that's voted in by the people but he happens to live in 

one town and serves three or four, and in this case it's become 

very evident, right from Outlook to Elbow, that we have a 

director that's been pushing to have the other schools closed 

and save his own school.  It's very evident.  That's why I'm 

bringing it here to you, Madam Minister. 

 

And why it's serious, because we're going to spend a lot of 

money.  You'll see . . . I'm going to go through a little bit of this 

with you, Madam Minister.  The provincial government -- I'll 

go through this with you.  The provincial government has 

approved emergency funding for roof repairs and two 

relocatable class-rooms for Loreburn Central High School for a 

total expenditure of 438,000.  The Elbow local school board is 

totally in favour of the expenditure to repair the roof as it has 

been in need of repair for at least 20 years. 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

There's no problem with that, Madam Minister, as we talked 

about the other day, and I didn't understand the whole scenario 

then.  But now what they're upset about is they're going to be . . 

. 204 or 5,000 of that is for the relocatable class-rooms when 

they've already got a class-room in Strongfield and a real good 

school in Elbow.  And those towns are only about seven miles 

apart.  So it's only a 10-minute drive to drive the children or 

students down to Elbow.  Because the growing town, the only 

one in the whole Outlook district, the only one that has had an 

increase in students will be Elbow since '86 till now.  They're 

the only ones, I should say, holding on; the rest are dropping 

fast. 

 

It would only cost, Madam Minister, $8,000.  This is all over 

an $8,000 problem at Strongfield.  And I know as I talked to 

you before that the minister . . . and I don't blame you, don't 

want to get mixed up in local problems -- but in this particular 

case, I ask the minister if she would get involved because there 

is a problem here.  When any time that you're going to spend 

200-and-some thousand dollars just to take in 20-some students 

from Strongfield, only 20-some students . . . but once you do 

that it automatically will close in the next year or two, the 

Elbow school, which will mean another two or more, if not 

three more relocatable class-rooms, which is going to run 

maybe up to half a million dollars or at least 400,000 just for 

relocatable class-rooms. 

 

I've been in the Loreburn school.  It's badly in need of repair.  

And to squeeze in all these students, there will not be a proper 

school.  It just won't be.  They're talking about . . . and I got it 

right from the officials there that they have to use a stage to 

make it into a class-room just for emergencies.  They haven't 

enough room.  So if we start doing this, and I'm not here to talk 

about one town against the other or what not, but in this 

situation there's a school in Loreburn, one in Elbow and one in 

Strongfield, and if we're going to close them we should do it, I 

do believe, for the least dollars as possible and do the right 

thing. 

 

When Elbow has a school that's only asked for $500 worth of 

repairs to keep it open for another year, and that's for paint and 

8,000 for a furnace -- something wrong with the furnace which 

is not even too serious -- but to replace it, for $8,000 everybody 

can stay the way they are. 

 

But as you go through that document I gave you, Madam 

Minister, it says in there, other solutions.  And why I bring this 

to you tonight, because I won't be able to get a chance to talk to 

you, there's a meeting tomorrow night at Elbow where they're 

bringing all the local school boards from three or four towns, 

that's just the local school boards and their one representative, 

Lorne Ulvan, is going to be there to listen to their stories. 

 

So what I'm asking you, Madam Minister, that I think there's 

something's happened out there.  They've been dealing with 

Glen Penner out of Saskatoon, and with Mr. Brunas, I believe it 

is from Regina here, and I think there's a little problem.  I don't 

think the right information may be getting through to your 

officials and to yourself.  I just ask you if you will look through 

the material, and what I bring you back tomorrow night from 

this meeting, and give it 

your consideration.  That's all that I can ask you, Madam 

Minister:  give it your consideration to look at what's 

happening with our tax dollars. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that there 

was a question there, but I would like to rise in any event and 

thank the member opposite for the information that he has 

provided with respect to this question.  We did, as he 

mentioned, have a discussion about this the other day, late last 

week, about a situation that was developing there and some 

fears again that people have that may or may not be based on 

fact.  So I hope that the meeting tomorrow night will be an 

airing of those views and that people will come to understand 

what the real situation is. 

 

I will certainly undertake that myself and the department will 

follow these events closely and I would suggest if I may, and I 

certainly will be in touch with the regional director for that area 

who you mentioned has been contacted, but to make sure that 

he's aware of the meeting and that we make sure that we have a 

good line of communication so that we all understand what's 

happening to assist the local board in solving the problem. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I understand what some of the problem is, 

Madam Minister.  They thought it was good news at first when 

I told them -- And I thank you for giving me quick attention to 

get that information for me, that Elbow School wouldn't be 

closing, like, this summer.  They'd have at least the other year. 

 

But it's agreed upon by the unit board that -- and they've been 

told that it will close -- that's the last year, that's it, that's the 

move.  And so they're saying that if the relocatable class-rooms 

go ahead with . . . if they go ahead with that, that will lead to 

the next year of the closing of their school.  So they are not 

fighting for just the one more year, they are fighting and 

pleading for their town to be able to hold that school there . . . 

by spending . . . building the relocatable class-rooms, and that 

only takes care of the move for Strongfield for this year.  Then 

when they move to Elbow the next year -- they have a lot more 

students, they will need another at least two more relocatables.  

So it is talking about a lot of money here. 

 

I understand it has been approved so that is why I am quite 

sure, Madam Minister, that the people know what they are 

talking about.  There is not any . . . The people in the local 

area, they are quite clear what is happening.  It is very evident, 

very evident in this case, and that's what bothers me -- that 

there is one director that has caused all this problem because 

where he lives there is a little group of one to six students that 

would mean going ten minutes farther to the Elbow school and 

his children, and a few neighbours where he lives, want to have 

it for Loreburn and it is only going to be for a year or two and 

then they are going to have to go to a different school perhaps 

anyway. 

 

It is an awful thing for the . . . I am going to put in right on the 

record, as I see it from the whole area, the greed of one man 

has been pushing and pushing for his children and his little 

neighbour's children instead of looking at the overall picture.  

That is why I do believe that it will not get cleared up.  I hope I 

am wrong about the accusations I 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

made, I really do but it is what I am bringing from them.  They 

feel that the greed of one man in a little local area can affect the 

whole scenario for a good many years to come. 

 

I don't need to ask any more questions on it as long as I have 

got your commitment, Madam Minister, that you and your 

officials and your department will please keep a close handle 

on this, that it is handled in a right and proper manner. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will certainly 

undertake to make sure that the regional director for the area is 

aware of the meeting and we certainly don't get involved in the 

decisions of the local boards because that's where these 

decisions should be made.  But I hope that there will be a good 

attendance and an active interest by the rate payers in that 

school division in this public meeting so that they can attend 

and apprise themselves of the facts so that the best decision can 

be made. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's the problem, Madam Minister, just as 

you said, that you don't want to interfere in the local.  But the 

department still must pass the money to build what they're 

building now. 

 

That's what the local people . . . I believe the majority.  The big 

tax base comes from the Elbow area.  That's where the good 

land is, the big tax base.  It is more money coming from taxes 

from Elbow than all the other area put together.  And it's those 

people saying, that have the tax base, that were asking you not 

-- your department I mean -- not to approve what they're doing. 

 

That wouldn't be interfering because you just don't have 

somebody say . . . no local school board or a unit board can just 

have a meeting and say, well now we're making a move that 

we're going to build a new school.  Now that's local autonomy 

all right, but they still have to get approved.  So we know this 

has been approved, but what we're asking is to put it on hold or 

do something that it doesn't happen until this mess gets 

straightened out. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will certainly 

undertake to review the whole situation and take the most 

responsible action that would be expected of the department in 

this situation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much, and the member 

from Estevan is going to ask some questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a couple of 

questions to the minister with respect to universities in 

education.  I know, Madam Minister, that you would like to 

have more money for education -- I'm sure you would -- and 

for universities.  And I'd like to ask you a couple of personal 

questions with respect to your philosophy about generating 

money for universities. 

 

I know for a fact that you're spending about 100 million more 

than the previous administration in terms of total budget.  I 

believe our budget was 4.9 billion; yours is about 5.1 billion, 

something like that.  So you got about 100 million more.  Now 

I would like to know whether you've considered allocating 

more of that increase in expenditure to education, and 

particularly to some of the 

post-secondary education facilities. 

 

Secondly, you obviously made the choice . . . and I know it's 

part of a cabinet decision, but you might want to comment on it 

-- about why you turned down 190 to $200 million associated 

with tax harmonization.  I know the Associate Minister of 

Finance has said on more than one occasion here in the House 

that the one-tax system made sense in terms of efficiency, and 

obviously it made a couple of hundred million dollars worth of 

sense that you could have applied to universities and some 

others. 

 

And you probably know that that method of generating money 

was supported by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), the board of trade, and the 

chamber of commerce, and others.  And I wondered if you 

might have some personal thoughts about generating that kind 

of money, a couple of hundred million dollars, for education -- 

universities, technical schools, and so forth -- by 

harmonization, and whether you had any personal concerns 

about it.  In fact, how would you explain why you didn't do it, 

perhaps to students and to faculty members and others? 

 

Secondly, you might comment, Madam Minister . . . and I can 

do these one at a time but I'll just throw them out and we can 

get into some detail. 

 

You might want to comment whether in fact if you could 

generate 2 or 3 or $400 million in terms of Saskatchewan share 

offerings, whether it's in bonds -- and I know you're 

considering a bond for the province to help keep some of the 

interest here -- or whether you'd look at bonds associated with 

education;   whether you'd look at maybe even public share 

offerings associated with generating revenue, whether it's in 

things as controversial as in public utilities or in something 

else, to generate money.  And I know that's a cabinet decision, 

but you might want to make some comments about that. 

 

And for now, just a question on whether you would think the 

university and the academic community might really benefit 

from an AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement, 

particularly in Saskatoon with the university there. 

 

(2215) 

 

I know the president of the university was talking to me the 

other day and several other people who are concerned about 

building an academic infrastructure. 

 

And I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would comment about 

the benefits to the university in terms of education and students 

with an AECL agreement that would put research, millions and 

millions of dollars of research, into something like the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to attempt 

a response at the member for Estevan's remarks, wherein I 

didn't find a lot of questions that related to the Estimates for the 

Department of Education, I would respond first by saying that 

post-secondary education which he referred to is a very 

important priority for us, which is the reason that we are 

carrying out the reviews 



June 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

that we referred to earlier, to make sure that any available 

funds are targeted as well as possible. 

 

If we had raised some money in the manner that he suggests, I 

suppose that . . . or I know that the first priority in the 

allocation of those funds would be to make a contribution 

toward the $760 million that we are first obliged to pay on the 

public debt before we have money for any kind of programs.  

That's the unfortunate circumstance which makes it necessary 

for us to reluctantly reduce the third-party grants to the 

educational institutions. 

 

As to the other references for how money should be raised, the 

bonds, agreements, harmonization, and so on, I suggest that the 

member opposite should reserve those questions until the 

Estimates for the appropriate departments, being I suppose the 

ministers of Finance, and Energy and Mines, will appear in this 

House. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Chairman, I . . . Mr. Chairman, 

excuse me.  Madam Minister, I had made the assumption 

already that you would say that you are going to allocate your 

money to the deficit rather than to education.  So I was trying 

to find out from your vantage point whether you thought $200 

million through tax harmonization was such a sinful or evil 

measure, particularly when it's recommended by such a broad 

cross-section of people in Saskatoon and across the province. 

 

And goodness knows, education needs it for this generation 

and the next generation.  And as the Minister of Education, I 

would suspect that you would be interested in that kind of 

money. 

 

Now fair enough, you've thrown the ball over to somebody else 

and say, well I can't really comment about that because it's just 

your decision to talk about your budget.  Well your budget is a 

little short.  And that's the concern because university students 

are being turned away, tuition is going up, you're cutting back 

on universities and technical schools, and you're spending 100 

million more than we did last year and you've obviously made 

some decisions to put the money some place else.  And 

secondly you've made the decision, and you're the minister 

responsible, to say no to the universities and no to the students 

and no to the technical schools because, let's say for an 

example, you wouldn't go for a couple of hundred million 

dollars in harmonization -- $200 million. 

 

Now, as a minister of the Crown, you are going to have to 

defend that to the university students and they would like an 

answer so even those students who are not going to get access 

to the university, could you provide an answer of why the 

Minister of Education in the province of Saskatchewan 

wouldn't want to have access to a simplified tax system that 

generates $200 million in additional revenue and one that was 

recommended by the Associate Minister of Finance when he 

stood on this side of the House and said one system makes 

sense. 

 

So I'd just maybe ask one more time and you probably won't 

want to answer this, but just in case you get up enough 

courage, would you explain to the students and 

to the university why you as a Minister of Education wouldn't 

want access to $200 million that you could get through 

something like tax harmonization. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member from Estevan I would like to say that even if, even if 

$200 million, your estimate, was raised through harmonization 

or any other means, there would still be, because we're 

committed to pay $760 million in interest this year on the 

public debt, we would still have a $560 million shortfall, over 

half a billion shortfall just to pay the interest.  So that kind of 

action wouldn't yield any additional dollars whatsoever for the 

education system or any other program.  And you mentioned, 

you talked about the chambers of commerce and people being 

in favour of these measures and asking me if I thought it was 

sinful, if harmonization was sinful.  What I think is sinful is 

that we've got a $15 billion deficit that we have to pay interest 

on, and that's why we have to ask everybody in the 

Saskatchewan community -- including students, including 

financial . . . or educational institutions -- we have to ask them 

all to share in the recovery program and to put this province 

back on a sound financial footing so that we can reorder our 

priorities and give the financial attention to education and the 

kinds of initiatives that will always be priorities for our 

government. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, what I want to know is 

some indication for the students and the people of 

Saskatchewan -- professors, academics -- where you might 

change course, where in fact you might consider that education 

is a stronger, bigger priority, particularly post-secondary, and 

that you would say, yes we are going to increase funding there 

because of the demand for knowledge, technology, in an 

information-based society. 

 

Now you said $200 million wouldn't do it for you.  Would you 

give us some indication of where you might decide to increase.  

Would it be 300 or 400?  Is there anything in the next budget, 

or the budget after that, or the budget after that, that would lead 

you to believe that students could have some hope, or 

professors could have some hope, or colleges, departments, 

research labs, and others, that you might look at allowing them 

to stay abreast of the current demands for education?  Or are 

you going to say, at all costs, you will not increase funding to 

education? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we seriously regret the 

circumstances that we inherited from the previous 

administration in terms of the $15 billion deficit.  You will 

notice that in the provincial budget the largest portion of 

spending is to the health area, in terms of about $1.5 billion, 

education about 920. 

 

Servicing the debt, which didn't even appear in the budget of 

1982 because there was no debt to service, is now our third 

biggest department.  If we didn't have to pay that $760 million 

before we devote a single dime to programs or to the priorities 

that are important to us, we would be able to say yes to those 

people in the education community that want more funding. 
 

As it is, we have to find, within the scarce dollars available, 

what are the best priorities and the best balance between 

undergraduate, postgraduate, technical, research, and make 

sure that whatever funds are 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1992 

available are priorized very carefully so that our education 

system suffers as little as possible while we attempt a 

permanent recovery so that we can return to a healthy fiscal 

situation. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, I obviously have a 

series of very specific questions, but I just want to go back at 

this approach you're taking one more time to see if you can 

give us some indication of whether you would seriously look at 

increasing funding to one of the most important parts of the 

next generation, and that's education. 

 

And it's simply to recall, if you will, the demands for increased 

spending in education in the last decade from members 

opposite, when as the Minister of Finance today pointed out, in 

1982 there was a $3.5 billion debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan and interest rates were running at 22 per cent. 

 

Now you can imagine, Madam Minister, 3.5 billion for 10 

years at 20 per cent.  Now that's there facing us regardless of 

other circumstances.  And the demand for education was going 

up, and under those circumstances, you found a real 

commitment to universities -- new geological sciences 

building, new administration buildings, new facilities, new 

agriculture facilities.  And increased numbers, and we stayed 

with it to help keep up with inflation, to fight 18, 20, 22 per 

cent interest rates. 

 

And you're saying in your first time in your administration that, 

oh my goodness, I'm going to have to cut back in education and 

cut back in facilities because the Finance minister says, well we 

told them that we were going to spend less but we're actually 

going to spend more, and whoops we've got a $517 million 

deficit and on top of that we're spending a hundred million 

dollars more than the other people did, but we've got to now cut 

Education. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I want you -- and I've got a series of 

questions -- I want you to tell this Assembly how much you cut 

the operating grants to the universities.  How much you cut the 

operating grants to both universities, the University of 

Saskatchewan and University of Regina, each of the four 

campuses of SIAST, and each of the regional colleges in the 

province.  And I want you and your officials to please compare 

those changes, where the percentage changes in the last five 

years, and if they want some homework, in the last 10 years, 

and compare that to the rates of inflation and the rates of 

interest rates and the number of students to find out how you're 

doing.  And if you're not going to change your mind on your 

philosophy -- and it looks like you're not and we can ask other 

ministers about the same thing -- then we're going to have a 

pretty good picture of the slope of the line that you're going to 

level and leave with education over the next three and a half to 

four years. 

 

So I want the percentage increases or decreases on operating 

grants for universities, for colleges, and regional colleges, 

technical institutes, and some comparison. 

 

And I know your officials will work very hard.  But they might 

have some of that from the years, so that you might be able to 

compare and help us compare how we're 

doing from year to year. 

 

And then perhaps you might even add that we'd like to have 

some indication interprovincially how you compare to other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Would the minister just answer yes or acknowledge that she 

could provide that kind of information or something like that so 

we'd have an indication of where she may be taking education 

here in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the 

committee rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 

 


