




















































Hansard: July 15, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1503 

 July 15, 1992 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order, I have received the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7), and it is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program to stand for this year. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. It gives me 

pleasure, Mr. Speaker to introduce to members of the 

Assembly someone I think we all know, the president of the 

SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees Union). George 

Rosenau was re-elected — we’ll all appreciate the value of this 

— was re-elected about three weeks ago I think, if my time is 

correct. 

 

Government is a partnership between those in executive branch 

and the many workers who strive with diligence and 

competence to provide services to the public. Mr. Rosenau is 

the duly elected spokesman of those people, and I’m sure we’ll 

all want to take a moment to congratulate him. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce an individual who is with Mr. 

Rosenau in the Speaker’s gallery. This individual is Pat 

Gallagher who is director of membership services with 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. And I look 

forward to meeting with Ms. Gallagher and Mr. Rosenau after 

question period to discuss matters of mutual concern. So please 

give her a warm welcome, as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the legislature five members of 

my constituency which they are seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. They are Daniel and Zoria Poilievre and their children 

Joanna, David, and Christina. I hope they have a pleasant day 

in Regina and I ask all the members of the legislature to 

welcome them. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, as member of the Constitutional 

Committee I rise today to talk about a unity project that is 

being undertaken by malls all across Canada, and their 

retailers. Canadians will be asked to participate in a national 

grass roots movement and 

demonstrate their desire to keep Quebec within Confederation. 

They will do so by filling out a friendship card available 

through shopping centres across the nation. These cards will be 

stuffed into mail-bags and picked up at a designated time. 

 

In early August they will begin to gather these bags in Victoria, 

B.C. (British Columbia), St. John’s, Newfoundland and 

shopping centres. They will be picked up along the Trans-

Canada Highway to Quebec. In each major city, smaller trucks 

will gather the city’s mail-bags and add them to the tractor-

trailers. 

 

The collection of friendship cards at each pick-up point is an 

essential part of the media promotion to generate growing 

awareness of the program amongst all Canadians, but 

especially political leaders and Quebecers. The collection route 

will be timed to reach Quebec City in late August while the 

National Assembly is in the process of debating the referendum 

issue. 

 

The single mission is to deliver one friendship card to each 

single household in the province of Quebec — to dramatically 

reach out to the people of Quebec and make it clear to them 

that we believe we belong together. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

pleased to announce today that the Pearl Group of companies 

has chosen Melfort as the site for a processing plant that will 

utilize cereal grain and straw as feedstock to produce ETBE 

and a number of other products. The plant will employ 

approximately 32 people and will not be reliant on any 

government aid. 

 

The good news for Melfort does not end here. Caldwell Power 

Drill of San Bernardino, California is also planning on 

relocating to Melfort pending the successful sale of a 

community bond issue. It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, 

that the owners of this company have already bought houses in 

Melfort indicating their optimism in the relocation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these developments in Melfort are further proof 

of the economic revival taking place in this province. 

Furthermore, it vindicates this government’s position that the 

private sector does not need to be enticed with lavish grants 

and government loan guarantees. 

 

These companies know a good thing when they see it, and that 

is a confident province populated with resourceful people. Mr. 

Speaker, these companies are seeing the initiatives and the 

chances in Saskatchewan — the opportunities — and they are 

taking it, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On July 8, the 

Minister of Economic Development announced an enhanced 

Destination Saskatchewan tourism program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tourism is one of the mainstays of our 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard July 15, 1992 

provincial economy. It generates roughly $780 million in 

revenues each year. It employs almost 16,000 people directly 

and another 5,600 indirectly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are four components to the new Destination 

Saskatchewan program. First is the travel-generator program. 

For your information, we define a travel-generator as a tourism 

project or activity that has the potential of attracting significant 

numbers of tourists from outside the province. 

 

This program will provide financial assistance for major new 

tourism initiatives. There will also be a marketing development 

component which will provide support for out-of-province 

marketing of events, bidding support for conventions, and the 

development and marketing of inbound tour packages. 

 

Thirdly, a tourism association component will give operational 

and marketing support for key non-profit tourism groups. 

Fourthly, the planning and research component will provide 

assistance for tourism project, feasibility studies, market 

research, and destination area planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier changes made to the provincial tourism 

strategy are already shown impressive results. In the first five 

months of this year, inquiries at Tourism Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 

opportunity, along with a lot of other colleagues here, to attend 

a gathering at SaskEnergy, and became aware that SaskEnergy 

has developed a unique relationship with Energy & Chemical 

Workers Union members and management employees. 

 

The joint dialogue process is a co-operative venture that 

empowers SaskEnergy employees to discuss and resolve issues 

and problems. Working towards common goals and objectives, 

this process is an alternative to the traditional confrontational 

style of union-management relations. 

 

SaskEnergy’s joint dialogue committee is responsible for a 

number of achievements, including the improvement of gas 

service men training program, the employee development 

program, the re-establishment of employee orientation 

seminars, and the corporate mission statement, and 

participating in the business process review. 

 

This notable co-operative venture has gained international 

recognition. Recently an Australian delegation of union and 

management visited Saskatchewan on a fact-finding mission to 

understand the workings of the joint dialogue process. 

 

And I wish to commend SaskEnergy union and management 

employees for their very positive contributions to service 

delivery in the economy through 

these innovations, and also just to say that the atmosphere in 

that enterprise was very positive and it was enjoyable visiting 

with them. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we 

witnessed perhaps the greatest outrage against the democratic 

functioning of this Assembly in history. What is happening 

should be clearly, clearly reflected. We have a government bent 

on imposing a unilateral rule change with the force of closure 

to achieve passage of a Bill that eliminates fundamental rights 

under the common law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Democracy is a fragile thing. It rests not on a firmament of 

indestructible law but on a thread of trust that those who hold 

power in the name of the people will wield that power with a 

heavy awareness of the need, the absolute commandment, not 

to stray from the democratic process. Today that trust is 

broken; that thread is snapped. The bottom line in this series of 

debates is the government’s decision that it will remove the 

legal rights of Saskatchewan people, and if it needs to trample 

the democratic institutions of the people in the process, so be it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a sad day of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we’re learning in Saskatchewan 

that economic development does not mean risking a lot of 

taxpayers’ money in large corporate megaprojects. It means 

taking Saskatchewan talents and resources and building from 

our strengths. 

 

And I want to relate to the House an example of prairie 

ingenuity going on in my home city of Saskatoon. Select 

Millwork has been hit by the recession in the construction 

industry but to cope the company has used ingenuity, necessity 

and market demand to bring to life a new creation. Select 

Millwork is now leading the way in the manufacture of a new-

age economical casket. Originally designed by an Alvena 

company that went into bankruptcy, Select was confident they 

could produce and market the contemporary design 

successfully. 

 

These coffins are of a lacquered finish and available in white, 

black, or green with woodgrain highlights. Select Millwork has 

recently sold 20 of the new coffins and expect to sell between 

30 and 60 each month. 

 

The best part, Mr. Speaker, is that this company has embarked 

on this innovative venture without any government hand-outs. 

And local business like this, Mr. Speaker, gives us all 

confidence that we will indeed rebuild our economy. And this 

is good news for the opposition . . .  

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



July 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, over the past few months this 

province’s people have been subjected to a very sad and hurtful 

litany of NDP (New Democratic Party) government mistakes, 

including tax increases, pension plan  cuts, changes for 

diabetics, hospital and school closures. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

worst mistake is the fact that this government believes it has 

total licence to change people’s lives retroactively and without 

consultation. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture tell this House why it is he has 

refused to compromise. Why does he stubbornly and without 

regard to farmers’ needs, refuse to remove the retroactive parts 

of the GRIP legislation and let farmers have their day in court 

to prove whether the government is right or wrong once and for 

all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the clauses of the Bill will 

become apparent to the members opposite when they allow it 

to be introduced, and we will have adequate time to discuss it 

then. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, the open and accountable 

government and arrogance is a joke in the country. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want the members of this Assembly to understand 

that and the people opposite to understand that. 

 

They’re using their majority to strip the opposition of its rights, 

and by virtue of this fact are stripping farmers of their rights. 

They are not consulting with farmers. They are taking them to 

court. They are not helping farmers. They are throwing them 

off their land. They are not telling the farmers the truth; in fact 

they are legislating a lie, Mr. Speaker. Once again . . .  

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member for Morse knows 

full well that that is unparliamentary, and I ask him to 

withdraw the word, legislating a lie. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw. Once again, Mr. 

Minister, why are you so afraid of farmers? Why won’t you let 

them have their day in court? Why won’t you pull all together 

your retroactive parts in the legislation, in exchange for the 

opposition co-operation on the Rules Committee, to have 

something to date you have so far arrogantly refused. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

fully aware that the process of change to the farm legislation 

that began with a hurriedly put-together collection of items into 

a Bill that didn’t result in a federal-provincial agreement last 

year until September 19, after most people’s crops were in the 

bin, that our review of that very flawed program began on the 

basis of legislation introduced by your government with a 

committee appointed for the most part by your government, 

that the report that came forward I’m sure is 

very much like a report that would come forward in any case, 

identifying the serious weaknesses in the old program and 

weaknesses that many analysts have identified and the changes 

about which they concurred. 

 

The bottom line on agricultural support in Saskatchewan is that 

the programs that the members opposite engaged in with the 

federal government in terms of taking on of the province 

responsibility and allowing farmers to be ravaged by the costs 

of programs they cannot afford, simply has put agriculture in 

very tough straits here. 

 

And I ask the members opposite to stop their negative 

bickering and get together with us in encouraging the federal 

government to offer the third-line programming that every 

government in Canada agrees was offered by the federal 

government. And you know that as well, and now you refuse to 

support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s arrogance is 

only outdone by its stubbornness. You won’t compromise. You 

won’t let farmers have their day in court. In fact, you and your 

colleagues are afraid to meet with them. Rural people are 

ashamed of your ministers, Mr. Premier. They’re afraid of 

them and they’re ashamed of them. 

 

Rural people met in SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) meetings, they’ve had livestock regional 

meetings, and you would rather fly over the drought areas than 

go down there and visit with them. And to top it all off, your 

Crop Insurance minister said: who says Crop Insurance was 

intended to save farmers in the first place . . . and Crop 

Insurance. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: will the Minister of 

Agriculture not today admit he has totally failed the farmers? 

He has lost their confidence and any respect he might have had. 

Mr. Minister, will you tell the farmers you are wrong, or will 

you continue your stubborn and arrogant way and keep this 

retroactive, regressive GRIP legislation on the Table? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite makes 

obviously as many statements about which he has no 

knowledge as they engaged in governing without any 

knowledge for the last 10 years. 

 

The fact is that a good chunk of the agricultural caucus drove 

through, meeting with communities, across the southern part of 

the province. The only thing that was not apparent to the 

members with whom we spoke was where the members of the 

constituencies that supposedly are elected there were to deal 

with these farm programs and to deal with the crisis with 

respect to the federal responsibility on this matter. I think you 

have your own taxpayers to answer and your own 

constituencies for not being there and dealing with their issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I met with representatives 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard July 15, 1992 

of the hog board from various parts of the province yesterday 

and they told me this minister isn’t worth his salt. If he would 

have some salt in his . . . and jam, he would reinstate some of 

the programs that he cut and sawed off. 

 

I want to ask the minister this question: is there any 

compromise the Minister of Agriculture would accept which 

would allow this House again to function normally, or be so 

hidebound by his blind ambition that he will, like a deaf and 

dumb mule, pack this regressive GRIP program off into the 

sunset no matter how many farmers he loses in the process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in this business 

long enough to realize that sometimes, sometimes minds with 

little else to occupy them, cannot construct much more of a 

question than that. But there’s very little in that question that 

deserves a response. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to try and get 

through to the minister one more time. Your Premier professes 

compromise on the constitution, on the constitution of our 

country. He says compromise is the way to go. Would you 

compromise some of the things, given opportunity, for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan under the GRIP 

legislation, to allow them the opportunity to choose between 

’91 and ’92 GRIP? Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, if he 

were to analyse honestly the reality of farm programming when 

you would realize that the question he asks is one that couldn’t 

be accomplished if he wanted it to be. The fact is that the 1992 

GRIP program is based on advice from producers that there 

were serious flaws in the old one and that the . . . running side-

by-side programs is an option that is only real in the political 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. There was very little 

interruption when the member asked his question and I ask the 

members to please extend the same courtesy to the minister in 

answering the question. Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The only place in which a side-by-side 

option has any reality is in the dream world of the politics of 

the members opposite. The fact is that the program is in place. 

It represents the advice that producers gave. It recognizes 

clearly — and this government has never denied that — that 

the program that was begun by the members opposite last year 

and foisted on people across Canada, which cost governments 

and producers too much, is one that needs serious redress. And 

we, I want to tell you, have raised with the federal government 

at the agriculture ministers’ meeting the cost-sharing question, 

the third-line triggering question that you people have denied to 

support, and the other issues about making a program out of 

this that is useful for farmers and stabilizing to the industry. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, our phone in our caucus office 

and my constituency office and my personal office keep 

ringing off the hook from all over the province. Keep those 

bells ringing, Mr. Speaker. They say to you, Mr. Minister, they 

say keep those bells ringing because they don’t want the 

changes to the GRIP program that you’ve introduced. 

 

My question to you is this — and I’ve got them from all your 

rural constituencies, if you want to know. I could name them 

and I did in debate — my question is this: will you not prove 

the people of this province are wrong when they tell us your 

government has absolutely no regard for democratic rights and 

let the farmers have their day in court without the interference 

of your retroactive legislation? Will you allow them to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the member 

opposite were to speak with absolute integrity, he would 

possibly recognize that the ringing that is happening in his head 

was there long before anybody’s telephone started ringing. 

 

There is a general recognition that we need to get on with 

implementing the farm program so farmers know what they’re 

doing. There is a general recognition that farmers need more 

income support. We need the support of the federal 

government to provide the third line of defence that was 

promised and that your leader recognizes because he sat at the 

federal-provincial table along with the other ministers who 

recognize that the provinces were promised third line of 

defence across Canada. 

 

If you want to sit there now and deny it and deny that kind of 

support, go ahead. But don’t pretend to the people of 

Saskatchewan. . .  

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I enter this debater to direct a 

specific question to the Deputy Premier. The Minister of 

Agriculture just said that it was a dream, that there was 

problems. Let me say . . . preface to my question, Mr. Minister. 

There is, Mr. Deputy Premier, an agricultural crisis, and that’s 

not a dream. There is a drought, serious drought in parts of the 

province, and that’s not a dream. There is a court case before 

the people of Saskatchewan today on agriculture and GRIP, 

and that’s not a dream. And there are rule changes in this 

legislature that are historic, and that’s not a dream. 

 

In that evidence, Mr. Deputy Premier, realizing the plight of 

rural Saskatchewan people and the survival of democracy in 

this Legislative Assembly, would not you respect the rights of 

individuals and the public process and let the Minister of 

Agriculture introduce his legislation without the retroactive 

nature, so that in fact people can have their day in court, so that 

we know that there is respect for democracy at a time of crisis 

on two 



July 15, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

fronts in this province, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 

about a Bill that he will not allow to proceed to the proper 

forum for its debate, and then on the other hand talks about 

appropriate democratic process. Mr. Speaker, I simply ask the 

members opposite to be somewhat consistent in their actions 

and their words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — I would go right to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP censorship has put a stranglehold on free speech and 

debate. It will lead to forced changes in the fundamental 

element of Saskatchewan’s charter and charter of rights. 

 

The Premier of the province of Saskatchewan has paraded in 

front of the television cameras his defence of democracy and 

compromise. And when you’re looking at the constitution, the 

Premier of Saskatchewan says, well we’ll be co-operative and 

we’ll compromise. Yet when it comes down to changing rules 

in Saskatchewan’s legislature, the NDP act like tyrants. 

 

I ask the NDP Premier: will you treat Saskatchewan people and 

this Legislative Assembly with the same respect that you treat 

changes in the constitution, and have co-operation and 

consultation and allow people to go through the democratic 

process like we encourage across the country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition, we have been seeking to give 

you and your opposition the opportunity to deal with 

resolutions and government business, and you have sought all 

manner of means to avoid that. 

 

Last night, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you adjourned . . . for 

instance you adjourned this House for five hours. And if there’s 

any more charitable reason than the fact you wanted to go 

watch a ball game, I’d like to hear it from you. That’s 

irresponsible, and that can’t continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking here today about 

the cowardly acts of a large majority government. If I go to the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the NDP Premier . . . 

and they know that we have offered many compromises to look 

at 1991 GRIP and 1992 GRIP. Let the farmers have their day in 

court. Look at ways that we can put some money in the hands 

of farmers. 

 

And I quote the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald, of February 23, 

1991, simply says this, and I say this in front of the NDP 

Premier: tax increases are not needed to pay for GRIP and 

NISA (net income stabilization account) program, says NDP 

leader, Roy Romanow. End of quote. Now they hide and won’t 

let the farmers talk about their insurance program. 

My question to the NDP Premier in the province of 

Saskatchewan: are you more interested in saving the career of a 

Minister of Agriculture who obviously made a mistake, or are 

you more interested in the public and in the farmers of 

Saskatchewan who are facing a crisis of historic proportions? 

Will you stick up for the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was two 

part, and I shall try to deal with it briefly. We sought 

compromise with your party. We thought last week we had it. 

And just about the time we were ready to conclude an 

agreement, you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! On both sides. Let’s 

have order and let the minister be able to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just about the time we were to 

conclude an agreement with your designated representatives, 

you made us an offer you knew we couldn’t accept, and it was 

so designed. We have sought compromise with you; it is 

apparent you don’t want it. It is apparent, for some reason or 

other, you want to continue to obstruct this legislature ad 

nauseaum. And the public have told us in the clearest terms 

that this must come to an end, and that the government 

business must go on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker I have to read on the record to the 

people of Saskatchewan, the direct quotes of the NDP Leader 

when he stood in this position. Because we’re talking about, 

one, afraid of GRIP legislation and the people and the courts 

and the farmers, and now changing rules so that you can’t get 

at it. 

 

And I quote. This is the NDP Leader saying here about changes 

in the rules: 

 

What new-found Democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

What new-found democracy is this? What kind of charade is 

this? What kind of an unprecedented action it is for these 

people to bring forward a motion for rules changes without 

consultation . . .  

 

End of quote from the NDP Leader. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, to the NDP Leader: in the light of the fact 

that you can’t face farmers and in the light of the fact you must 

force these rule changes, won’t you now allow the people of 

Saskatchewan to talk in a general sense about this Legislative 

Assembly and let the Agriculture Committee and members of 

the back bench go out and talk to people about GRIP before 

you bring forward this legislation on the rules in this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, it seems necessary to 

remind you . . . it seems necessary to remind the former 

premier that we were prepared to send the motion on bell-

ringing back to the committee if you’d let us 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard July 15, 1992 

introduce the Bill without ringing the bells. We were 

encouraged in that view by your chosen representatives. 

However, as soon as we got to conclude an agreement, you 

pulled it. It is apparent, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you want 

to obstruct the work of this legislature and the public of 

Saskatchewan have said that the work of this government must 

go on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s abundantly clear that the 

NDP Premier with a very large majority is prepared to keep 

farmers from having their day in court. The NDP Premier is 

prepared to unilaterally change the rules in this Legislative 

Assembly. The NDP Premier is prepared to hide his ministers 

from the public. The NDP Premier is prepared to say, what we 

said before wasn’t true; we’ve changed our mind, and say 

something else, which would be called hypocritical in any 

man’s language. The NDP Premier, Mr. Speaker, is prepared to 

hide in this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Will the members please 

quit interrupting. And I’ve asked the Leader of the Opposition, 

he’s had ample time now, to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question, and I’ll put 

forward this in this dark day in Saskatchewan legislature, under 

the circumstances of these terribly difficult rules. Mr. Speaker, 

in light of the fact that the farmers can’t go to court and the 

government won’t respond, and in light of the fact that the 

NDP . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve asked the Leader of the 

Opposition to put his question. Order. I will determine if there 

will be a next question. Leader of the Opposition, will you 

please put your question. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have put question and 

question and question to this Legislative Assembly and to the 

deputy and to the NDP Premier. I really see no point in 

continuing this, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:05 until 5 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m. and the time of daily 

adjournment having been reached the adjournment motion now 

lapses. This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


