




















































Hansard: July 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1275 

 July 7, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's five 

individuals sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, that brought 

this petition to me this morning to present in this House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister's office that she 

has someone to meet with these people later this afternoon, and 

I wish to thank the minister. 

 

The petition is as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

in Legislature Assembled: 

The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

That the Elbow school is a physically sound facility 

capable of accommodating all elementary school students 

of Elbow and Strongfield schools, and further that the 

decision to close this school demonstrates a lack of fiscal 

responsibility and a disregard for the quality of education 

for the children of the Elbow area. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse this action in recognition that 

maintaining both Loreburn Central High School and 

Elbow Elementary School would provide a maximum 

quality of education at minimal cost. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's approximately 400 names on this petition, 

and it is a pleasure to table this in the legislature.  They're from 

the Elbow area and also from the surrounding areas: some from 

Loreburn, Strongfield, and from Outlook and around the area.  

I won't read the names because there's 400.  And it's a pleasure 

to present this to the Assembly today.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Speaker, as chair of the Special Committee on 

Rules and Procedures presents the second report of the 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee recommends the following amendments 

to the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

The first recommendation is for a rule change to establish 

a time limit on the length that the division 

bells may ring during a recorded division.  This change in 

the rules brings Saskatchewan into step with other 

Canadian legislatures, all of which have restrictions on the 

length that the bells may ring during a recorded vote. 

 

The second recommendation is for a new procedure to 

provide a period of three sitting days during which 

consideration of a government public Bill might be 

postponed.  The purpose of suspending a Bill would be to 

allow members an opportunity to further study the Bill, 

consider amendments made in debate, and to review 

public reaction. 

 

Your committee recommends the following amendments 

to the Rules and Procedures and further recommends that 

the said rules take effect on the date this report is 

concurred in by the Assembly: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

be amended by adding the following after rule 36.1: 

 

"Length of division bells" 

 

36.2(1) When the Speaker has put the question on a 

motion and a recorded division is requested under rule 36, 

the bells to call in the members shall sound for not more 

than 30 minutes. 

 

(2) Notwithstanding sub-rule (1), where a recorded 

division is requested in the following cases, the division 

bells shall sound for not more than 10 minutes. 

 

(i) on a non-debatable motion; 

(ii) on a motion moved without notice; 

(iii) in a Committee of the Whole or Committee of 

Finance. 

 

And further: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

be amended by adding the following after rule 55: 

 

55.1(1) Proceedings on a public Bill introduced by a 

minister shall, at the request of the official opposition, be 

suspended for a period of three sitting days following first 

reading either before or during second reading debate or 

during committee stage.  Such request can be made only 

once during consideration of any Bill and shall be made 

orally by the member standing in his or her place. 

 

And: 

 

55.1(2) sub-rule (1) does not apply to an appropriation 

Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I shall, at 

the conclusion of my comments, move a motion 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

that the report of the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures be concurred in. 

 

I want to address, Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments -- and 

they will be brief -- on the matter of bell-ringing, before I do.  

Those of us, Mr. Speaker, who choose to sacrifice careers, who 

run for office, who make the sacrifices that it takes to be here, 

do so I think because at the end of the day we believe that 

reason and the power of reason has the power to influence 

human events -- that we are something more than just corks on 

a sea, tossed this way and that by the wind.  We believe in the 

legislature.  We believe in our ability to influence a course of 

human events by reason and public discussion. 

 

The procedure of bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, is at complete 

variance with that approach -- at complete variance.  It is in 

essence anti-democratic.  It has, Mr. Speaker, been used only a 

very few times.  It was first devised by the former member 

from the Yukon, Mr. Nielsen, in response to a Bill put forward 

by the Trudeau government containing a thousand clauses and 

touching upon several different Bills -- a true monstrosity of a 

Bill which the federal opposition felt they could not deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been used a few times since but public 

opinion has been coalescing against this as a tactic because it 

does interrupt the work of the legislature, because it means this 

legislature can no longer function as a place of public 

discussion or a conduit through which public business can be 

done. 

 

That is the reason, Mr. Speaker, why in a goodly number of 

Canadian jurisdictions it's never been used at all and the issue's 

never been relevant, and why in those jurisdictions where it has 

been used it has been . . . rule changes have been made to 

prohibit its use. 

 

There is no question about where the public in Saskatchewan 

stand.  The opposition members, the member from Rosthern, 

the member from Morse, admit public opinion opposes the use 

of bell-ringing.  It is essentially anti-democratic and the public 

understand that.  The member from Saskatoon Greystone 

admits the public are opposed to the use of this as a tactic. 

 

That is why I believe, Mr. Speaker, it was in response to public 

opinion that you called the Rules Committee and asked them to 

consider the matter.  We have done so, Mr. Speaker, and we in 

essence agree with public opinion and believe the public are 

right with respect to this particular procedure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to address my comments to the specific 

use of it on this occasion.  Mr. Speaker, the members of the 

opposition who are engaged in this debate with me in such a 

vigorous fashion will recall that we believed in the spring that 

this would not be necessary.  In January and February and 

March of this year when the Rules Committee was meeting, we 

did not believe this was necessary.  And I didn't believe this 

was going to be necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have witnessed here is what we have 

witnessed from members of the Conservative Party virtually 

since 1982 -- the irresponsible use of power. 

The first controversial piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, to 

come before this legislature, they walk out on.  We have no 

assurance that it's not going to happen on the second 

controversial piece of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member from Wilkie have a 

question or a comment he wishes to make? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Can I ask a question? 

 

The Speaker: -- You will have your turn to ask a question, sir.  

Later.  And I wish the member would not continue to interrupt 

when the member is speaking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have no assurance, Mr. Speaker, 

that this won't be used again and again.  It was used on the first 

controversial piece of legislation to come before this 

legislature.  And we have concluded, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

work of this legislature is to continue, it must do so without this 

procedure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the comments of members opposite have left little 

doubt that they feel this tactic is justified because they feel 

strongly about it.  Mr. Speaker, this procedure in effect gives 

the opposition a veto.  That is the effect of bell-ringing.  It 

gives the opposition a veto.  A parliamentary government 

cannot operate with the opposition, who have an interest in 

seeing government fail, have a veto over government activities.  

That is not the way this institution works.  A congressional 

form of government, such as is utilized by our good neighbours 

to the south, operates very differently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe the time has come to outlaw this 

procedure.  We believe we have massive public support. 

 

I want to make one other comment as well, Mr. Speaker, about 

the opposition tactics in this regard.  I have been asked by 

members of the media, what's the difference between this and 

1989?  I want, for members opposite, to point out that there are 

a number of differences, the most important of which was that 

the opportunity was used to show massive public support.  

Within a day after it occurring, there were huge rallies across 

the province.  There were a hundred thousand names on a 

petition. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Your union friends. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And we believe that the . . . Well the 

member from Wilkie seems to believe it was only union men at 

the meetings.  I want to say that there was a rally in your area 

where there aren't many union people, and there were a great 

number of people there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ignore, if I can, the scurrilous 

comments of the members opposite.  Mr. Speaker, there was a 

massive show of public support and I truly believe the 

government of the day changed its mind, not because of a 17 

day walk-out, but because of a massive show of public support. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we need to contrast that with what happened this 

time.  What happened this time was that a couple of days later, 

from the golf course in Estevan, the now Leader of the 

Opposition stated that they weren't returning for an indefinite 

period of time. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

No effort to garner public support.  No effort to have any 

rallies.  No petitions have been presented to this date.  There 

was nothing to indicate any public support except a poll which 

I think nobody, no independent person . . . no 

independent-minded person gives any credence to the poll, and 

anecdotal evidence, and that's it. 

 

The opposition, Mr. Speaker, simply want a veto over 

government activities.  And certainly the opposition members 

have every right to use legitimate tactics to delay, to ask 

government to reconsider, and there are a number of those 

which have been available for a long period of time and which 

don't involve having this legislature stalled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with one other brief item, and that 

was a comment which I made to a reporter who asked me 

whether or not this was being done in relation to the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) Bill.  And I said no, it 

wasn't.  This is being done because we believe -- as I did not in 

the spring -- we now believe the government . . . the opposition 

are going to use this whenever they feel strongly about an 

issue, and this parliament simply can't operate with the 

opposition having a veto. 

 

(1345) 

 

I was then asked whether or not the Bill might proceed, 

whether or not this might be suspended if we had an 

undertaking from the opposition that they wouldn't use it on 

anything but GRIP.  I said no.  I said that the procedure itself 

was improper and should be ruled out of order. 

 

Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the reporter has gone to members of 

the opposition.  I simply say that any comments made now 

about what . . . when you might use the tactic and when you 

might not use the tactic are coming far too late.  The Rules 

Committee met over several days.  There was no suggestion, 

no suggestion that this would be the last use ever of this tactic.  

Indeed all the language of the members in that committee 

suggested they thought it was legitimate and they thought it 

was legitimate to use it whenever they felt appropriate. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, before sitting down, point out that the 

amendments which have been offered are among the most 

generous in Canada.  And no jurisdiction outside of Canada, to 

my knowledge, uses this bell-ringing tactic.  Only in Canada 

has this occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have offered . . . these rule changes will give 

to this legislature the same opportunity to return for a vote as 

exists in the House of Commons, where I don't think anyone 

suggests that the bell-ringing is a necessary tactic for the 

opposition to effectively function. 

 

In addition to what is offered in the House of Commons, Mr. 

Speaker, we are providing a three-day hoist.  We are saying, 

Mr. Speaker, that at any stage of the Bill, but only once, that at 

any stage of the Bill they may in effect suspend the Bill and the 

government can't return to it for three days.  That doesn't exist 

anywhere else.  We have gone the extra mile to ensure that this 

opposition can function. 

Mr. Speaker, there are plenty of tactics available to the 

opposition when it thinks the government is wrong.  You're 

always given one adjournment.  That's almost always done, 

except in the most exceptional circumstances.  Mr. Speaker, 

there is first reading and then 48 hours must elapse . . . sorry, 

24 hours must elapse before second reading.  Then there's 

Committee of the Whole.  The whole procedure takes, at a 

minimum, the whole procedure takes days. 

 

There is the time-honoured practice of a filibuster, and it has 

been used with great effectiveness in this legislature.  I recall in 

the mid-'70s the then Liberal opposition began a filibuster in 

January and finished . . . began a filibuster in December on 

potash taxation and ended in early February.  And those 10 or 

12 members, as I recall it, carried that debate during that period 

of time.  At the end of the day they did not have a lot of public 

support for what they were doing and the filibuster came to an 

end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those tactics are still available.  None of that has 

been ruled out.  What we are saying here, as other jurisdictions 

have said, is that this tactic which has members holding up the 

House and issuing statements from golf courses about when 

they will and will not return to government to do the public 

business, is simply not satisfactory. 

 

I want to address a brief comment about the position taken by 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone in the committee.  She 

stated, Mr. Speaker, that she was opposed to bell-ringing, 

found that the motion dealt with it in a fair fashion  

_- I think that's a reasonable summation -- but did not like the 

timing, and was therefore going to abstain.  Mr. Speaker, I 

think the public are going to equate an abstention with an 

abdication of responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recall many years ago, the late Tommy Douglas 

appearing on national television being asked by a national 

reporter: isn't it true the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) are just Liberals in a hurry?  Mr. Douglas's 

response was: any Liberal in motion would appear to be a 

Liberal in a hurry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some things which simply don't 

change.  We have the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

vigorously, with determination, making sure she's seen to be on 

both sides of the issue -- both for and against it.  And that's 

what an abstention is. 

 

One could take her argument, which may be sincere, may well 

be sincere, that she finds favour with the motion but is opposed 

to its timing.  That might be an argument for voting in favour 

of it with some qualifications.  That could be an argument for 

voting against the motion.  It is not an argument for abdicating 

leadership.  At the end of the day I do not believe the public 

will support those who abdicate their responsibilities when the 

going gets tough, and this isn't an easy issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those reasons, because there are other 

alternatives available to this opposition and there are more 

alternatives here than there are elsewhere, because other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, have abolished this as a tactic, I 

therefore move: 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

That the second report of the Special Committee on Rules 

and Procedures be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Normally I get up and I'm glad to get into a debate and go with 

the blows as it were.  But I think what we have seen today in 

this legislature bodes ill for the democratic process.  I do think 

that it is a sad day for the people of Saskatchewan when we 

have a government with its massive majority being able to 

ramrod and railroad this legislature along the narrow path that 

they have determined. 

 

And the method and the procedure in which it has been done 

shows utter contempt, disregard, and the height of arrogance by 

this massive majority government, toward the democratic 

process. 

 

And I was amazed as I sat and I listened to the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs.  I couldn't believe the words that 

were coming forth from his lips.  And I thought for a while that 

he was, in his droll, dry way, entertaining us with his wit.  

Because it was funny in a sense that he would make such a 

diametrically opposed position that he had a year ago -- 

diametrically opposed, totally contrary, flip-flop. 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, how can you make those statements that 

you are making today when I have before me copies of 

Hansard and the comments that you made in the previous 

bell-ringing episode of 1989?  And I would just warn the public 

and those people who are interested in this debate that what 

you're going to see in this legislature today, I believe, will 

almost defy explanation.  Because I suspect that members 

opposite will be rising in consort, if they have the courage to 

get up and speak on this issue, and will be doing exactly the 

same as the member opposite, the associate Finance minister, 

has done. 

 

It's deplorable.  It's a deplorable situation when we have a 

government like this coming in and saying, we're not going to 

stay with tradition in this House.  We're not going to operate 

under the normal operating rules that this House has operated 

through since its inception, I would say -- and I challenge 

someone to find and prove me wrong -- and the basic 

fundamental premise under which this House operates which is 

in the spirit of co-operation. 

 

This House -- and I say this to the House Leader -- this House 

cannot work unless you and I have an element of faith and trust 

in each other.  And we have had that.  And I think we've done a 

pretty darn good job of co-operating and communicating 

together.  And the House has been working well. 

 

But there's only one reason that this House has been working 

well, and that's because we've had that spirit.  And that spirit 

was elucidated by the . . . and I don't want to bring the Speaker 

into this, but during the times when we had the Rules and 

Procedures meetings.  And we sat down as a committee -- you 

had a preponderance of members there.  You could have 

railroaded, your could 

have ramrodded, you could have done exactly then what you 

did today, this morning, but you chose not to.  And you 

included the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Now we sat down as a group of individuals representing the 

three major parties of this province and said, the rules of the 

legislature should be changed.  We agreed.  And we sat down 

and said: how will we do this?  Well the only way in which this 

House can operate is by consensus -- not total agreement.  I 

mean I haven't got my head in the clouds.  We know that we 

can't have total agreement.  But we can have agreements that 

we can all live by, that we can live by.  And we agreed upon 

that. 

 

And then we decided that what we were going to be doing is 

those issues that it will be difficult to come to an agreement 

with, we will put aside.  We will agree to disagree for now.  

One of those issues was bell-ringing.  And we said, let's not let 

that issue jeopardize the rest of the procedure. 

 

And then we spent, Mr. Speaker, I'm not quite sure how many 

meetings but literally tens of hours of meetings where we came 

to a resolution of many of the items that were of concern to us, 

where we thought that if we adopt these procedures the House 

will operate more effectively. 

 

And we've been operating during this session with these new 

rules.  And I think we've been fairly pleased with many of the 

innovations that we have.  Members' statements, for example, I 

think is going over fairly well.  And there are other rules that 

we have done and we have adopted and that we will concur in, 

I'm sure after the 50 session . . . trial period is over. 

 

And that's how we operate.  And that's how we can continue to 

operate in this House.  But when you take an isolated issue, 

albeit important, such as bell-ringing and say, whoop we're 

going to take that one out of the closet now because we have 

need . . . There's another issue driving us.  We have need to 

address this issue because it's standing in our way of 

accomplishing what we want to accomplish now. 

 

And then you bring up the bell-ringing issue on a unilateral 

decision, using your majority over the protestations of both of 

the other parties present, and you rammed it through.  And we 

have it in the House now, and we're debating it.  And it ain't 

going to work.  It cannot work; it will not work.  Because that 

is not the spirit of the democratic process. 

 

We're not naïve.  We know the government will have its way.  

But you cannot take the bell-ringing issue and hold it up to the 

public and say: this is the issue of the day; this is the issue of 

the moment.  It is not. 

 

And I say to all members, and I say to the public: the issue that 

we are debating here this afternoon is not the issue of 

bell-ringing.  Bell-ringing is not the issue.  The motivation for 

you folks bringing this forward in this high-handed way is 

GRIP.  Make no doubt about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- GRIP is the issue.  Your court case against 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

the farmers, your court case for breaking contracts with 55,000 

farmers in the province -- that is the issue.  That is what is 

driving you.  And you will not use this legislature to 

accomplish that. 

 

Now I agree with you, and I've said that all along.  And I 

agreed with you this morning as well in committee, that 

bell-ringing should be looked at.  I don't think any of the 

opposition parties have ever said no, we're going to close our 

eyes to that; bell-ringing is not something that we are prepared 

to do any research into.  We've not said that. 

 

And I am well aware of some of the studies that have been 

done and have been run in your local paper here that says, 

so-and-so-many per cent of the people oppose bell-ringing.  Of 

course they do.  Maybe I do too.  But let's take a look at the 

issues that are involved. 

 

Let's bring forth the reason why the bells have to ring, and 

immediately you get a different response -- immediately. 

 

Now I have been out in Saskatchewan talking to the people that 

are most directly affected by this -- most directly affected -- 

and that is the farmers.  But it's not only the farmers that are 

expressing concern to me. You folks there that think that you're 

hidden inside the city, safe walls of the city -- the folks there 

are recognizing that what is happening here, what this 

bell-ringing issue is about has the great potential of affecting 

them as well.  So it's an issue across the province, but 

particularly the farmers. 

 

And I went and I took some of this time to go to the SARM 

meetings, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, to find out was there support for the 

bell-ringing; were we on the right track as far as the farmers 

were concerned.  And do you know what those . . . invariably, I 

have not had one person come up to me and say, stop the 

bell-ringing. 

 

(1400) 

 

And I've been at parades, I've been at auction sales, I've been at 

events throughout my constituency.  But not only in my 

constituency, I have been in North Battleford, I have been in 

Saskatoon, I've been in Kelvington, I've been in Wynyard.  I 

have been where the SARM had its annual or semi-annual 

regional meetings. 

 

There was support.  There was solid support.  But one question 

that I was asked by the leaders of that organization was this.  

You know, they said, when Bob Pickering was minister of 

Rural Development he came to a few of our meetings.  He did.  

When Neal Hardy was minister, he never missed a meeting.  

He never missed a regional meeting in all the time that he was 

Rural Development minister.  Because he was concerned and 

he wanted to find out and have his pulse . . . his fingers and his 

hand on the pulse of what was out there in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But do you know what they told me?  The Minister of Rural 

Development has not been at one of these meetings.  Not one.  

And I'll guarantee you he wasn't at the three that I was at. 

But do you know what is more disconcerting -- and you say we 

don't have support for what we're doing -- that at not one of 

those meetings was there an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly).  They were 

conspicuous by their absence.  Not one of your folks had the 

courage to get away from your bunker mentality and go and 

face the folks, not one of you.  Not one of you rural folks were 

out there to any of these meetings. 

 

Do you know what a SARM meeting is?  Have you ever been 

to one?  That's where you get the pulse.  That's where you get 

the feeling of where it's all at.  But I guess when you develop a 

bunker mentality you haven't got the courage and the 

convictions of what you're doing to go and face the folks. 

 

Don't tell me there isn't support for bell-ringing.  Bell-ringing 

as such, we can argue about that.  That's fair game.  But when 

you add the issue that is involved, it's totally a different story.  

And don't tell me, member from Churchill Downs, that there's 

any equivalency between what is happening today and what 

happened in 1989. 

 

The fight in 1989 was because you folks did not want the 

Saskatchewan people to be able to participate in the economic 

activity of this province.  You said no to bonds.  You said no to 

share offerings.  Yours was a philosophically, ideologically 

driven traumatic experience when we gave the folks of 

Saskatchewan the opportunity to participate financially. So that 

is why you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I called the members to order 

before when the member from Regina Churchill Downs was 

speaking.  I asked the members, please let the member from 

Rosthern speak. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Now 

let's take a look at the concomitant side of the issue.  We have 

had the energy issue which you folks threw a scare . . . scare 

tactics into the people of Saskatchewan.  Because now they're 

out there, we taught them -- well, I shouldn't say we taught 

them, I don't want to be patronizing on this -- but we gave the 

people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to become used to the 

financial activities of the world.  Not that it had to be some 

kind of a high financier going to New York and so on to do 

that, but the common folk in Saskatchewan could also 

participate.  That's what we were doing.  And you were 

ideologically hidebound to prevent that.  That's the difference. 

 

And what are we doing today?  The issue is not bell-ringing 

here today, folks, the issue is the GRIP program, the GRIP 

program.  And the reason we are standing firm on this is 

because you were asking this legislature here to legislate a lie. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member to withdraw 

that word "lie" from his materials.  He knows that that is 

unparliamentary. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He didn't call anybody a liar. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the member from Arm River 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

challenging my decision?  I asked the member from Rosthern 

to withdraw the word "lie" from his materials. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I withdraw that remark, Mr. Speaker.  It's just 

that it's become a habit, when you read the newspapers and so 

on; this is where you see it all the time.  But I withdraw that. 

 

They are asking us to legislate an untruth, something that we 

all know is not a fact, it's not the truth.  The crop insurance 

contract signed by these farmers said March 15, Mr. Minister.  

March 15, any changes made you were supposed to notify them 

by . . . in letter, in writing by that date.  You didn't do that.  We 

all know that you didn't do that.  The world knows that you 

didn't do that. 

 

And the court . . . the judge threw you out of court and said you 

haven't got a case to stand on.  So what do you do?  You said, 

the Minister of Agriculture said, we'll fix that.  We'll legislate 

it.  We'll say that we did that anyway, and we'll pass a law in 

the legislature of Saskatchewan saying that we sent that letter 

out. 

 

But we can't have that done.  We will not allow you to do that.  

Because what you're trying to do is break the law.  You want to 

break the law and you want us to be party to that.  You want to 

change history, tamper with evidence.  These are the kinds of 

things that you are going to be trying to do with this Bill. 

 

And if I'm wrong, say so.  Say that that retroactivity is not in 

there.  Mr. Minister, I will sit down if you will get up right now 

and say that's not in there.  It's a done deal . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You see, there you go.  You can't, you can't.  

So there at is where we are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've spent the last few moments trying to make 

the point that the issue here today is not bell-ringing, but rather 

that the issue is GRIP; it's GRIP-driven. 

 

Now the minister from Churchill Downs seemed to be quite 

sanctimonious in saying how the use of ringing of the bells was 

somehow undemocratic, that it couldn't be used and it shouldn't 

be used.  And I warned the public about this.  I warned the 

public about the flip-flop that we were going to be seeing here.  

And he said in Hansard on June 7, 1989, and he said this: 

 

 We oppose this because it is out of keeping with the 

traditions in this House. 

 

We oppose the stopping of the bell-ringing.  He said, we cannot 

allow the bells to stop ringing.  He says, we oppose that 

because it's not in keeping of the traditions. 

 

 We think those traditions have served this Legislative 

Assembly very well and should be maintained. 

 

And should be maintained, Mr. Minister.  How short a memory 

we have.  Mr. Speaker, he continues, and I quote again, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 . . . we are told by others (this is the minister speaking) who 

have researched the subject, 

there's no instance in Saskatchewan history, in the history of 

this legislature, where changes have been brought about 

unilaterally as it is being done now. 

 

Referring to our previous situation. 

 

So what did we see the same member doing today in 

committee?  What did we see him doing?  He continues: 

 

 Before I take my seat I will repeat my defence of the tactic, 

but I say, even with respect to bell-ringing . . . (that there may 

be some time to consider that.) 

 

And I grant you that. 

 

But these are the types of comments, Mr. Minister, that you 

were making.  You continued on: 

 

 Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm on page 1704.  You said, sir: 

 

 Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I was 

pointing out in summary form that a parliament acts as a 

check on executive power . . . a parliament acts as a check on 

executive power. 

 

You, sir, are the executive power.  The rest of us are 

parliament; we serve as a check on you.  Those are your words.  

I agree with you.  That's the correct procedure.  That's 

democratic process. 

 

And then you continue, Mr. Speaker: "the bell-ringing is very 

much . . ." and I repeat that.  This is you speaking, sir, you that 

just spoke to the public and I request the public to try to 

remember what you just said.  But this is what you said on June 

7, 1989: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing is very much within that 

tradition, very much within the tradition of providing some 

effective limits on the exercise of executive power -- very 

much within the parliamentary tradition. 

 

That is what you said when it suited you.  Today you are 

saying other things because times have changed and it suits you 

differently. 

 

I just want to, Mr. Speaker . . . I'm searching here for some 

supporting evidence of the next point that I'm going to be 

making here, and that is that I want to spend a little bit more 

time talking about the procedures within the House, the 

consensus that is necessary for a House to operate.  And I've 

already indicated to what the member from Churchill Downs 

has said about consensus, about unilaterally changing the 

procedure within the House to suit the government of the day 

for that one particular issue. 

 

I have some other changes that I want to bring to your 

attention, Mr. Speaker.  And this is the May 31 . . . The 

member from Saskatoon South is speaking during this time 

back in May 31, 1989.  And he is reading from an article from 

the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix.  And I can only 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

but hope that the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix is going to see fit to 

run the same type of article on this situation today, that there 

will be prove to be some consistency. But we'll have to wait 

and see on that. 

 

But the member from Saskatoon South is quoting.  The 

Saskatoon ". . . Star-Phoenix has an editorial which says, 

'Motive questionable' -- motive questionable."  The motive of 

our government of the day was being questioned in so far as 

the motive behind what caused the bell-ringing.  And we're of 

course referring to the bell-ringing that the NDP would have 

refused any change. 

 

But it says, both sides will have to come to some compromise, 

and I want to pick up on that point at the conclusion of my 

remarks.  Both sides must come to some compromise. 

 

 There does not appear to be any pressing need for a rule 

change. 

 

I'm quoting from the Star-Phoenix article, as the member from 

Saskatoon south was quoting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on with the editorial, and it 

says: 

 

 Saskatchewan is no worse off because the bells jangled for a 

record 17 days over the SaskEnergy issue. 

 

That's the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix talking. 

 

 My colleague says in fact they're better off, and the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix . . . agrees with them. 

 

Now, and I want to continue on the quote: 

 

 In this case, a legislative rule allowed the public to become 

more directly involved in democracy.  The government needs 

to make a stronger case for changing this rule. 

 

That was when we were sitting over there and the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix was saying, and I will repeat: 

 

 In this case, a legislative rule allowed the public to become 

more . . . involved in democracy.  The government needs to 

make a stronger case for changing (the) rule. 

 

Today we saw and heard the chairman of our committee 

downstairs saying that bell-ringing was undemocratic.  

Bell-ringing was undemocratic is what the chairman of our 

committee said.  But I want to quote, I want to quote the 

member from Saskatoon South of May 31, 1989: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, here was a rule, here was a rule that was not a 

detriment to democracy, but it furthered the process of 

democracy. 

 

Bell-ringing, we're talking about bell-ringing. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, here was rule (that), here was a rule that was 

not a detriment to democracy, but it 

furthered the process of democracy.  It gave the people an 

opportunity to become involved and to tell the government, 

no, we don't want what you are putting forth . . . 

 

So we seem to be having here a change of positions on many 

individuals' part in this Legislative Assembly as fits the 

situation.  I think, if I recall some of the things that I said in the 

last debate -- maybe some of you will have the courtesy of 

quoting me -- but I think there will be a string of consistency 

there where I have never said we should not have a look at the 

situation of bell-ringing. 

 

(1415) 

 

And under the works and under the procedures that we are 

involved with right now, and under the duress of the situation, I 

can only but say again, it will not happen.  Because I want to 

further throw back at you some of the comments . . . and the 

reason I'm doing this is not because I have a personal vendetta 

against the member from Prince Albert.  But the member from 

Prince Albert, and I don't know his constituency for sure, but I 

do believe that he is the Deputy House Leader, was in 

committee this morning and making arguments as well that 

were diametrically opposed to the stand that he took in 1989. 

 

And I just want to refer to a few of the comments that he made 

in 1989 where he said in Hansard, this is on May 29, 1989, the 

member from Prince Albert . . . if anybody help me out.  I don't 

want to attribute it to the wrong Prince Albert member . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you very much, sir.  Prince 

Albert Carlton said: 

 

 It's a kind of sad thing, Mr. Speaker, to see that the traditions 

and customs of this legislature will be changed unilaterally 

(unilaterally) without the co-operation, in this case, of all of 

the people who are elected by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what he said when it suited him.  You see, he said . . . 

Oh my goodness, I guess the member from Churchill Downs 

and the member from Prince Albert Carlton were thinking 

along the same wave line because the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton said also: 

 

 You see, in a democracy we have a series of checks and 

balances.  One of them is this bell-ringing mechanism. 

 

Mr. Member from Prince Albert Carlton, I don't remember you 

saying that this morning.  Have you changed your mind with 

that?  Because you continue on, and this is a different part: 

 

 Without that alternative voice (I'm quoting again), Mr. 

Speaker, we would not have a democracy as we know it.  We 

would have a system of government as is known in countries 

that have dictatorships . . . 

 

So what you're saying there is that if we don't have bell-ringing 

we will have a system of democracies . . . of countries rather, 

that have dictatorships or in the communist bloc countries 

where there's just one party, no opposition.  And you 

continued, Mr. Member: 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

So our job . . . here in the opposition is to make sure that that 

point of view is heard. 

 

You went on, you went on on May 29, and you said this: 

 

 Every once in a while, when the government loses touch . . . 

it is the duty of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, sitting on 

this side, to bring them back to reality.  If that bell-ringing 

process was not here, I don't know if that could have been 

accomplished (that). 

 

That's what you said about the bell-ringing -- an integral part of 

the democratic process according to what you said then.  And 

that, sir, is not what you were saying this morning.  And you 

continued: 

 

 And it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, that bringing this 

legislation to limit bell-ringing is going in the wrong 

direction. 

 

 . . . I believe that by limiting the bell-ringing we're actually 

doing a disservice to democracy as opposed to opening up 

our democracy. 

 

Then why, sir, did you make a motion in that committee that 

would be akin to doing a disservice to democracy?  That's your 

own words in Hansard, sir. 

 

 . . . it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, that bringing this 

legislation to limit bell-ringing is going in the wrong 

direction. 

 

It's doing "a disservice to democracy."  That's what you said 

May 29, 1989. 

 

This morning you rammed through a motion that does exactly 

that -- a disservice to democracy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I hope you get up, sir, during the course of this debate and 

defend that apparent contradiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue . . . Well, pretty weak, the member from 

Swift Current said.  I'm expecting you to get up, sir, and give 

me a strong contradictory viewpoint.  I don't think you can.  I 

think you're one of the honourable members of this legislature 

here that's having a great deal of trouble swallowing what's 

going on here.  I really think you do. 

 

And if you don't, I'm very disappointed.  And I think there are a 

lot of you people in this legislature who feel that way. 

 

When the member from Churchill Downs concluded his 

remarks, there was a lot of one-handed clapping going on.  The 

body language, the body language is something that we watch, 

just as you watch us.  And it said a lot.  There are 

uncomfortable folks over there. 

 

And I'll tell you one thing: a lot of this problem that we're 

having today is motivated, is motivated by the member of 

Finance.  I know how the system works.  He goes into cabinet, 

he goes behind Treasury Board walls, and he gets an earful 

from his officials about what a tight situation he has.  And then 

he goes into cabinet, full cabinet, 

convinces them.  Then you have your caucus meeting and the 

Minister of Finance and certainly the Premier, certainly the 

Premier, throws the fear of deficit into you. 

 

And everything, everything then is eligible as a means to that 

end, everything is eligible as a means to that end of conquering 

the deficit.  And you don't care whom you trample under, 

which farmers you cause to go bankrupt, which jobs are going 

to be lost as a result of it, or which rules and laws of the 

democratic process have to be broken in order to accomplish 

your end. 

 

I'll give you another example of this.  Let us not lose sight of 

the fact that we are talking about GRIP.  This is a GRIP issue.  

This is your means to that end and you're not being very steady, 

for want of a better word, about how you do that.  You're not 

being very consistent in how you're doing that. 

 

Because I would like to quote to you, page 1186 in Hansard, 

July 3 -- not very long ago -- July 3, 1992.  I think the hon. 

member from Kindersley was questioning the Minister of Rural 

Development.  And he was asked a question.  And the Minister 

from Rural Development said this: 

 

 And we are prepared to look at possibly even extending an 

opt-out longer if we can get the Bill back into the House. 

 

You, sir, said at that point, we need to get the Bill in the House 

before we can adjust the program to meet the needs of the 

farmers who want a longer opting-out date.  You said we can't 

do that because the Bill isn't in the House.  That nasty 

opposition is holding it up. 

 

You went on to say: 

 

 The opt-out that was extended by the court has been 

discontinued.  If there's any further opt-out, it will have to 

come through . . . legislation. 

 

That's what you said, sir.  And you said: "I don't know how 

much more clearly I can say (than) that." 

 

Before you can extend an opt-out clause, you threaten the 

farmers that the Conservative opposition is holding up this Bill 

and we will not be able to extend that opt-out clause.  That's 

what you said right here in question period.  Well 

whoop-de-do, Mr. Minister. 

 

Then I was just given this before I walked into the House.  

Haven't even had time to fully digest it.  But some of the things 

that I find out now are: 

 

 Darrel Cunningham (quoting, Mr. Speaker), minister 

responsible for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance . . . announced 

today farmers will have until July 20 (to opt out) . . . 

 

You have made a decision to go for that.  I will read the rest of 

it: 

 

 "For the protection of (the) producers, there must be a firm 

deadline . . ." 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

Now isn't that ironic, Mr. Speaker?  The minister says, "For 

the protection of the producers, there must be a firm deadline 

. . ." 

 

Well, sir, and I say to members of . . . to the government.  

There was a firm deadline for the protection of producers.  That 

deadline was March 15.  March 15 was a firm deadline.  You 

ignored it. 

 

And now because you ignored it and you're finding yourself in 

trouble in the courts, you're coming back into this legislature 

and saying, whoops, we got to do away with that bell-ringing 

because we have a deadline to meet, a firm deadline.  You're 

talking here about the fact that farmers need protection with a 

firm deadline.  It was there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You go on to say: 

 

 "We have made a commitment to farmers that the 1992 GRIP 

will be in place.  It is cheaper for farmers and cheaper for the 

province, and it is more tuned into the marketplace." 

 

This is the sentence I want to emphasize: 

 

 "Despite any stalling tactics that might be used, the changes 

to GRIP will be legislated this summer, so farmers should 

know . . . what their deadlines for opting out (are)." 

 

I want to repeat this.  Despite any stalling tactics, changes in 

GRIP will be adjusted this summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I started my comments this afternoon talking 

about the arrogance of members opposite; talking about their 

willingness, their willingness to unilaterally make massive, 

dramatic changes to how this House works.  And then we see 

further arrogance now by the member and the minister of Crop 

Insurance where he says, it doesn't matter what the people of 

Saskatchewan think; it doesn't matter what the opposition 

thinks; we're going to ram this legislation through the House 

just as we rammed the bell-ringing through the House. 

 

I don't want this to be interpreted as being a threat.  But when 

the House succumbs to this kind of pressure, it can only be 

considered in the most negative of terms.  I do not think, ladies 

and gentlemen of this Legislative Assembly, that it has been 

well served today by government members opposite.  I don't 

think so.  I sincerely believe that in your heart of hearts you 

know that you have not done the right thing. 

 

I'm not talking about the bell-ringing as a long term.  That's not 

the issue.  But using this, using the legislature, using your 

massive majority to thwart the will of the people, I think that is 

going to be a legacy that's going to come back and haunt you.  

And I hope that it has become fairly apparent to everyone that 

as the member from Rosthern, I am going to do my utmost to 

see to it that this Bill will not become law. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to make 

comment on several of the things that have transpired with the 

government and opposition members over the last few weeks.  

So what I wish to do of course is to reflect for a while upon 

what has happened and brought us up to this date. 

 

We have gone through a number of things in this legislature 

which have caused some height of emotion on both sides of the 

legislature, one of which of course is the legislation that was 

being proposed and brought forward on GRIP.  That resulted in 

the opposition members leaving this Assembly, just as once 

upon a time the government members -- many of whom of 

course were here as opposition -- had done in 1989.  They too 

felt very passionately. 

 

I'm in a very different set of circumstances, Mr. Speaker.  What 

I really did need at the time that the opposition walked out was 

a certain amount of time to become more reflective and 

understanding, to meet with legal counsel and others to find out 

more about what this really meant, if indeed the proposed 

legislation contained some of what the government . . . the 

opposition members expected that it did. 

 

And what I did do at that time was to walk out with the 

opposition members, and then within a day and a half, I 

returned.  I returned because I felt that it was important that this 

is the place in which we do our business, that the Assembly, 

the workings of this Assembly should take place and that we 

should have been able to put aside the differences of one Bill 

and to be able to continue forward with the workings that are 

before all of us. 

 

And we are here for a purpose.  We're here to work on behalf 

of the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What happened subsequent to that time with the 18 days of 

walk-out, with people's emotions growing even stronger and 

stronger, is that the Speaker came forward and I think gave a 

very compelling argument for why it is we should be in the 

legislature.  He suspended the Bill -- something I think that 

there was an enormous feeling of relief and a consensus from 

members in this legislature that you, as Mr. Speaker, had 

indeed done the right thing. 

 

The one thing that in fact I felt very strongly about was at that 

time, Mr. Speaker, you also mentioned that there was an 

urgency, an urgency to call together the Rules and Procedures 

Committee and to review bell-ringing of this legislature. 

 

That concerned me for one reason.  It concerned me because of 

the timing -- that emotions were still running high.  There was 

not any real resolve about the legislation at hand.  And that it 

was going to appear to those in the Rules and Procedures 

Committee that there was some interlacing between these two 

specifically different entities. 

 

(1430) 

 

On the one hand, the responsibilities of the Rules and 

Procedures Committee to look at, review, and hopefully  



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

suggest some very helpful changes to the workings of this 

legislature in order to make us do our work with greater 

credibility and perhaps greater ease, and to mix that somehow 

with the emotional issue of the day was going to undermine 

what I believe to be the credibility of that committee.  And it 

has been with great disappointment of course that this has 

transpired. 

 

I believe that the members of this Legislative Assembly should 

think very carefully about what has happened here today 

because the member from Regina Churchill Downs has talked 

about what he sees as my abdicating my role in leadership.  

And I of course cannot concur with that because I'll tell him 

what I believe my responsibilities are. 

 

My responsibilities are to be a principled person; my 

responsibility is to tell the truth; my responsibility is to be an 

open-minded person and consider all sides.  My responsibility 

as a member of the Rules and Procedures Committee is to be 

an active member of that committee and to work in the best 

method that I know how.  And the best method that I know 

how is to work according to proper process. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton spoke at some length 

about public confidence, Mr. Speaker.  He stated that the 

reason for which we have to make the change in bell-ringing is 

because public confidence is at an all-time low and that the 

public really wanted a change to this particular way of our 

legislature functioning, or not functioning, as the case may be. 

 

I have been on record for some time that I believe that we 

should limit bell-ringing, and I very much supported the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton in what he proposed as far 

as suspension of Bills was concerned.  However, there is 

something called proper process.  And what we should be 

motivated by is not simply the end, but the means by which we 

achieve our ends.  And that's what I had the gravest amount of 

difficulty with in the Rules and Procedures Committee. 

 

It has been with great pride that I have been a participant on 

that committee, a committee that is worked by consensus, a 

committee that has been able to demonstrate to the citizenry of 

this province that three political parties can come together, 

work together, and achieve a real end.  And I'm proud of that.  I 

was proud to be a member of that committee. 

 

What concerns me most is that I think that the workings of 

today, the decision of that committee to run not by consensus 

but by majority rule, has now tainted its function from now 

until the end of this legislative term which will be perhaps four 

years hence.  And that is going to be a tragedy for the people of 

this province and this Legislative Assembly, that I don't think 

that people will work as well together because of the decision 

that was made by government to change the Rules and 

Procedures Committee and the method by which we achieve an 

end. 

 

I believe in political reform, and I'm committed to positive 

change, particularly the kinds of change that can come by 

updating the rules and procedures of this Legislative Assembly.  

And it really saddens me that the 

NDP majority has chosen to undermine the integrity of the 

Rules and Procedures Committee.  I can only hope that the 

work that we do in future is not going to be, I think, seriously 

changed as a result of this. 

 

Public confidence is something that needs to be restored, but 

the way to restore it is not by doing things this way.  The way 

to restore public confidence is by adhering to proper process.  

The way to restore public confidence is to make people feel 

that politicians are trustworthy and that their word means 

something.  The way to restore public confidence is when 

people see all-party committees able to work together in the 

best interests of all of the people and put their partisan politics 

aside. 

 

And public confidence will be restored when members like the 

member from Regina Churchill Downs and the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton will not say one thing in opposition and 

another thing in government.  What people want is consistency.  

And I hope that by my stand that I took this morning in stating 

that I very much support the content of the motion but what I 

cannot support is the absolute undermining of proper process of 

the Rules and Procedures Committee, that I could not in any 

way, shape, or form do anything but abstain from that vote. 

 

A 55-member majority government, Mr. Speaker, is going to 

get its own way regardless.  But there is a way of reconciling 

differences, and I truly believe there was a way of reconciling 

the impasse that was at hand over the proposed legislation. 

 

If we're talking about leadership, let's talk about leadership.  

The power lies in the hands of a 55-member majority.  And the 

House Leader, Mr. Speaker, could have done many, many 

things to have come to some resolve and negotiated with the 

opposition.  What indeed could have happened here was the 

Rules and Procedures Committee could have been struck to 

come together at a later date, and we could be rejoicing in the 

change that has taken place today.  We could be happy about 

the limiting of bell-ringing.  We could be pleased and coming 

together as a group in solidarity about suspension of Bills, and 

we could have felt that we were very inventive, very creative, 

very thoughtful, and very forward-looking in the change that 

had taken place. 

 

That is not how we are today, Mr. Speaker, and I have great 

regrets about it.  I chose to do what I did today because I would 

not give credibility to what I saw as voting on a motion that 

was in fact being proposed in a way that undermined proper 

process.  And I would not vote versus the limiting of . . . in 

favour of limiting the bells and in suspension of Bills, simply 

because of the way in which people were making this happen.  

We wanted to be able to have a committee that could function 

well. 

 

And I'm just wondering whether or not any of these 

government members ever really do think about proper 

process, whether they really do care about thinking through 

seriously the kinds of things that are at hand.  And who does 

think for themselves over there?  All I've seen is all the ducks 

fall in a row every single time.  I'd like to see people stand up 

and actually speak for themselves for a change.  And that just 

doesn't seem to happen. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

If people really want to know what the common people want, 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan want one thing, 

Mr. Speaker.  They want common sense.  And what they don't 

want is to be held to ransom all the time by politicians who 

simply care more about the end than they do about means by 

which we do things.  And I hope in future that the Rules and 

Procedures Committee will be able to work in concert with one 

another in spite of the fact that we felt very much hijacked this 

morning by the majority of government members. 

 

It is with great regret that in this Assembly we can't applaud a 

change to the rules, we can't applaud a limit to bell-ringing, we 

can't applaud a suspension of Bills.  It's unfortunate that the 

government chose to do what they did for what I believe are all 

the wrong reasons.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today is a sad 

day for Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, when I was contacted 

back in 1976-77, if I would be interested in running as a 

nominee for a candidate for the constituency of Arm River, I 

thought about it for, I guess, several months.  And I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that when I made my decision to let my 

name stand as a candidate . . . a nominee for a candidate, I 

never thought that after 15 years later that I would see a sad 

day like this in Saskatchewan -- I would see a government that 

has been so arrogant as this government has been in this 

session. 

 

The deputy minister of Finance stands to his feet, Mr. Speaker, 

and he made several comments about how he loves this 

legislation and how he believes the legislature should work.  

How does he possibly think, Mr. Speaker, how could he 

possibly think that railroading the rights of the opposition right 

away from them is democracy?  How could he possibly believe 

such a thing? 

 

Why didn't he stand to his feet and say what he really believes?  

Why didn't he stand to his feet and say, we are going to fix you, 

Tories; we are going to fix you, opposition, because we're in a 

jam.  We're in a GRIP jam.  We've been gripped, and we have 

to get out of it.  We made a blunder last spring.  We came out 

with GRIP '92.  It turned out to be wrong. 

 

And I've had many members over there, Mr. Speaker, that 

admitted to me that it's wrong.  But the reason why they can't 

do it is . . . if the Minister of Finance had of stood to his feet, 

the deputy minister, and said, well the truth of the matter is this 

government is short of funds and we don't want to give it to 

farmers . . . That's the truth of the matter. 

 

If he had of stood to his feet and said, I believe in this 

legislative democracy, I believe in it, like he said, but we're 

going to have to just slip away from that for a little while, we're 

going to have to get the GRIP Bill through, we're going to have 

to legislate this GRIP Bill so the farmers will lose their court 

case . . . and that's what's more important.  Because it 

happened, Mr. Speaker, right in the Rules Committee, it 

happened that they said, well we can always try it for a week or 

two or maybe to the rest of this session. 

 

So you'll see, Mr. Speaker, that later on in this good old 

province of Saskatchewan that when people find out 

what this sad day's all about, that there'll be the pressure on 

them and they'll be meeting back at the Rules Committee again 

and we'll have a change.  It won't be 3 days; it'll be 30- or 60- 

or 90-day hoist.  We talk 60 days; they talk 3 days.  And it'll be 

a change. 

 

But first they have to get the GRIP Bill through.  We know 

that.  But why couldn't they, Mr. Speaker, why couldn't they 

have been truthful to this here Assembly?  They haven't been 

truthful to the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  They 

haven't been.  But at least you could have been truthful . . . and 

you've elected people along this front row.  You could have 

stood up here and been gentlemen and men and said exactly the 

facts, not misled this here Assembly.  You've been misleading 

the Assembly by using the rules and regulations. 

 

You don't ever, never . . . intelligent, respected people that have 

been elected don't go change the rules in the middle of the 

game.  You just don't do things like that. 

 

We've got, Mr. Speaker, there's a quote here from the House 

Leader, and it's May 18, 1989, when we were talking about a 

motion along the same lines.  And this is a quote from the 

House Leader: 

 

 . . . take this stupid motion out of here and we'll deal with the 

issues that the people voted us to come here . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, talk about hypocrites.  I've never known 

that I ever thought I would see that my friend from Shaunavon 

would ever have a turn-around like that.  In May 18, 1989, he 

says: 

 

 . . . take this stupid motion out of here and we'll deal with the 

issues that people wanted us to come here . . . 

 

Well what would . . . I don't think I could stand to live with 

myself if I had done something like that.  When I was elected 

by the good people in Arm River in 1978, I made my stand.  I 

told them at my nomination where I completely stood morally 

and politically.  I said, I'll carry any message to the legislature 

but don't ask me to do something that's not right.  It must be 

right. 

 

Well what happened to the member from Shaunavon?  How 

come he's such a hypocrite? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Member from Shaunavon? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well he was the member from Shaunavon.  

Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about the member from Shaunavon 

and that's where he was representing when I came here in 1978, 

the member from Shaunavon.  Then he was representing in 

Elphinstone about 1989 when he made this motion. 

 

Now let's just think seriously about this.  Here's that hypocrite, 

along with a bunch more that back him; anybody that backed 

him is in the same position exactly. 

 

 . . . take this stupid motion out of here and we'll deal with the 

issues that the people voted us to come here . . . 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

Then on May 17, 1989, the day before, another statement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, until now, as I indicated, this Assembly has not 

made these kinds of changes without all-party input and 

consent on any rule change.  As I say, this has been a strength 

of our system.  (that) . . . has protected the majority from 

ramming through procedures without minority input and 

approval.  And this is an important . . . the importance of this 

tradition cannot be underestimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

This has got to be preserved as an important tradition. 

 

 Throughout the history of the Assembly, substantial 

consultation on rule changes has taken place through the 

mechanism of all-party committees which are given a 

mandate by this Assembly.  Rule changes have, for the most 

part, been accomplished through consensus without division.  

And there are many examples from 1985, 1981, and 1986, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And this was . . . and excuse me, Mr. Speaker, but I'm reading 

the words here and it says: Bob Pringle, May 17, 1989. 

 

(1445) 

 

Then there's another one the same day, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

talking about anyone that's on that side of the House today that 

is backing the front row on this here mechanism to get rid of 

GRIP, pay the farmers on the '92 GRIP so they make sure some 

of them will lose their land, and then they will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be many farmers that won't survive if 

they don't get a good crop.  And the crops on about 75 per cent 

of this province have slipped away badly.  And there is not 

going to be a good crop unless we get miracle rains in all areas. 

 

But also the same day, Mr. Speaker, there's another statement 

here and it says Glen Hagel, May 17, 1989. 

 

 We're debating this motion, not because it interfered with the 

government's plans but because the government is hurting. 

 

Well I guess, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member: what is he 

quoting from that he is quoting the actual names of people?  It 

seems to me that those are not part of your quote.  And if they 

are not part of your quote then the member should not be using 

the actual name of the individual, but the constituency that they 

represent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's Hansard I'm quoting 

from, but the name I guess that they put on apparently was the 

name instead.  And I apologize for using their names. 

 

 We're debating this motion, not because it interfered with the 

government's plans but 

because the government is hurting.  And it's hurting over the 

public response more than anything else. 

 

 And when we consider these kinds of motions having to do 

with the conduct of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

we have to put them into their context as to how they served 

the democratic process, and most importantly, the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 If there's anything that I know about rules of the game, Mr. 

Speaker, there's a very clear rule, and that's this: you don't 

change the rules in the middle of the game. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- I can't believe my 

eyes, just looked up there and it was Mr. Speaker there and 

looked back up and there's a change up there.  Sorry, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Talk about changing the rules in the middle of the game.  Here 

we have a government that is arrogant.  Never thought I'd ever 

see the day that I'd see a government as arrogant as this, that 

they only think of one thing, they know they're in a jam, so 

they're changing the rules in the middle of the game. 

 

The Rules Committee, which my colleague the member from 

Morse is on that committee, and they've suggested that we 

should be talking mid-session, when the House is not sitting, 

about changing the rules, and they've had many meetings 

discussing it.  And they should be discussing it and changing it 

then.  You just don't ramrod a Bill through or a motion through 

to change it in the middle of the game. 

 

And I know that there has to be some individuals in that side of 

the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that know this is wrong.  And 

I would like to be a mouse in the corner at the caucus meetings 

because I can tell you that we know what's happening, is  the 

Minister of Finance, like my colleague from Rosthern states, it 

would be coming from him because he's the one that's getting 

the pressure put on him.  Don't pay those farmers.  We didn't 

get elected by farmers.  We must have . . . we have to pay them 

their '92 GRIP and we'll save millions, multimillions of dollars, 

and let's don't worry about it because there's a federal election 

coming up and we'll just force the Tory federal government to 

give some cheques out and the farmers will win and we'll win.  

And that's the idea because I've heard that from many members 

on that side. 

 

Going on with the quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker:  "Nobody would 

ever suggest that it's appropriate to change the rules in the 

middle of the game."  Now we've heard the members from that 

side say it in the last few days.  And now this is their own 

quote back in 1989. 

 

Let's take an analogy.  Let's consider, let's consider, Mr. 

Speaker, we're into the ball season and the Toronto Blue Jays 

were playing ball here in Saskatchewan last week.  And let's 

just say the member from Rosthern suggested, the Premier got 

hit with a pitch in the head -- I'm not sure if that's true or not, 

I'm not sure if that's true; the member from Rosthern can 

confirm that himself.  But how 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

ridiculous it would be in the middle of that ball game, Mr. 

Speaker, if someone slid into second base, someone slid into 

second base and there was a close call, and the Blue Jays came 

running out in the field and said that because the umpire had 

called their slider out, their runner going into second base, 

came running out in the field and said:  well you made the right 

call and we don't like the rule.  And all the Blue Jays stood up 

and jumped up and down and wailed and they ground their 

teeth and they hollered and cried tears on the pitcher's mound 

and said:  we're not going to continue this game until you 

change the rule.  You called it right, you called it according to 

the rules, but we don't like the rule.  Wouldn't that be 

absolutely ridiculous?  That's a statement from a member 

sitting over there representing one of the Moose Jaw ridings 

now. 

 

There's another . . . a long one here.  And I want to read that 

into the . . . it's very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I read 

this one in.  This is a name that I can use because he's not a 

member here now.  And it's from the former speaker, John 

Brockelbank, May 18, 1989.  He sat in the Chair for many 

years, that you're sitting in.  He was an honourable man.  And 

this is what he said when he was here in 1989 as just a 

back-bencher on the opposition side. 

 

 It is . . . with a great deal of sadness that I rise to take part in 

this debate.  I have been associated with this Legislative 

Chamber now for many years, and it gives me a heavy heart 

to take part in this debate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's how I feel today.  It does give me a 

heavy heart to be even speaking on such a motion that we have 

before us today.  And when my heart lifts is when I take a look 

at the deputy Finance minister and the minister because I start 

to understand why it's happening.  It's their greed and their 

greed for success.  That's why these kind of things are 

happening.  They know they've made a mistake.  They know 

they've made a serious, serious mistake when they promised 

the GRIP last spring and now they have to cover their tracks.  

And they're doing it at all lengths. 

 

 In all the time I've thought about this Legislative Chamber, 

Mr. Speaker, I have never, never thought that I would see 

happening what this government is doing today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, someone said: who wrote that speech?  I 

took it from Hansard from the former speaker, John 

Brockelbank, word for word.  This is Hansard.  A good 

member from this House and a man that I have a lot of respect 

for said, who wrote the speech.  Just in case he didn't hear me 

to start out, this is a statement in Hansard by the former 

speaker, John Brockelbank. 

 

 Never, in any thoughts, that I had about this Legislative 

Chamber, had I thought a government would attempt to do 

what this government is doing today. 

 

Now doesn't that do something for the people sitting around 

this room, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Doesn't it bother you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and to the people sitting here, that here's a 

John Brockelbank who was a Speaker, and he comes from a 

family of . . . his father was a member of 

this here Legislative Assembly for a good many years.  And 

they're saying that this was wrong, wrong when we were trying 

to do something like it. 

 

But when we were trying to do was deal with bell-ringing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  We were dealing with the bell-ringing.  But 

now we're not dealing with bell-ringing.  And I want to make 

that very, very clear as I speak here today, that as the member 

of Arm River makes his statement that we are not, not dealing 

on bell-ringing, we're dealing strictly on a GRIP Bill. 

 

We're dealing with the Minister of Finance so he can save some 

money.  He knows that it could cost him if this crop slips away, 

it could cost like multi, multimillions more dollars. 

 

We know that, and I understand that.  But don't, don't stand to 

your feet as you go throughout this province and say to the 

good people of Saskatchewan when you're out campaigning 

that I will . . . we're going to do everything we can for farmers.  

We'll do more for farmers than the Tories ever did.  We'll go to 

Ottawa and we'll get money.  We will improve the GRIP 

program to their liking.  We will change the GRIP program.  

They changed it all right.  They changed it so it doesn't cost 

them so much money. 

 

Now that's why we're sitting here.  That's why we're in this here 

precarious situation today, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Because this 

government has got themselves into an awful jam and has put 

us in a position where we're all going to regret -- we're all 

going to regret.   We're going to regret that we're sitting here 

with only 10 and the terrible things that . . . watching what 

you're doing over there as government and we haven't got the 

power, with 10 of us, to outvote this here big power chamber 

over on the other side -- this big power-house over here -- that 

we can't outvote them.  All we can do is just keep on doing 

what we are.  Fight the fight as long as we possibly can. 

 

I want to go on with the quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

 I want to review briefly my experience with rules committees 

in this Chamber.  I want to go back to 1969.  I was a new 

member of the Legislative Assembly, and you might say a 

side-line participant at the beginning, but in 1969 a rule 

change was made . . . 

 

 It was not done in 1964 or '65 or '66 or '67, but (it was done) 

in 1969, after the members had been sitting in the Assembly 

for some period of time, had become experienced with the 

rules, and then they drew off a committee of members of this 

Assembly . . . 

 

 In 1969 I was a relatively new member in this Legislative 

Chamber, and I appreciated that report that (the) . . . 

committee, that all-party committee, set aside from the heat 

of the moment on any particular issue, had time to deliberate 

and consider what should be adaptations for the rules to run 

this Assembly.  There was no rash move to change the rules 

in the Assembly or to change the rules arbitrarily.  There was 

co-operation, and as the Speaker said, a harmonious 

relationship 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

among the members of the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sincerely say to you, Mr. Speaker, that what's 

happening before us today is not a harmonious situation.  We're 

not working out with co-operation.  The Rules Committee have 

been meeting for a long time and nobody will ever tell me that 

something couldn't have been worked out very easily to have 

this bell-ringing stopped and work out some mechanism for the 

opposition to be able to contest Bills that are of a contentious 

nature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why is this happening?  Why is this 

happening?  As I've said it's happening because this 

government has to stop.  They have no other choice.  They've 

found out that when we let the bells ring for 18 days before, for 

11 sitting days, and you, Mr. Speaker -- which I congratulate 

you for it -- you brought us back in here.  And you made a 

statement from your Chair, Mr. Speaker, and you said you 

would pull the Bill and asked that cooler heads would prevail 

and that people would get together and solve this problem. 

 

Well how much getting together was there?  I like to just say to 

the members of this Assembly, how many times did they get 

together to try to solve the problem?  They got together right 

away to start talking about changing the rules.  But did they get 

together to talk about the GRIP?  Was there one meeting, was 

there one meeting, Mr. Deputy -- or Mr. Speaker, sorry -- Mr. 

Speaker, was there one meeting set up where the two House 

leaders and the whips sat down and said, how do we solve this 

problem for the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan?  

How do we solve it? 

 

The farmers out there, the majority of them, wanted 1991 

GRIP.  I understand from polls agreed on from both sides that 

it wasn't quite as strong as in my area.  My area is about 80, 90 

per cent wanting the 1991 GRIP.  When you take the province, 

it's about a 60/40 in favour of the 1991 GRIP.  Then as it got 

drier, people started to realize that the 1991 GRIP was not that 

bad a program.  It just needed to be improved on in a little 

different manner than what this here government did by the 

1992 GRIP.  The 1992 GRIP, Mr. Speaker, just completely 

took all guaranteed coverages away from them.  They got the 

crop insurance . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is getting off the 

topic entirely.  I will permit members . . . if they see the 

possibility of linking this resolution to GRIP, I will allow that.  

But I will not allow members to get into the debate on the 

actual GRIP '91 or '92.  That is not within the purview of this 

resolution. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, can I go on a point of order?  

On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 

Churchill Downs, when he was speaking, he brought GRIP 

right into it and some details of GRIP.  And so did the member 

from Rosthern.  And this whole rules, this whole rules at the 

Rules Committee, it's all been talking about . . . any time I talk 

to any member, Mr. Speaker, it's been talking about GRIP and 

this rules . . . 

 

(1500) 

The Speaker: -- The member has made his point.  I've made 

my decision that if you see that there is a link between GRIP 

and the resolution before us, you may state that there is that 

link, in your opinion.  But you may not get into the details of 

GRIP '91 versus GRIP '92.  That is not part of this resolution.  

The resolution simply says that the second report of the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures be now concurred in. 

 

In that report there is absolutely no mention of GRIP.  And I 

ask the member to please desist from discussing the advantages 

or disadvantages of GRIP '91 and '92.  That is not part of this 

resolution. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, then I will just put it this way, 

that the rules motion, how it will affect us in the future if we 

have any Bill come towards this House -- I don't care whether 

it's the farm Bill or the GRIP Bill -- how it can affect us and 

how it could stop us from talking and expressing ourselves for 

a length of time on a Bill. 

 

And it will stop . . . the rules, the way they have it, if we have 

this here GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker, and we're not . . . don't even 

know what we're talking about for sure.  We're going to have to 

hear it through the media and through speculation that the 

GRIP Bill, what it states.  And we're saying, Mr. Speaker, what 

the . . . the GRIP Bill is going to affect the court case.  And 

that's why the rules . . . I'm saying that's why this rules motion 

has come towards the House, so it can stop the GRIP Bill. 

 

If you want me not to get into the details of the GRIP, that's all 

right, Mr. Speaker.  I go by your ruling.  And I'm just saying 

that any time that this legislature, that the heavy-handed people 

of this legislature, states that we have heard enough from you, 

we have had enough from maybe other Bills that's coming to 

this House, that will be tabled in this House, we don't want to 

hear from you, we only want to hear from you for three days or 

whatever it is, and you can toss it out for three days, well three 

days, Mr. Speaker, is just like no days at all.  It's not fair, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's the worst thing that's every happened in this 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We'll have a Bill, have first reading, and it'll sometime be 

several days before it even comes back for second reading.  

And then they'll be some motions on second reading, and then 

they'll be adjournment.  And sometimes it's not brought back 

up for several days again.  And the same thing has happened 

here. 

 

We heard about the GRIP Bill, the farm Bill.  We heard about 

it for six, seven months.  But finally it hits the House.  We've 

been sitting here now since early June when the farm Bills 

were tabled.  We've been back in here.  We're on our second 

week but nobody's bringing these important Bills forth, so 

they're not really too important, I guess. 

 

So then when they have second reading, and we debate that and 

then they vote it off, Mr. Speaker, and they go into committee, 

then we talk about them for several days.  We talk about them 

-- maybe some cases on a minor, not such important Bill -- 

only several hours or whatever, and they become law. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

All right, Mr. Speaker, in this particular case with the Rules 

Committee change, we have the right at any point -- the 

government or the opposition -- I guess it would have to mean 

anybody could stop the Bill for three days.  So if it can sit for 

three days going from first reading to second reading, from 

second reading to Committee of the Whole for days. And this 

here arrogant, arrogant government says, you get three days to 

go out and talk to the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

I mean it's got to be the most arrogant thing I've ever heard 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to continue and finish this here quote from the former 

Speaker, John Brockelbank, in case, Mr. Speaker, you didn't 

know this quote that I was reading from Hansard.  And he's not 

a member of this House so I can use his name, and I'm about 

half-way through his remarks, Mr. Speaker.  He says: 

 

 In 1969 I was a relatively new member of this Legislative 

Chamber, and I appreciated that report that that committee, 

that all 

_party committee, set aside from the heat of the moment on any 

particular issue, had time to deliberate and consider what 

should be adapted for the rules to run this Assembly.  There 

was no rash move to change the rules in the Assembly or to 

change the rules arbitrarily.  There was co-operation, and as 

Mr. Speaker said, a harmonious relationship among the 

members of the committee. 

 

 In 1976, Mr. Speaker, (as Mr. Brockelbank continues to 

state) I have here a report, it's the third report of the Special 

Committee on the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly, November 22, 1976.  And I must admit that I was 

more intimately involved with this committee than I had been 

with the previous one, and as a matter of fact, I served as 

chairperson of that particular committee. 

 

 Once again, Mr. Speaker, consideration of the rules down the 

road a bit from the first committee, which is in 1969, now 

1976, considered by an all-party committee outside of this 

Chamber, deciding what amendments, if any, should be made 

to the rules of the Assembly.  It worked well.  Members were 

satisfied with the procedure.  There was no rush, no pushing, 

no shoving.  There was respect for the parliamentary system, 

and the rules reflected that. 

 

 Later, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to chair a further 

committee of this Legislative Assembly.  And their report 

was tabled on April 21, 1981 . . . 

 

 . . . the third time in my experience in this legislature, where 

an all-party committee was established to decide if the rules 

of the Assembly needed amendment . . . The amendments 

were brought forward and accepted in the spirit of 

parliamentary harmony . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that what's happening here today?  

There's a former Speaker of this Assembly, a well-respected 

man, Mr. Brockelbank, and he said, it 

worked well without no pushing, no shoving, and no hurry.  

What's the hurry? 

 

We have the chairman or whoever's been speaking, one of the 

members of the Rules Committee, he seems to be the only one 

doing the speaking.  And they have a caucus once in a while, 

right from their Rules Committee, and they go out and talk 

about it and come back in and they talk about whether there's 

going to be any move between three hours and 60 days, and 

they just couldn't seem to . . . they couldn't agree.  But they 

didn't try to agree. 

 

They could have agreed.  Nobody need to tell me that 

somebody couldn't have sat down and do, Mr. Speaker, what 

the Clerk of this Assembly suggested. 

 

The Clerk of this Assembly had a real good suggestion.  But 

why didn't somebody talk about it?  Why wasn't it enlarged 

upon?  Because we were just breaking.  I was there, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Clerk of the Assembly said just when we 

were adjourning, when you asked, Mr. Speaker, for a short 

adjournment, when some of the members of the Rules 

Committee wanted to have a caucus and discuss about some of 

our solutions. 

 

And the Clerk of the Assembly very nicely said, if I could just 

give a suggestion.  And I may not be quoting her.  I have the 

Hansard here but I may not be quoting exactly right.  But the 

gist of what she was talking about, that maybe we could have 

this 30 minutes to an hour of bell-ringing or whatever the 

committee comes up with.  But then if you have this once in a 

10-, 15-year stand-off where you don't agree, that perhaps we 

could get on with the work of the legislature and this could go 

out to a committee for hearings throughout the province to see 

what people think about it. 

 

Now why didn't somebody, Mr. Speaker, talk about that?  We 

did.  Why didn't somebody want to take the suggestions and get 

at it.  It was the Clerk of the Assembly that said, here's a 

suggestion.  The NDP didn't agree with what . . . we didn't 

agree with what they were suggesting with the three-day hoist.  

They didn't agree with our 60 days. 

 

It would have been so easy to do, Mr. Speaker.  So easy just to 

say, well our chairmen or our representatives from both sides 

or all the three parties could have said, well look, we can't 

agree, but we've had a suggestion from the Clerk.  Now why 

couldn't that have been discussed?  Why can't it be discussed 

yet?  Why do we have to have this ramrodded through? 

 

Because you people know that there's only two things that can 

happen here.  That when we talk for a day or two or three, we 

express our views that are opposing this terrible, terrible thing 

that's happened to Saskatchewan, the worst thing that's 

probably ever happened in any legislature in any place in 

Canada -- maybe North America, where something like this has 

happened.  And, Mr. Speaker, I don't mean the rule changes, 

the light of the rule speeches itself. 

 

What they're really talking about there, changing the rules to 

stop the bell-ringing and get some other mechanisms for people 

to have their voice heard on 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

controversial Bills.  I don't mean that.  I mean using the Rules 

Committee because of the GRIP Bill.  That is what's so terribly 

wrong with this.  I can't believe that you're doing it.  I can't 

believe that you're saying to people in Saskatchewan, we can 

do what we want. 

 

I've heard people say that the NDP are going to just come out 

here and they're going to just walk right over Saskatchewan 

this first year.  They're going to do all their dirty things.  

They're going to break all their promises and try to have, I 

guess, people not like them.  I don't think they want that.  But 

they're going to do all their dirty things in the first year and 

then hope people forget in the next two or three years. 

 

Well it's our duty on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, to 

make sure that people don't forget.  The Conservative caucus 

will have to in the next three years make sure that all these 

things that's happening on this Assembly, all the types of things 

that they've been doing and the types of Bills they've been 

bringing in, the types of arrogance by not asking questions 

about the things that's been happening, and we'll have to make 

sure that the people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

continually reminded.  I think some of the people in my area, 

Mr. Speaker, some people that have never voted for me and 

they're so angry with this government that they won't need 

much reminding.  They won't forget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've talked to several people on the weekend 

about this rules change, I talked to as many people as I possibly 

could.  I was to a 40th wedding anniversary in this city, Mr. 

Speaker, and there was about 150 to 200 people at it.  And 

there were very, very few people that, I would say, were 

farmers from that area.  That was a city group of people. 

 

And I couldn't believe.  If this had have been last summer, I 

wouldn't have wanted to even told anybody I was a 

Conservative MLA because they would have said, oh you and 

those Tories.  Well I tell you, as soon as they recognized me as 

who I was, an MLA, I'll tell you it's a different story now.  

They said, tell us, what's this all about, about this rules change?  

Are you satisfied with it?  I said yes, we want a rules change.  

We'd like to see the bell-ringing stopped, as long as there's 

mechanism to protect the opposition so we can speak on behalf 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I said we're not happy with this particular rules changes 

because they're doing it to get their GRIP Bill through.  And 

they said, what is wrong with the GRIP Bill?  And I said, well 

let me explain to you.  They said, we've talked to some people 

and they said the 1992 GRIP is not so bad.  And most of them 

didn't understand it. 

 

I said, don't talk about . . . let's not talk about it, whether it's '91 

GRIP or '92 GRIP.  It's the type of legislation -- and we haven't 

seen Bill, but we've been definitely told and the media knows, 

we all know that it's going to legislate that the farmers got a 

letter on March 15, 1992. 

 

And what's more, Mr. Speaker, when I explained how this all 

was working, there wasn't one individual that could stand it.  

There wasn't one that . . . don't let them away with it.  They 

said to me . . . and I know people that I doubt 

supported the Tories in the last election. Some of them might 

have been Liberal, but I think most had been NDP.  Well we 

ask you to stand up for our rights; don't let this happen. 

 

As far as I can recall, Mr. Speaker, of talking to people . . . and 

I tried to talk to some people in Ottawa, but I talked to an MP 

(Member of Parliament) over the weekend and they told me 

that as far as they know, going back right to England from the 

first time that there has been a government in England, and 

then as the Commonwealth formed throughout the years and 

Canada was one of the . . . we're the youngest country among 

them all . . . that this type of a Bill has never happened in the 

history of the Commonwealth . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Sure, retroactive Bills, Mr. Speaker. That's happened and we've 

agreed with them. 

 

Sometimes you have a Bill that takes a little too long to get 

through the House and it's a housecleaning Bill or it's a Bill 

that's important. And we agree that the Bill maybe got passed 

and it becomes law on a certain time in June or July and 

retroactive back to January 1 of that year.  That's just 

hypothetical dates or whatever, Mr. Speaker. We won't get into 

the details of that.  But people haven't complained about that. 

 

But when you tell anybody in this province, anybody, that the 

rules change are being forced upon you to have legislation get 

through this House -- because if this passes, if we quit 

speaking, or ever we're through, we let the bells ring for weeks 

or whatever, we have that right.  We had that right, Mr. 

Speaker.  We can walk out of here.  We walked out for 18 days 

before and we know that we maybe have to, we may have to 

for the sake of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, let 

the bells ring for the rest of the summer.  We may have to do 

that. 

 

And we know that we won't be called back in, Mr. Speaker, 

because we had your word that this would be the only time that 

you would interfere.  So we know that it'll be between the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would appreciate if the member from 

Arm River would leave the Speaker out of the debate and the 

decisions that the Speaker has made.  And he knows that he's 

out of order in commenting on a decision that the Speaker has 

made. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But that's where 

it's at, Mr. Speaker.  It's sitting right out here, what the people 

of Saskatchewan want us to do.  Do they want us to talk on this 

Bill, voice our opinions, and then just let it go?  And if we do, I 

guarantee the GRIP Bill will be in here, first reading; it'll be on 

the whites likely tomorrow or the day that we quit speaking on 

it.  In comes the GRIP Bill on the whites, and it'll be railroaded 

through. 

 

And then what happens to the farmers that's in the court room?  

What happens?  We know.  I've talked to enough lawyers about 

this and they all agree that if it ever becomes law, this here 

Bill's ever tabled in this legislature by the help of the Rules 

Committee, that what's going to happen, that the judges will 

have no alternative but to say no to the farmers that's in court 

with them pertaining to the '91 or '92 GRIP. 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

And that is serious, and it is serious.  But what's really serious 

is how they're doing it.  Mr. Speaker, it's how they're doing it.  I 

can't believe that we have such . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, we've 

only heard from one member over there, and I'm sure that if 

something is as important as this, that over the next day or two 

in debate, or three or four . . . Mr. Speaker, we know that 

something as important as this, that there has to be many 

people get to their feet and express why they're doing this.  

Somebody must back the front row. 

 

Because it's the House Leader and the Minister of Finance and 

the deputy minister of Finance that has caused all this problem.  

And we've had the Minister of Agriculture -- I almost feel sorry 

for him; he's just pushed into this kind of a thing -- and the 

minister of Crop Insurance.  They know better than that.  It's 

their people that say that it has to happen. 

 

What's happened, Mr. Speaker?  What's happened to 

democracy in good old Saskatchewan?  What's happened to it?  

Is this democracy, what we're talking about here?  To take this 

Rules Committee and say to the opposition, your wishes mean 

nothing -- absolutely mean nothing.  We can outvote you; we 

can do what we want. 

 

And I know you don't want to really do that, but you have to 

because of this Bill.  And you don't want to be embarrassed by 

the bells ringing for 18 days.  Because you know as well as I 

know that your phones must have rang just like ours did, 

saying, when are you, Mr. Government, going to get in 

control?  When are you going to get in control?  When are you 

going to put these Tories . . . When are you going to do it?  

When are you going to stop them? 

 

(1515) 

 

So the pressure was on the government, Mr. Speaker.  It was on 

the front row.  We got to get control.  So when the House did 

come back in, when this House came back in, what are we 

going to do?  We're in a dilemma.  We're in a dilemma.  We're 

in a serious situation.  Because here we have the two House 

leaders who were supposed to sit down and talk some 

compromise over the GRIP program.  They didn't do it.  They 

just got straight to the Rules Committee. 

 

Now what's happened to them?  Why did they do this?  Why 

are you people doing such a terrible, terrible dictatorship thing 

in this?  These are the kind of things that I used to as a young 

man watch over in Russia happen.  They wouldn't even happen 

there today.  I don't think that over in Communist Russia that 

their laws would be any different than what you people have 

done here this last few weeks.  The things you have done 

would be no different.  Because to have a dictator just up and 

dictate to you, Mr. Speaker, and that's exactly what these 

people are.  They are dictators. 

 

They are trying to dictate their wishes on the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and say, you 10 little jerks over 

here, you don't mean nothing.  You don't mean a thing.  We 

don't care about you.  We don't care about the Legislative 

Assembly. 

When the member stood there from Churchill Downs and said 

how he loves this place, and how he believes in the democracy 

of this here Legislative Assembly, then turn around and put in a 

motion like this.  Why he ought to be ashamed of himself.  If 

that was me I'd be crawling home in the back alleys to get 

home, and I wouldn't want anybody to see me.  It's the worst 

despicable thing I've ever heard in my life. 

 

Anyone that's a part of this Bill over there, anyone that's a part 

of this rule change should be absolutely ashamed of yourself, 

and I don't care who you are -- good or bad.  Why didn't you 

get control of the front row?  Why didn't you?  Because I know 

some good individuals.  I'm looking at one right across from 

me -- a good individual.  Why didn't you get to that front row 

and stop them? 

 

The member from Quill Lakes, he says, what about him.  He's a 

member, Mr. Speaker.  He's a member that's been representing 

this House for a good many years.  And he must have the will 

of his people -- he must have.  He wouldn't be elected if he 

didn't have his people voting him in. 

 

But I challenge that member, Mr. Speaker, to go home to the 

streets of his town and call in the farmers in every town in his 

riding and say, what do you think about the rule changes in the 

GRIP program?  I challenge him.  He cannot do it.  He cannot 

do it, and he won't do it, the same as all you members. 

 

The member from Rosthern, as he stated that we had the farm 

meetings throughout the province, that there was farm 

meetings, and meeting with councillors, and you didn't have the 

fortitude to even show.  You wouldn't even show up and listen 

to them.  It's a railroad job.  And every last one of you should 

be so ashamed of yourself that you should sink down low in 

your seats, lower than you can get.  Because it's the worse thing 

I've ever known to ever happen. 

 

As I said in my earlier remarks when I started to speak, when I 

was elected . . . when I was asked to run as a nominee for a 

candidate and I said . . . when I did say I would run after 

several months, I said yes, I will try it.  When I was running for 

a candidate, when I was running for an MLA, and then I was 

elected, I never thought a sad day like this would ever, ever 

happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I never thought that we would have to have a Bill come into 

this House that would be so bad that we'd have to ring the bells 

on it.  And we have all this big story from these people over 

here that we got to stop all these bells from ringing all the time 

-- all these bells from ringing. 

 

I've been here, this is my 14th year, and we've had two 

Mexican stand-offs since then.  That's all we've had, over the 

energy Bill and this one.  You going to tell me that intelligent 

people couldn't have sat down and worked out an agreement?  

But no, you couldn't do it.  You've done something that's never, 

ever, ever happened before in history.  It's never happened 

before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know how I can enlarge enough on the 

parliamentary democracy that's been slipping away 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

in the last day or two in this House, and especially today. 

 

When I heard from one of the media this morning that they 

were sure this was going to happen, I said no, it won't happen.  

I don't believe they'll do it.  I believe that they'll pull it and talk 

about it and come up with some kind of a solution so we can 

get on with this legislature. 

 

Now I want each and every one in this, that's in the government 

side in this House, that if we . . . we'll be speaking on this Bill 

for one or two or three days or whatever, but I'll tell you the 

phones are going to be ringing.  Because I have contacts all 

over this province and I'm going to be asking the people of 

Saskatchewan out there -- farmers, retired farmers, business 

men, people from all over:  what do you want us to do, give in 

to them or let the bells ring?  What do you want us to do? 

 

And it's a terrible thing to have the bells ringing on a 

bell-ringing motion.  To have the bells ringing on a bell-ringing 

motion doesn't go down well with me.  It doesn't go down well 

with me.  It doesn't go down well.  But having said that, Mr. 

Speaker, we're left in a position of no other choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes, I'm sure that he'll 

be getting to his feet and he'll be standing up and telling us how 

great this motion is, that he believes in dictatorship.  I'm sure 

he'll be standing up here and he'll say that: I want to say to the 

member of Arm River that he is a dictator . . . that we are 

dictators and we are going to dictate a rule change upon you 

and we're going to do it.  And I'm sure he'll do that.  And I'm 

waiting with . . . I'm just waiting with anxiety that you get up 

and say -- put it on the record -- because the member from . . . 

and I know the member from Quill Lakes well enough to 

know. 

 

I know him well enough, Mr. Speaker.  I know that he chirps 

from his seat and I know that he's bothered badly about this 

Bill.  Because it bothers him.  I see when he gets talking to his 

colleagues there a little while ago, when they whisper together 

they get so quiet and they look so sad-looking and you can see 

all the people around there talking one to another.  They're 

saying, boy, what's going to happen when we've done the worst 

thing that we've ever done?  We've done a terrible, terrible 

thing in Saskatchewan and how can we handle this?  How am I 

going to go . . . 

 

How many people over there, Mr. Speaker, will even go home 

to their ridings on weekends?  I wonder how many can go 

home and look their people in the face and said, we're . . . They 

say, what's the bells ringing for?  If that's what happens, Mr. 

Speaker, if that's what happens that the bells have to ring over 

this, and they're going to say: the bells are ringing because of 

the Tories.  Then they're going to say to you as an honourable 

representative: please tell us why the bells are ringing. 

 

And so are you going to be able to tell them the truth?  They'll 

have to tell them the truth because they're honourable elected 

officials.  They'll have to say, well we got ourselves into such a 

position that we went and decided to change GRIP, we decided 

to put in a different type of a GRIP program, and we had to . . . 

we made a mistake.  The Minister of Agriculture didn't get a 

letter out 

to the farmers in time saying that your GRIP program is going 

to be changed. 

 

We can't go out and tell them that, but I think the member from 

Quill Lakes will tell his people that down in the south-west 

corner of this province, that by the time they changed it, there 

were some farmers already were planting their crop.  And they 

were planting their crop under the '91 GRIP program, borrowed 

their money under the '91 GRIP program. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the member not to 

get into the details of the GRIP program, that it's not part of 

this resolution.  There is nothing in the report.  There's nothing 

in this resolution pertaining to GRIP.  It's simply concurrence 

of the rules and procedures. 

 

I ask the member to please stay away from discussion of the 

GRIP program. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, when we're talking about the 

rules change, what would we be even having a debate about if 

we weren't bringing other Bills into it?  We have to, Mr. 

Speaker, with all reverence to you, Mr. Speaker -- and I'm not 

going to get into the details of the GRIP program, and I didn't 

get into details.  I'm only talking about why it's come in here, 

why this rule change is here. 

 

I feel that we have a right in this Assembly to say that this rules 

change is here because of one thing and one Bill and one 

happening.  And that's because of the big blunder of the 

Minister of Agriculture made on the GRIP Bill. 

 

Now that's why it's here.  And if we haven't got that to debate, 

Mr. Speaker, why the Bill is here . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member understands 

well my decision.  I have indicated to him that he is allowed to 

make the link between the rules and GRIP, but if he gets into 

the details of either GRIP '91 or GRIP '92, I will rule him out 

of order.  That is not part of this resolution.  And I don't want to 

warn the member again. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I again go back to the member 

from Quill Lakes.  When he goes home this weekend, he'll 

have to explain whether we've solved this problem or whether 

the bells are ringing or not; he'll have to explain to them why 

the bells are ringing. 

 

So let's say that then he's got talk about . . . it's because of the 

rule changes.  But, Mr. Speaker, they're going to say what rule 

changes?  Well the rule changes are going to be, Mr. Speaker, 

it's going to be that we bring a Bill to this here legislature and if 

you got sometimes through first, second, third reading, 

Committee of the Whole, that you can hoist this Bill for three 

days. 
 

And somebody's going to say to him, Mr. Speaker, three days?  

What does three days mean?  Because this is three days that 

you've been home on the weekend, Friday, Saturday, and 

Sunday, and you've only got to half a dozen of us.  How are 

you going to get throughout the whole province and ask what 

they think about any Bill, about any Bill this government 

brings forth?  What is three days?  I mean, my goodness, Mr. 

Speaker, three days has 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

got to be the . . . It's an outrage. 

 

I don't think there would been any problem whatsoever if the 

House Leader and our House Leader and our whips had of sat 

down in this last day or two.  And they didn't have to be at the 

Rules Committee.  They could have just got somebody's office 

here and said, what do we do here?  Are we going to let those . 

. . bring that rule change in?  Or are we going to have 

agreement ahead of time? 

 

(1530) 

 

Well now, wouldn't it have been nice, Mr. Speaker, wouldn't it 

have been a nice situation and a co-operative spirit, if the 

government wants us to co-operate and get along.  And I like to 

get along with people, and I know we all do.  But why couldn't 

we have had our House Leader and the Government House 

Leader, Mr. Speaker, meet and with maybe some other 

representatives from the caucus and also the member 

representing the Liberal Party . . . could have sat down and 

said, how do we come . . . what do we do here?  Wouldn't it 

have been easier to talk and talk and talk until they come up 

with a solution rather than doing it in the manner we're doing it 

now? 

 

There will never be a solution in the manner we're doing it now 

because all we're going to do is we're going to stand up and 

speak.  And you'll have some speakers, I'm sure, defending 

your dictatorship type of Bill.  You'll be standing up and 

saying, yes we're no different than the communists over in 

Russia that brings dictatorship in.  You'll have to stand to your 

feet and say that.  You'll have to stand up and say that because 

that's what it is.  It's a dictatorship Bill that I never thought 

would happen in the British Commonwealth or this great 

country of ours.  I never thought it would ever happen, never 

thought the day would ever come. 

 

But why didn't they do that?  Why didn't that happen?  Why 

didn't you get your people in?  Why didn't you talk to the 

officials?  You had the . . . Mr. Speaker, they had the . . . the 

Clerk of the Assembly had more experience in the running of 

legislatures than anybody on both sides of the House.  And the 

Clerk of our legislature suggested a good suggestion at the 

Rules Committee.  Why didn't they further that?  Why didn't 

we sit down and do that? 

 

No, you couldn't do it.  You couldn't even talk to her.  You 

couldn't talk to us privately.  Because you know if you ever got 

one on one, that you'd have to say, well we're in a bind, and we 

just got to save the money.  We can't afford to pay the farmers 

on the '91.  We've got to pay them on the '92 GRIP, or this 

province can't stand it. 

 

We know that the Minister of Finance dictated to you people.  

And you, the member from Quill Lakes, know quite well that 

it's all dollars and cents.  It's dollars and cents.  And you stand 

here and you always say blame it on the Tories, why we're so 

short of money.  Blame it on the Tories.  When you know quite 

well that the last debate I was in with the Minister of Finance, 

that we got admission . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is deviating 

completely from the resolution that is before us, and I ask him 

again to please stay on the resolution. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, where do we go from here?  

Our members are going to . . . Where do we go?  Our members 

are going to stand up and they're going to speak.  They're going 

to talk about this Bill.  They're going to talk about all the things 

that's happened.  They're going to talk about all the members. 

 

I went through and I talked about several members, what they 

said in 1989, how it talks about it in the Rules Committee.  

Where are we go from here?  Can there not be cooler heads, 

Mr. Speaker?  When today is over, surely tonight that someone 

can sit down with our side and your side and the member from 

Greystone -- sit down and solve this dilemma.  Because the 

only way that . . . it's going to be a terrible thing for 

Saskatchewan.  That if we have to talk for several days and 

then you don't come up . . . And that's what we're going to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We're going to talk and we're going to express our views about 

this terrible, terrible thing you've done on Saskatchewan.  

We're going to talk about it and talk about it and talk about it 

and then eventually we will . . . There's no amendments can 

come in.  We have no mechanism whatsoever, I understand.  

Mr. Speaker, there's no mechanism for us to bring a motion in 

here.  I understand that.  So when the 10 of us are through 

talking -- and the member from Greystone has already talked -- 

so then it's over with. 

 

We only have one alternative then -- that's give in or let the 

bells ring.  So before those bells ring, before they do, I say very 

sincerely to all the members of this legislature -- very, very 

sincerely -- let some cooler heads get together and solve it and 

come up with some kind of a solution, a solution where you 

can have a place for a mechanism for controversial Bills to go.  

There has to be some way. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- This is the place. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- There has to be.  Mr. Speaker, one of the 

members over there says, this is the place.  Yes this is the 

place.  It should be done right here.  But it can't be done with 

bringing a rule change to this legislature without very little 

discussion on it. 

 

It's been discussed for several years, Mr. Speaker, about 

changing the rules -- about changing the rules -- but not 

changing the rules in the middle of a dilemma and the middle 

of a fight, in the middle when heads are hot about trying to get 

this GRIP Bill through.  And that's where it's all at. 

 

Don't sit there and say that we're all sincere to Saskatchewan.  

Because I say to Saskatchewan out there that these bunch of 

arrogant people are not sincere to Saskatchewan with this rule 

change.  If they were, if they were, Mr. Speaker, if they were 

sincere about this rule change, then they would have sat down 

with our individuals on this side of the House and cooler heads, 

and come up with an answer to this serious, serious problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House Leader, Mr. Speaker . . . I'm suggesting 

that there's ways that we can solve our problems here, that the 

House Leader, tonight or 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

tomorrow or whatever, meet with these people and come up 

with some kind of a compromise here.  But don't let it be . . . 

Like I spoke one night here -- last Thursday night, I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, you were there -- at a Rules Committee, and I 

said, let's be very, very careful what we're doing because the 

changes we make today, we don't do it just to solve today's 

dilemma we're in.  It has to be for the future.  It's for ever, 

maybe.  Rules change don't happen that often.  You don't 

change rules just to suit what's happening today.  The rules of 

this legislature have been there a long time, and it takes a long 

time to change it. 

 

And I agree, there's got to be a mechanism to stop the 

bell-ringing, even though a lot of people don't understand 

bell-ringing out there.  They think that, oh well, this is a terrible 

cost.  We had the House Leader say when the bells were 

ringing before that it cost 27 or $28,000 a day, when somebody 

from the Clerk's office or the Clerk had to say that wasn't right, 

it was $1,000 a day.  And so many people out there think that 

we all get paid, and we don't get paid; our per diem, we don't 

get it when the bells ring. 

 

But it's the mechanism that it's not necessary -- it's not 

necessary when we all come here to do our 70 to 100-and-some 

days of work.  I've been a member that's been here a long time, 

and we seem to have the feeling here now that if we can't get 

all the work of this Assembly done in about 25 to 40 days, 

somebody's stalling.  So we got to have rule changes.  We got 

to have something to happen. 

 

How come this here Assembly here adopted that we get the 

average sitting for a session is 70 days?  And I have sat up to 

127 days here.  How come, Mr. Speaker, this has happened 

before?  Why do we have to have rule changes to change these 

rules, to speed things up?  And then it won't take so long 

because you know, Mr. Speaker, that by changing this rule 

change it won't be such a thing as a long debate.  We won't be 

able to debate on the farm Bills or the labour Bills that's 

coming in. 

 

First thing you know, Mr. Speaker, we'll have rule changes 

saying we're going to shorten Estimates.  We're going to have 

rule changes that you're going to be stifled and you can't talk in 

Estimates.  Our members don't even answer the questions in 

Estimates now.  They just sit there.  And that's why there's no 

Estimates passed.  We haven't got one.  We've been here 40 

days and haven't passed any Estimates -- not one has been 

passed. 

 

So if the ministers would answer the questions it wouldn't 

happen.  But we get blamed for stalling the legislature.  We're 

at 40 days and we're to blame.  If the people would answer the 

questions, you wouldn't have to run down to the Rules 

Committee and see how we're going to shorten things up, how 

we're going to have only three days on a Bill.  Well that's got to 

be the worst thing I've ever heard of, is three days on a Bill -- 

three days. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes is chirping again 

and says, what do they do in Ottawa?  Well I'll tell you, we're 

quite satisfied with one day, two days, three days, but have 

some hearings for longer than that.  I don't want the bells 

ringing either, but you've got to have some hearings on 

controversial Bills.  There has to be . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I don't want bell-ringing.  I don't 

like it.  I have to explain . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure there'll be plenty 

opportunity for other members to get into the debate.  Order.  I 

recognize the member from Arm River, and I wish the member 

from Arm River would direct his comments through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well are you telling me, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is going to be a new precedent set, that never again will we 

be able to reply to someone else's remarks?  It's been done in 

history. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member knows well that it's also 

tradition that you direct your comments through the Chair, not 

at any particular member in the legislature.  That's always been 

a tradition in this House, and a member that's been here for 15 

years ought to know that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member from Quill Lakes should know better 

than what . . . speaking from his chair all the time.  And I say 

that to you, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Quill Lakes has 

been here a long time too.  And I'm sure that the member from 

Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, when he goes home, that he's going 

to . . . 

 

I won't be talking about him any more, but he's always the one 

that . . . He's the one that said that, Mr. Speaker, that in Ottawa 

-- and I will talk about the bell-ringing episodes in Ottawa -- 

they have a mechanism where these Bills can go to.  They have 

a stacking process.  We haven't talked about a stacking process 

here.  This here Rules Committee hasn't brought in . . . They 

haven't thought it out. 

 

What's going to happen if maybe in the next election they only 

got a one majority, like Manitoba's got a one-member 

majority?  Mr. Speaker, what would they do in Manitoba right 

now if a vote came at the legislature there and there happened 

to be two or three ministers in Ottawa?  They didn't bring in a 

mechanism here to how to handle such a thing as that. 

 

They only thought about today, just today.   They only thought 

about what are we going to do to get out of the mess we're in 

today.  That's all they thought about.  And that's what I'm 

saying to you, Mr. Speaker, that there must be a mechanism.  

There must be some mechanism and cooler heads that can sit 

together here and solve this dilemma that we're in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's members on that side of the House that 

have been here a long time.  They've been elected for quite a 

few years.  And there's some new members that've been elected 

in '82 and '86, and returned in '91.  So there's members that 

have had some experience.  And I wonder if they, Mr. Speaker, 

really understand. 

 

I wonder if the Rules Committee took back to their caucus and 

explained the seriousness of all this.  I wonder 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

if they know how serious this here rule change is.  I wonder if 

they realize that we're talking about changing direction in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I wonder if this has been discussed 

with their back-benchers.  I wonder if they understand it all.  

We only got a caucus of 10, so we're able to sit down and 

discuss these things, and we know the seriousness of it. 

 

But I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, how serious they are about it.  

I wonder if they know that when all of a sudden democracy is 

taken away from you, that the right for we as an opposition . . . 

We're sitting here as an opposition and goodness only knows 

over the next three years what kind of Bills are coming forth.  

We don't know. 

 

And a three-day hoist period on it?  That doesn't give any time 

whatsoever for the . . . you can have a Bill come in, presented, 

and passed in a very short time.  And you cannot get that 

message out to Saskatchewan. 

 

In my 14 years I've been here, there has been quite a few Bills 

that has hit this here . . . and I mean usually one or two a year, 

sometimes more.  And when people speak from Saskatchewan, 

through their MLA, through their representative, and they bring 

back to this Assembly, they come back to this Assembly and 

say in their caucus or whatever that people aren't liking that 

Bill, and I see many Bills get pulled.  They slip away, because 

it gives the people of the province of Saskatchewan a right to 

have time to voice their opinion. 

 

And so what this arrogant government is doing, Mr. Speaker, 

what they've done is they're not keeping the 10 members on 

this side shut up.  They're not putting the skids just to us.  

They're telling the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

you're not going to have a say any more in this province.  

There's no more say for you because you're going to have to . . 

. when a Bill is tabled in this House that there's going to be . . . 

you're going to have to have . . . I don't know how you're going 

to do it because nobody has the mechanism to get on television 

and get all these things out there. 

 

The government could even have done that.  They could have 

done something so they could get the people of Saskatchewan 

knowing each and every Bill, what's happening out there so 

they can speak and get to their MLAs and get to have meetings 

and have hearings out there. 

 

But no.  There's this government that's going to keep it so quiet, 

that we're just going to be like little mice over here, that we got 

our three days to sit and decide whether we're going to . . . what 

we're going to do about this Bill.  And then first thing you 

know while we're getting information from the public -- no, 

this is a bad Bill for Saskatchewan, it's going to hurt us.  And 

then it's too late to voice our opinion.  She's all over. 

 

So this is a serious, serious situation, Mr. Speaker, and I don't 

know where it's going to end.  I don't know because we've had 

so many dictatorial things happen.  It's been dictatorship of the 

worst kind that's happened since November of 1991. 

 

(1545) 

And I never thought it would happen.  I never thought that 

these kind of things would happen.  But to end up today that 

we have to stand here and speak and voice our opinions and I 

just never believed that such a thing would happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier of this province, the now 

. . . used to be the minister of Justice, used to be the deputy 

premier, I wonder if he knows what's going on.  I wonder if he 

knows how serious this is. 

 

He's been so busy in Ottawa, and I understand he's busy over 

the constitution. But I don't think he's probably had time to . . . 

I wonder if they've even contacted him to tell him this terrible 

thing that's happened here.  Because I surely can't believe that 

the Premier of this province who has made the promises he has, 

would be in favour of a motion that was made this morning in 

Rules Committee is already into this House by 1:30 in the 

afternoon and we have to debate something that could affect 

everybody's lives in the province of Saskatchewan.  And it's 

going to affect them for a long, long time. 

 

I wonder if he's down in Ottawa today. I think he must be back 

there again.  And the Minister of Justice, he's a good 

individual. I wonder if their own caucus has even told them, 

Mr. Speaker. I wonder if they understand the seriousness of it. 

 

I understand that there's been an odd conversation, a few 

conversations between our leader and the now Premier.  And 

we had good feelings about it, that maybe something could 

come of negotiation.  So when the two leaders, the member 

from Estevan and the member from Riversdale have had 

conversations stating that, you know, that was maybe a good 

idea and that may not be too bad an idea. 

 

And then we've had . . . our House Leader has talked to some 

of our people and said, well that may be a solution.  But all of a 

sudden it's taken away from us.  It don't seem to materialize.  

Why, why won't they, Mr. Speaker, why won't the members 

opposite sit down and talk about this.  You can't do it at a . . . 

you got to get together with a small group of people and sit 

down and say, where do we go from here.  Where do we go? 

 

What happened to this same motion in 1989, Mr. Speaker?  

What happened?  We couldn't agree.  So we didn't get the 

bell-ringing changed.  We're the ones that wanted to have the 

bell-ringing changed in 1989. And it was this government . . . 

our government that said, let's do something about it.  But it 

didn't happen.  We didn't get those rules changed because we 

couldn't get an all-party agreement. We needed an all-party 

agreement at that time.  We knew that.  We knew that the 

opposition sitting here must agree with the government or it 

wouldn't work.  Now why can't we, Mr. Speaker, why can't we 

have that same co-operation today that we can get an all-party 

agreement. 

 

When you're going to have something so serious as this, 

something that affects the lives of a million people in this good 

province of Saskatchewan, something so serious, how can you 

just have a debate from this side and a few people from that 

side and then all of a sudden it's 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

happened.  How can we do that?  Because it's hard to retract 

and change it. 

 

It's been recommended on the Rules Committee, it's been 

stated, well let's try something for so many days.  Let's go for . 

. . we even suggested that we go for all the rule changes should 

be tried for 50 days.  We didn't even live up to that.  This is just 

being forced upon us without people with cooler heads sitting 

down and talking and talking about this. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to close my remarks with this.  

That to me, a senior member of our caucus and a senior 

member of this Legislative Assembly, that I feel it's one of the 

saddest days of my political life, and that I ever thought that 

any government that was born and raised in Saskatchewan, 

which most of these people are, would ever bring such a 

motion to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I'm just asking, Mr. Speaker, that cooler heads will do 

something over this next day or two to come up with some 

co-operative answers that we can all agree to and work out a 

solution so these bells don't have to ring and so we can go 

ahead and do work of this Legislative Assembly without all 

this here fighting and scrapping.  It's not necessary to fight and 

scrap. 

 

We don't care whether you're sitting on a city council down 

here, whether you're sitting on my rural council at home or a 

town council, there's always people that don't agree.  There's 

people that get to be enemies for not agreeing, but they come to 

a solution.  They have to come to a solution. 

 

Well now we couldn't come to a solution, Mr. Speaker, on the 

GRIP Bill.  We weren't able to come to a solution.  So to come 

to a solution on the GRIP Bill, we have to have a rules change. 

 

So my last words are, please, I ask the front row members, 

please do something in this next 24 to 48 hours before this 

becomes a serious, serious precedent in our great province of 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously none of 

the members of the government have got the courage to stand 

up and debate this Bill, or this motion before the House.  I was 

wondering if any of them did have the courage, after all the 

chirping I heard from their seats. But obviously they feel more 

comfortable hiding behind their desks on this day of infamy in 

the province of Saskatchewan than they do standing on their 

feet. 

 

It's not often, Mr. Speaker, that you find a New Democrat 

hiding behind his seat.  They've had a propensity in this 

province, at least in my political career, to stand up and talk at 

great length.  I can remember the member from Rosemont 

doing about 16 hours, and the member from Moose Jaw doing 

13. And there was a great amount of sort of one-upmanship in 

the former opposition caucus as to who could talk the longest, 

who could filibuster the longest, who could uphold the 

democratic rights and traditions of the people of Saskatchewan 

by standing on their feet for hours on end. 

And after the conclusion of that particular debate, then we had 

great amounts of discussion about bell-ringing in this 

legislature.  And as my colleagues have read from Hansard, 

nearly every member that sat in this House in the New 

Democratic Party between 1986 and 1991 were on their feet at 

great length defending the democratic principles of this 

particular House, defending the rights of individuals to say and 

have their say and go out and influence public policy.  And 

they made all sorts of statements that happily are on the record 

today so that they can be reminded of the things that were said 

in this House a short time ago. 

 

The Associate Minister of Finance was very verbose at that 

time in talking about his defence of democratic principles and 

how this House should never undertake rule changes unless 

they were by concurrence of the members of the Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today we've had it proved to this Assembly 

and the folks of Saskatchewan that our happy little Rules 

Committee is nothing but a sham.  Before this legislature met, 

we had the Rules Committee getting together in the spirit of 

co-operation.  We had a lot of pronouncements from the newly 

elected government about being open and democratic and how 

they were going to fundamentally shift the rules of this 

province so that people ultimately would have a greater say in 

their government. 

 

And so the members of the legislature that were on the Rules 

Committee sat together, and I think there was some due 

diligence there.  And they went through a process that 

culminated in a report to this legislature that said we are going 

to start on the process.  And we agreed to some things and 

disagreed on others, but nothing was ever fundamentally 

shoved off the table that it couldn't be referred to during the 

four years that this committee would sit and represent the 

members of this legislature. 

 

Tough questions have to be addressed over a period of time.  

The history of the British parliamentary system is one of a slow 

progression that ultimately leads to good change.  Our system, 

our fundamentals, are based on the ability of people to stand 

and debate and not use physical violence upon one another in 

settling their disagreements.  We have the opportunity to view 

other legislatures around the world.  Most recently, I believe, 

we had incidents in Formosa and Taiwan where legislators 

came to physical blows on the floor of their House. 

 

That isn't our tradition, Mr. Speaker.  That isn't the way we 

settle our differences.  That's why we have a Rules Committee 

that ever since this province came into being in 1905, the rule 

changes have happened by consensus.  And I do agree with all 

those members of the NDP who stood on their feet in 1989 and 

said you shouldn't have rule changes brought in unilaterally by 

a majority government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know, those of us that were in that 

House at that time, those unilateral changes weren't made.  

They weren't made because consensus was not achievable.  We 

didn't have the undemocratic situation 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

arise, even though some of us, some of us in the heat of debate, 

in the heat of political battle in this province, thought it would 

be right and justifiable at that time to bring in such a rule. 

 

I have always fundamentally believed, Mr. Speaker, and have 

said to the folks in my riding time and time again, that I don't 

believe the taxpayers of this province should pay to put gas 

pipelines in the ground.  But that's simply my feeling about it.  

I don't think taxpayers should have to do that.  I think investors, 

the same as they do in every other province and territory in this 

country, should do that. 

 

But that's a philosophical difference that we have in this 

province that we stand on our feet in this House and debate.  

And there were no rule changes brought in this legislature to 

take that philosophical difference and the ability to debate that 

difference away from us. 

 

But now we have a government, a newly elected, large 

majority government that has got itself in a bind.  And they've 

got themselves in a bind with a large segment of our 

population, a segment of our population that was the 

foundation of our province, that darn near every person in this 

province is either related to or has in its history people who 

work the land.  And we all know the difficulties that those 

people have gone through, particularly in the last decade.  And 

they have increasingly come to rely on the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan and in Canada to sustain themselves in their 

everyday lives. 

 

And along with that reliance, along with that reliance, has 

come the need for Saskatchewan men and women involved in 

farming to be involved in contracts, to become involved in 

insurance programs, to become every bit as much a 

paper-pusher as any small-business man in this province in 

order to sustain them and their families in their everyday life. 

 

So when they get into that situation, Mr. Speaker, they have to 

rely upon legal tenets, legal codes. They, because they sign 

these contracts, are subject to the law.  If they break the tenets 

of those contracts, they can be removed from the program.  

They can have their farming careers put in jeopardy if they 

break those contracts.  You can't cheat on your seeded acreage 

report.  You can't lie to the government about how much grain 

you've got stored in your granaries.  You have to comply with 

the letter of the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that increasing reliance has meant that these 

programs have become more difficult for the average 

Saskatchewan farming couple to understand.  So the only thing 

that they can rely upon in many cases is the goodwill in the 

handshake of their crop insurance agent. 

 

And that is what the fundamentals that we're talking about 

today, Mr. Speaker, in debating this motion, are.  It isn't the 

fact that this bell-ringing problem that has been with us for 

decades has to be solved in a matter of hours.  I am sure that if 

the GRIP problem wasn't with this legislature, that our Rules 

Committee over the course of the next four years would have 

come to a solution on this problem. 

But we have another problem before us, Mr. Speaker, and let 

no one in this Assembly say that this particular motion is 

anything but the government's attempt to solve that problem.  A 

news release put out today, Mr. Speaker, by the minister 

responsible for crop insurance -- this very day that we go into 

this House, debating the fundamentals of our democratic 

principles in this House -- a news release that says: despite any 

stalling tactics that might be used, the changes to GRIP will be 

legislated this summer -- will be legislated this summer.  

Whether it changes the evidence in court, whether it takes the 

right of individuals to sue the government away, it will be 

legislated this summer and farmers will have no option. 

 

(1600) 

 

This very day that we debate this motion in this House, the 

minister of Crop Insurance lays it out clearly to the people of 

Saskatchewan where this government is coming from.  

Summer is half-way through, Mr. Speaker, and if he's going to 

meet his self-imposed deadlines, that means that he and his 

colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, are going to ram 

through this distasteful piece of legislation to take away the 

rights of people in the courts of our land.  And that is what 

we're dealing with here today. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if this House was going to get into 

some fundamental rules changes that made it more democratic, 

I can think of all sorts of things that we could have talked 

about.  We could have gone, for instance, to our Mother of 

Parliaments and looked at what they have done in the last 10 or 

15 years to resolve some of their problems.  The place from 

whence it all began probably could have given us some tenets 

upon which to build a better legislative process in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I mean when we see, Mr. Speaker, one of the most powerful, 

democratically elected leaders in the world brought to heel by 

her back-benchers -- and I speak of Margaret Thatcher and the 

question of the poll tax in Great Britain -- you know that they 

must have a system that truly has some democratic tenets to it. 

 

When the now Prime Minister of Great Britain, John Major, 

could go against his own party and his own prime minister on a 

question of national defence -- a large question of the British 

government of the day -- and stand in his place and speak 

against his government and his party, take his seat, be 

re-elected, re-enter cabinet, and today be the Prime Minister of 

his country, then I suggest that we have a system that is worth 

looking at. 

 

Because maybe some of these New Democratic Party 

back-benchers that were recently elected, with those kinds of 

rules -- particularly the ones from rural Saskatchewan -- would 

feel the courage to get up on their back legs and in this 

Assembly and say, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Minister of 

Crop Insurance, you have some fundamental flaws in what you 

are doing, in what you are presenting to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Maybe those are the rules that we should be looking at, Mr. 

Speaker, so that we don't get ourselves in this box of 

bell-ringing.  Maybe those are the kind of rules that the Rules 

Committee should be studying with some due 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

diligence, and bringing back a report to this legislature and 

saying, we, in studying other precedents, have found ways that 

we can become more democratic, that we can better represent 

the people of Saskatchewan, that we can become better MLAs. 

 

It was interesting to hear, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Churchill Downs refer to the House of Commons several times, 

that this was the ultimate salvation for people in Saskatchewan.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't suppose the House of Commons -- at 

least from some of the comments that I hear around the piece -- 

has any more credibility on questions of democracy some days 

than what we do.  That's why people like Preston Manning -- 

and I quote from today's Leader-Post in an article by Dale 

Eisler -- why someone like Preston Manning can go about the 

land with the Reform Party and make significant inroads at the 

costs of the traditional political parties in our country. 

 

Mr. Manning often tells a joke at his rallies, and I quote from 

the Leader-Post.  The joke goes like this: 

 

 "What's the difference between a catfish and a politician?"  

And the answer is: "One is a bottom-feeding, scum-sucker, 

and the other is a fish." 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the motion that we're 

dealing with today talks about the folks other than the fish.  

And I would suggest maybe that most of them on this particular 

day are on that side of the legislature.  Because that is why 

people -- and Mr. Eisler goes on at great length in this article 

today -- why people have lost confidence in their politicians 

and their political system. 

 

It's because we as politicians don't take the time to do our due 

diligence, that the Rules Committee of this legislature, before it 

unilaterally votes a motion with a massive government 

majority to change a rule that has been with us since 

Confederation, would not take the time to go to some place and 

look at the rules such as they have in Great Britain or other 

jurisdictions that allow members to truly represent their riding, 

to truly be consistent, to come to this House and have the 

ability to say to Executive Council, we don't think you're doing 

things right; that we don't have the ability perhaps of premiers 

and prime ministers to dictate to the back benches, to say that 

you will never amount to anything in my government if you 

don't follow my wishes. 

 

People in this country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want fundamental 

change in their elected officials, but they don't want what we're 

seeing in front of us today in this legislature.  They don't want a 

government that says, I will change the evidence in a court 

case.  They don't want a government that says, I sent you a 

letter, and because I didn't, I'm going to use my legislative 

majority to right a wrong.  That doesn't build confidence.  That 

only gives Preston Manning more opportunities to talk to more 

people, and say that politicians generically are the scum of the 

earth. 

 

And I'm sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people in this province 

of ours, who like all of us don't like bell-ringing, would've 

hoped that we, as elected officials, with a 

responsibility thrust upon us to be the Rules Committee of this 

legislature, would not in four or five days time unilaterally 

come up with a rule change simply because a couple of 

ministers of the Crown have got themselves in a jackpot; even 

though they were forewarned ahead of time by the people that 

they're supposed to represent, that they were going to get in a 

jackpot, simply said, well it doesn't matter, we'll use our 

majority and we'll ram it through.  That's not what people in 

this province want.  They didn't want that from a new 

government.  They wanted a government that would go out and 

truly do the right thing, not driven by some agenda from the 

front bench. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier, who in 1982, 

1981 was the deputy premier of this province, the minister of 

Justice, and involved in a constitutional round at that time, saw 

fit to be in the kitchen of a hotel, along with Roy McMurtry 

and John Chrétien, and they dealt the cards that night, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  They dealt the cards as to the way that our 

constitution would come home to Canada from Great Britain. 

 

And when they dealt those cards, one of the fundamentals that 

came up on top -- the ace that came up on top, and it was 

referred to time and time again -- was that the ability of the 

executive branch of government to have its way with Canadian 

people will be for ever more changed this day.  That we are 

going to shift our emphasis so that every man, woman, and 

child in the country of Canada will have their day in court.  

That we will fundamentally shift from the executive branch of 

government to the judicial side of our society. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not sure the jury is in on that 

decision, but the cards were dealt that night.  Our Premier, 

today's Premier, dealt those cards, and he said, you will have 

your day in court.  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the shoe is on 

the other foot.  And this Premier and this government have got 

themselves in a legal bind with some of the people they 

represent.  And instead of saying, all right, we messed up, let's 

let the courts settle the issue, let's give people in Canada 

according to the constitution as dealt by the now Premier, they 

said no, we can't take that chance. 

 

We can't take the chance that we might be proven wrong, that 

we might have to offer Saskatchewan people the opportunity of 

choice, that it may cost the treasury some more money, that it 

may cost the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation some 

more money, but that the people out there who thought they 

had a contract -- which they signed over a period of three years 

to guarantee their livelihood as farmers in this province, that 

they thought they had those rights, and that no government 

would try and change the evidence in a trial . . . in a hearing, 

that would guarantee those rights. 

 

So what we have is a rule change proposal to this Assembly 

that fundamentally goes against what our now Premier dealt for 

us in 1982.  The same man who is now on the constitutional 

trail again -- we hope representing the people of Saskatchewan 

with that fundamental basis that he achieved in 1982 to back 

him up, that men and women in this province will have that day 

in court.  And he is negotiating on our behalf further changes to 

our 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

constitution -- the Canada clause and what will happen to our 

Senate -- so that people ultimately have more rights, so that our 

democratic principles are furthered, so that the Senate of our 

land will have a greater opportunity to provide the checks and 

balances to the executive of government in the House of 

Commons. 

 

And those are things that all Saskatchewan people, I think, 

fundamentally agree with.  But they are built on the tenets that 

he brought forward and others in 1982.  And now in his own 

Assembly, his own government, his own political party is 

bringing forward a rule change so that they can break those 

very tenets. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that unacceptable.  I think 

most people in my constituency will find it unacceptable.  And 

I think once the full impact of it is known to Saskatchewan 

people, their concept of what is fair, what is right, will mean 

that they will say it is unacceptable. 

 

Does it mean that the contracts that each and every one of us in 

our everyday lives signed can be broken by this government 

simply because some minister messes up?  Does it mean that 

the contracts that are signed with the various unions, the 

contracts signed with various groups, third parties, NGOs 

(non-governmental agencies), can be broken because one of the 

ministers forgot to do something?  And then they'll use their 

majority to right the wrong?  Is that the way it's going to be for 

ever more after this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this Assembly?  

Because that's the message that these people are giving.  And 

their reluctance to stand on their feet and debate this question 

obviously shows that's the way it will be. 

 

We have a tremendous reluctance over there to stand up and 

defend this thing.  But no, no, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we get the 

chirping, but nobody on their feet. 

 

The Minister of . . . Associate Minister of Finance said, you 

know in 1989 we took our political party and we ran around 

this province and member after member stood on platforms and 

said we're going to make this province ungovernable.  Well it 

was bad enough when they were on the opposition, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they threatened to make the province 

ungovernable.  And now they're government and they're doing 

a darn good job of it.  And I believe by bringing in a motion 

such as this that we even give these people more credence to 

make this province ungovernable. 

 

(1615) 

 

The member said you guys, during your walk out, haven't done 

anything substantial.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there's a big difference between myself and the member from 

Churchill Downs.  Because I would never go stand on a 

platform in this province and say that I was going to make the 

province ungovernable.   I would never incite people to go to 

the doors of the legislature and kick them down and break in 

like members of the New Democrats feel quite comfortable in 

doing.  I would never think of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because I don't believe that is what people expect from elected 

officials of this legislature. 

But I will tell you, Mr. Associate Minister of Finance, that 

there are 35 petitions going around my riding.  I expect your 

home community of Greyburn will sign on quite heavily . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we'll see when I start 

presenting them in this legislature, Mr. Associate Minister of 

Finance. 

 

And those petitions are going around and they will be 

presented in here, I give you every bit of assurance, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as they will in every other riding in this 

province.  Because it's getting drier and drier out there and 

people are becoming worried about how they're going to pay 

their bills. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us in this legislature to 

say that we are going to change the rules so that this 

government can make up for its shortcomings, so that that 

minister of Crop Insurance can get off his petard, then we are 

not doing what is fundamentally right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know this minister, and I hope you allow me the latitude, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about the minister of Crop 

Insurance a bit because I think it does relate to this question in 

a big way.  This minister has been throwing out deadlines to 

Saskatchewan farmers time and time again.  He said, June 25 is 

it, boys.  After June 25 I can't do anything more because the 

Tories, the Tories have walked . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The business before the 

Assembly . . . Order. The business before the Assembly is the 

motion that the second report of the Special Committee on 

Rules and Procedures be concurred in.  The Speaker has ruled 

on a number of occasions this afternoon -- and I think we 

should respect his ruling -- that references to other matters 

other than the rules may be alluded to but should not be 

specifically addressed. And therefore I would encourage the 

member to stick to the debate at hand. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I most 

certainly will follow your guidance, and if I had been allowed 

to continue . . . The minister was talking about the bell-ringing 

that we recently went through, that this legislature recently 

went through.  The minister of Crop Insurance was saying that 

he could not do anything further in his job as Crop Insurance 

minister because the legislative process was at a standstill 

because of bell-ringing, that any further deadline movements 

could only be achieved if the legislature came back to work and 

he was allowed to bring things through here. 

 

Well lo and behold, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've now had the 

deadline changed to July 20.  And I didn't . . . unless I missed 

something in the last couple of days, I didn't notice a Bill 

coming through here.  I didn't notice any motions by the 

minister of Crop Insurance.  But, you know, a few short weeks 

ago he was saying the bells are ringing; I cannot do anything as 

minister to extend the deadline.  And now, bang, it happens. 

 

So what I gather from that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the minister 

of Crop Insurance was looking after his hide.  He was looking 

after his political hide.  It had nothing to do with the well-being 

of the people that he has been sworn 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

to represent -- the oath that he took as minister of the Crown on 

behalf of.  It had nothing to do with that.  His political skin was 

on the line, because he's gone and extended the deadline and 

there's no bells ringing, at least not yet, anyway. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's the same old story.  These people 

say one thing and do another, say one thing and do another.  

There have not been any negotiations on the issue that caused 

the bell-ringing in this legislature, I can assure you.  There 

were lots while the bell-ringing was going on.  And when the 

Government House Leader said, there have been many 

negotiations afterwards, I wondered who he'd been talking to 

because it sure as heck wasn't me.  In talking to the other 

members of the opposition, it wasn't them.  And the member 

from Greystone assures me it wasn't her. 

 

So I didn't see any serious consideration from the Government 

House Leader of how we would sit down and negotiate a 

change to the problem at hand -- the problem that the member 

from Rosetown and the member from Canora have got this 

Assembly into.  I didn't see any effort to negotiate our way out.  

I didn't see the federal Minister of Agriculture being pressed by 

anyone to come and help us solve our problem.  No. 

 

Because I think what was happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that the front rows of this government were saying, we are 

going to get ourselves out of this problem another way.  We are 

going to unilaterally change the rules of this Assembly.  We are 

going to use our majority in a way that it has never been used 

before in the history of our province.  And we are going to get 

ourselves out of this box without negotiating with anyone. 

 

We're not going to negotiate with the people that have taken us 

to court.  We're not going to negotiate with the members of the 

opposition.  We aren't going to negotiate with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture or the Prime Minister or anyone else.  

We're not going to use the time honoured tradition of 

negotiation and consensus.  No.  We're going to fundamentally 

change the rules of this House so that never again, even when 

we mess up in a really bad, ugly way, will we have to be 

accountable to anyone. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that totally unacceptable.  

The question of bell-ringing has been on the minds of 

Saskatchewan people, it's true.  But the question that's caused 

the bell-ringing has been on a lot more minds, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

As the member from Rosthern alluded to in his remarks, while 

those bells were ringing some of us did take the opportunity to 

talk to the people that are the leaders in rural Saskatchewan. I 

was at one of those SARM district meetings, about 125 folks 

there, all elected like me.  All elected because they stood for 

something.  Maybe not the same level of issues, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that you and I deal with in this Assembly, but people 

that have gone out, put their name on the line, and got 

themselves elected to public office. 

 

And I'll tell you they were some upset that neither the minister 

responsible for Rural Development in this 

province nor the Minister of Agriculture, for the first time in 

living memory of some of those older councillors, would not 

avail themselves of the SARM district meetings, would not 

come and listen to what elected people, the people that are 

always at the bottom end of the off-loading, would have to say 

on the issue. 

 

And you multiply 125 times 125 times 125 all through six 

meetings, because that's how well they were attended.  And the 

members of the opposition were there in twos and threes at 

every one of them.  Not one New Democrat.  The bells are 

ringing.  The issue is GRIP.  Not one New Democrat has the 

courage to go out and see what the elected folks in rural 

Saskatchewan have got to say for themselves. 

 

Where was the Minister of Rural Development?  If he believes 

so fundamentally that the bells were the issue, I would have 

thought he would have taken the opportunity to converse with 

the people that he has duly sworn to represent as a minister of 

the Crown.  Those 8 or 900 people that took the time to go out 

to a SARM district meeting would have liked to have had the 

minister there to express his views on the issue.  But no, he hid 

in this building.  He hid in his office because he didn't want to 

hear the truth. 

 

Because I'll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Those people 

took the member from Riversdale at heart when he dealt the 

cards in 1982 and he said that every man, woman, and child in 

this province would have their day in court.  They took him at 

this word.  They took him at his word.  And that is why the 

member from Canora hid in his office while the bells were 

ringing instead of conversing with the people that he is duly 

sworn to represent. 

 

And where, during the same period of time the bells are ringing 

in the province of Saskatchewan for 18 days, is the Minister of 

Agriculture?  The guy with the two university degrees that tells 

everybody he's smarter than they are in rural Saskatchewan -- 

where was he during this period of time?  The bells are ringing; 

it's on people's minds. 

 

Was he out meeting with the livestock producers?  No.  Was he 

out meeting with any of the folks that sat on the committee that 

supposedly okayed all of his changes?  No.  I mean you would 

have thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . The bells are ringing.  

Okay?  The bells are ringing in the province of Saskatchewan 

because of what this minister has failed to do and is attempting 

to change.  And you would have thought the first place you'd 

run to to get some back-up, to get somebody to help you out of 

your problem, would be the very folks that he claims got him 

into it in the first place. 

 

But was he doing that?  Was he talking to Hartley Furtan?  Was 

he talking to the canola growers?  Was he talking to any of 

these guys that's supposedly, you know, made the changes? 

 

The bells are ringing, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  No.  Not one place 

where he could be held accountable, not with one group of 

people who wanted to know what was going on.  And the bells 

were ringing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And where was he?  Well we're not sure.  If he wasn't 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

hiding in here, some said he was in Newfoundland.  Others said 

he was some place else. 

 

And now this Assembly is being called upon to fix this 

minister's problem through a unilateral rule change.  I mean I 

don't know how any rural MLA in this Assembly can stomach 

being part of this process, how they can possibly go into their 

ridings as that crop wilts day by day and say that this minister 

that has hid from Saskatchewan people for months now would 

rather let the bells ring, would rather let the bells ring in this 

Assembly than back off his arrogant stand on GRIP . . . 

continues to hide from them. 

 

How can those members allow that to happen?  How can the 

member from Kinistino, the member from Yorkton, the 

member from Nipawin, how can they not grab that minister by 

the scruff of the neck and drag him out to some community hall 

and stand him up on a stage in front of real live farmers and 

say, come clean? 

 

The bells are ringing, you know.  We got a major problem here.  

We got a court case going.  We got the potential for liability 

suits galore. 

 

I mean he wouldn't even come out and say, well the truth be 

known the Minister of Finance told me to fix the problem, and 

I kind of messed up while I was doing it.  And now I'm in a 

box, so I've got to use the legislature to get myself out.  I mean 

if he even said that, I guess it would be something rather than 

hiding, rather than let the bells ring. 

 

(1630) 

 

I mean in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any conscionable 

member of this legislature would feel that compromise, 

co-operation, some sort of give and take is preferable to using 

that ultimate tactic in this legislature.  I mean I heard New 

Democrat after New Democrat in this House in 1989 tell me 

that.  I heard every last one of them get up on their feet and tell 

me that was the case; that no government should unilaterally 

change anything because they reserve the right to use that 

tactic.  I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could stand here and 

read verbatim for a good two hours. 

 

The member from Churchill Downs's verbatim alone on that 

issue which I reviewed earlier today runs to some 14 pages of 

Hansard.  Totally legitimate to stand in this House and quote 

verbatim of that debate in 1989.  But I don't think that serves 

the purpose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I as a government 

member was told over and over and over again by them that 

they had to reserve that ultimate right. 

 

A majority government much smaller than what we face today, 

a majority government in its second term, and yet New 

Democrats felt so strongly about it that they stood on their feet 

for hours on end saying that they had to reserve that right unto 

their opposition so that Saskatchewan people would be 

protected. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one was in court.  No one was 

going to lose their job.  SaskEnergy could have been 

privatized, and for the guy out there working the pipeline 

I don't suppose he'd have missed a minute's work.  I don't 

suppose there'd have been a single court action anywhere.  You 

and I would have still had the gas in our house.  No one in 

court. 

 

This situation is far different.  By changing the rules in this 

Assembly we take the right of court away.  We perhaps take 

the livelihood away.  We take away the ability of people to 

educate their children.  We take away the ability of rural 

communities to survive in our province because the dollars 

don't turn around in them.  We take away the ability of farmers 

to have dignity.  That is the potential down side to what we are 

addressing here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  People signed a 

contract and went out and did things.  They rented land.  They 

bought machinery.  They did all sorts of things.  And then the 

bells were the only alternative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

preserve that. 

 

Someone who signed a contract in good faith and at the end of 

the day . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I've listened to the member carefully, 

and I've given the member every benefit of the doubt.  But I 

must inform the member that he's straying from the subject at 

hand.  And I would encourage him to address his remarks to 

the motion that's before us and to try and observe relevancy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I guess 

what I'm trying to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that a certain 

segment of our society are very wrapped up in what we're 

doing here today.  They have expressed a very strong desire to 

have their day because of contractual arrangements that they 

have made in many aspects of their life.  And the fact that there 

is no tool available to their elected representatives, to the 

members of the opposition if this motion passes, for them to 

have that day in court is a very, very sad day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice, May 29, 1989.  The 

highest law giver in our province. 

 

 I am going to try again, Mr. Speaker, as previous speakers 

have done, to explain to you, and through you to the 

members on the government side, why what they are doing, 

why what they are doing is clearly wrong -- trying to explain 

that we can and should approach the question of rule changes 

in the normal, traditional way, and why that's a good idea; 

and in particular, trying to explain why we shouldn't be doing 

this rule change at this time, in this climate, and in this 

particular way. 

 

And I wouldn't expect anything different, Mr. Speaker, from 

the member from Fairview, a man that has been charged with 

the government of shepherding Saskatchewan's position on the 

constitution through the process that we as Canadians are now 

involved in. 

 

I think the member from Fairview has a very succinct and 

rational way of outlining difficulties.  And I would suspect that 

he is saying much the same thing to some of the members 

around the constitutional table.  I wish he were 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

here today.  I wish he were in this Assembly.  Maybe this 

nonsense that we have going on today by the government 

wouldn't be happening if the member from Fairview were here. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the member from 

Churchill Downs, Regina Churchill Downs knows full well 

when the Speaker is on his feet, you do not interrupt.  I think 

the member also from Thunder Creek knows that he's twice 

now referred to the absence of a member, and he knows that 

that is unacceptable.  And I ask him to refrain from doing so. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My apology, Mr. Speaker.  I didn't intend on 

referring to the member from Fairview in any way that would 

take away from the very important job that he is doing for 

Saskatchewan people.  But I was trying to make the point that I 

think on questions such as this he always has the ability to put 

it in a perspective that all members of this House should 

appreciate.  He's that type of individual. 

 

And certainly I don't think the member from Churchill Downs 

had that sort of rationale with him today when he stood in this 

House and brought the government's position on the motion 

forward, because they're diametrically opposed to what our 

Attorney General thought and felt just a short time ago. 

 

And I quote again, Mr. Speaker, from the same day: 

 

 . . . Mr. Speaker, these are not the rules of the government; 

these are not the rules of the Minister of Justice; these are not 

the rules of the cabinet; these are not your rules, Mr. Speaker.  

They are the rules of the Assembly.  These are my rules; 

these are the rules of my colleagues on this side of the House 

every bit as much as they are the rules of the government 

members. 

 

Again the member from Fairview in 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we're debating here is fundamentally 

different than what the member from Fairview talked about 

such a short time ago.  And I don't know how this government 

can seriously, seriously look at itself, given my remarks about 

what our Premier was involved in 10 years ago; given the fact 

that he's involved in the same process.  His Minister of Justice 

feels this way, and yet we have this government coming in with 

a unilateral rule change to the democratic rules and principles 

of this House that we have lived with since Confederation.  All 

because a couple of the ministers of the Crown have messed 

up. 

 

Now I think the easiest solution, Mr. Speaker, and maybe it's 

one that isn't available to the Premier, but I would think with 

such a large caucus that maybe the easiest solution would be 

simply to get rid of those two ministers, and sort of take the 

heat off out there a bit with Saskatchewan farmers and their 

families and say, look it, I've got a couple of new ministers 

here that are a little brighter and a little sharper and they won't 

try and mess you around as bad. 

 

Maybe that'd be the ultimate solution.  Rather than having 

a rule change brought in that will affect this Assembly for 

maybe decades, I'm sure he could find a couple of people that 

would be more competent and perhaps they could negotiate 

some type of change that would strike a deal. 

 

Maybe get a couple of new ministers that would meet with the 

folks in the court room and say, look it, I think this'll work or 

that'll work and I'll go see the guys in Ottawa and we'll work 

something out.  Maybe that'd be the easiest solution rather than 

bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, or worse yet, bringing in a motion 

that absolutely negates the ability of the opposition to give 

people their day in court. 

 

There's lots of options and solutions here.  There's lots of 

opportunity for the House Leader.  I know that the Premier and 

the Leader of the Opposition had a short chat.  And I'm sure 

there was options discussed at that time that would negate 

possibilities such as this from happening.  I'm sure it would be 

preferable to everyone in this House that those type of 

negotiations take place. 

 

I mean if worse came to worse, I guess, Mr. Speaker, we could 

change the Rules Committee.  I mean if it was a problem of 

personalities or a problem of stubbornness on behalf of some 

members, I'm sure that if that was the problem, then each 

caucus could meet and we could change the members.  I don't 

believe that that's the case with my caucus. 

 

But you know, if that's what this Assembly needed was a 

complete change of members in order for us to get on with 

doing as tradition has dictated to us in this Assembly, then I 

think that would be a reasonable solution.  That's something we 

could all live with.  We could have a new Rules Committee.  

We could sit down and try and come to some kind of a 

compromise so that we don't have this unilateral decision by 

the government. 

 

I mean when you think about it, Mr. Speaker, if this precedent 

is followed, how many committees of this legislature have been 

struck recently that haven't sat either for a great long time or 

have been newly constituted?  If this is the precedent that will 

be followed, where the seven government members will simply 

ramrod every one of these committees, we are in for a terrible 

time, Mr. Speaker, in this House.  Your ability to make this 

place function in any reasonable manner will be in great 

jeopardy. 

 

If the environmental committee and the Municipal Law 

Committee and all of . . . the Constitutional Committee, a big 

one that is before us, a committee that is charged with coming 

into this Assembly with some options for us as members and 

for voters in this province as to whether we should hold a 

referendum or not -- if we're going to have the same heavy 

hand, if we're going to have unilateral decisions made and not 

listen to people, then this Assembly won't work.  It simply can't 

function under those circumstances. 

 

And I, for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, didn't hear that option 

discussed.  Last Thursday they have their first meeting, and it is 

now Tuesday and it's a done deal -- a done deal.  I would have 

liked this committee to come forward and say any place in the 

British parliamentary 



July 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

system where a move this drastic was done in a matter of four 

days with a weekend in between.  A done deal. 

 

How long did it take the House of Commons to do away with 

bell-ringing?  I say months and years, Mr. Speaker.  How long 

did other jurisdictions take to make the decision?  Probably at 

least one session while members discussed it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not accurate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the member from Churchill Downs says, 

not accurate.  Well then get one of these other folks up on their 

feet and tell us what the precedents were then.  Tell us about 

the precedents in the House of Commons and in other 

legislatures.  It would be nice to hear those precedents.  It 

would be nice to know the time frames. 

 

I have the member from Regina Rosemont.  I reviewed his 

verbatim from 1989 on bell-ringing and how he felt about the 

rights of members of this Assembly, and how that right should 

be preserved at that time.  Maybe the member from Regina 

Rosemont will give us the precedents in other provinces of how 

they managed through consensus and co-operation to change 

the rules of their Assembly.  I'm sure that members on this side 

would love to hear it. 

 

(1645) 

 

But that's the kind of thing that I think your Rules Committee 

should do as they walk through step by step, arriving at a 

reasonable solution.  As I said earlier in my remarks, you 

know, maybe the Rules Committee would have spent more 

valuable time looking at the British parliament so that members 

in this House would truly feel free to stand and express their 

wishes instead of having bells as the ultimate tactic. 

 

Because I think anything, Mr. Speaker, would have been more 

fruitful for the Rules Committee than some hurry-up offence so 

that the minister from Canora can get his deadlines met.  That's 

simply unacceptable.  That simply won't give any member of 

this House the freedom to represent his constituents in a truly 

democratic fashion.  That's not how it's done. 

 

That Rules Committee, if it was deadly serious about solving 

this problem in a proper manner, would have taken the time to 

look at the other options.  And those options cannot be 

discussed thoroughly in four days time. 

 

I mean, it seemed, when our members reported back to the 

caucus this morning, that it was all a foregone conclusion about 

what was going to happen in there.  And I just, as a member of 

this Assembly, find that unacceptable, how anyone could have 

a preconceived notion in a few days time, that this is how it 

was going to be.  It simply doesn't work that way in this 

Assembly and never has -- never, never has.  And yet that is 

what we have before us today. 

 

The member from Rosthern, in his opening remarks today, I 

think said it all when he said this was the most undemocratic 

motion that had ever entered the floor of this Assembly.  And I 

cannot, Mr. Speaker, think of any 

precedent -- in my memory at least -- of Canadian 

parliamentary practices where such a thing has been done. 

 

It'll be a black mark on Saskatchewan's record, that we are the 

ones that will be held up across this country as being the ones 

who would act this way; that our mark in the parliamentary 

journals of Canada will be that we, in a four-day period of 

time, unilaterally changed the rules of our Assembly when 

knowing full well that the motive behind it was to deny 

Saskatchewan people their day in court. 

 

That's the kind of thing . . . They might even put a little asterisk 

beside it, you know.  Sort of like when Roger Maris hit 61 

home runs, you know, and Babe Ruth hit 60.  And he broke the 

record, but it was in more games.  Maybe we'll get a little 

asterisk beside our province in the parliamentary journals of 

our country for the quickest change in the rules of an 

Assembly, you know. 

 

And I'm not sure that that's particularly what I want to be 

remembered for, Mr. Speaker.  I don't want to know . . . I'm not 

particularly proud of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that I was part of a 

bell-ringing episode either, because I think it brought me down 

to the level of other politicians in this province that I didn't 

really want to be brought down to. 

 

But I guess the fact that we've both done it now -- and that only 

leaves the Liberals to go, Mr. Speaker -- means that we 

probably should be able to sit down and analyse the problem as 

mature adults.  We should be able to come to some sort of 

conclusion, because the tar brush was on both of us, you know, 

that we should've been able to reach a conclusion that had a 

reasonable, reasonable chance of acceptability -- acceptability 

on the floor of this House, amongst people who are charged 

with partisan feelings most of the time but, more importantly, 

acceptable to those that will come behind us and fill these seats 

as they represent people in our province. 

 

That the legacy that we would leave to the people who will fill 

these seats in subsequent elections would be a set of rules that 

everyone would feel comfortable with; that the rule changes 

were accomplished without the rancour and the hard feelings 

that are going to accompany this one; that every committee of 

this legislature will be tainted over the term of this government 

-- because it will be; that the ability to co-operate and achieve 

will be lessened because of these rule changes. 

 

That isn't much of a legacy to leave, Mr. Speaker.  That's not 

something that I particularly wanted to be remembered for.  It's 

not something that any duly-elected member of this House I 

think should aspire to, but that's what we have before us. 

 

If the members of the opposition simply throw up their hands 

and say it's a done deal, that's the legacy -- that's the notation in 

the history books, that's the notation in the parliamentary 

journals.  That'll be it. 

 

For some members of this House who may only serve one term 

-- and there's always lots of them, and as I look around I can 

pick out quite a few that I'm sure won't be back -- that'll be it.  

This will be it.  I was part of the 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard July 7, 1992 

Assembly that unilaterally changed the rules to cover one of 

my minister's backsides. 

 

Now I'm not sure that's why you get elected to the legislature of 

Saskatchewan.  That's not why you leave your farm and your 

family for four years to be a member of the legislature. That's 

not why you can't go to your kid's ball game or your kid's 

hockey game -- so that you got a legacy like that.  That just 

isn't in the cards, or it shouldn't be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's why I'm saying, if it is a problem with that Rules 

Committee, with the personalities involved, with the approach 

that those members have taken, then before this Assembly 

commits this ultimate act, maybe we should get 10 more 

members of this Assembly who don't want that legacy on their 

record to take a crack at it. 

 

Maybe we should do a little more due diligence.  Maybe we 

should check out other jurisdictions to make sure that the next 

time an issue as strong as this in another government who may 

have a different majority, a different make-up, a different split 

between rural and urban -- that when faced with the problem, 

when faced with the problem, Mr. Speaker, that the rule 

change, the legacy that we leave before them will fit the 

problem, will fit the problem, Mr. Speaker.  That the next time 

the issue is big enough, is big enough to have members feel this 

strongly, and be it a year from now or 10 years from now, that 

the rule changes that we have brought to this Assembly, that 

will be beside our names, is one that those elected members 

down the road will judge to be competent, to be fair, to be 

democratic, and to fit the Saskatchewan mode.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't believe for a minute what we are doing in this 

Assembly with this motion is the kind that I want to leave to 

other legislators down the road because it is tainted.  It is 

tainted to the point that it should never see the light of day.  

And that taint will never be removed from it.  It will always be 

there. 

 

There isn't one rule in this Assembly, not one as far as I know, 

that has not been achieved through consensus and co-operation, 

from our very first premier through the devastation of the 

1930s, when all about us other governments were using 

heavy-handed powers, the jackboots rang on the cobble-stones 

of Europe.  Joseph Stalin slaughtered his own farmers.  Asia 

was in turmoil. 

 

In the 1930s in this province no government brought in 

unilateral changes to the rules to ram something through this 

Assembly even though our people were starving.  The dirt was 

blowing.  People were on relief.  Was there a rule change 

brought into this Assembly unilaterally by any government to 

use the heavy hand?  No. 

 

During the Second World War when conscription was a crisis 

and every legislature in the country was faced with problems, 

was there the heavy hand of a rule change brought in?  No. 

 

And now in this legislature in 1992, all of a sudden, 87 years 

into Confederation, this government feels it is necessary to do 

that, to deny people's day in court, to change evidence, to 

change history.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that isn't a good 

enough reason -- that is not a good enough reason to break all 

the precedents of this 

legislature. 

 

That government can take that document in its draft form and 

lay it on the table in the court room and have it judged in that 

form and make their arguments, as their lawyers say, and there 

won't have to be any bell-ringing in this Assembly. 

 

That option was given to the government: simply take your 

draft Bill and lay it on the table, enter it as a draft Bill as 

evidence along with everything else you have and give people 

their day in court as our constitution predicated in 1982.  But 

they won't do that.  They would rather desecrate this Assembly.  

And, Mr. Speaker, that option seemed so simple -- so simple. 

 

Well, Mr. Member from Prince Albert, you're going to have 

lots of opportunity to stand up and give one that's exceptionally 

bright and lucid and all the rights reasons, and I hope you take 

that opportunity.  I hope you take that opportunity because it's 

going to be beside your name as well as it's going to be beside 

mine.  And if you have any credibility as a member, you'll want 

to make sure that you're on the record, make sure you're on the 

record for doing this deed in the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I realize 

that it's almost 5 o'clock and I have many things I would like to 

say regarding the Bill and motion before the House, so I would 

just give the Speaker the opportunity or I will begin my 

discussions on the Bill before the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that's been presented to this Assembly 

this afternoon is certainly a motion that I think any person with 

any moral conscience, regardless of whether they live within 

the province of Saskatchewan or in Canada or any part in the 

world in a democratic nation, would find very offensive and 

reprehensible. 

 

It is just, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, very inconsiderate of 

any party, any political party regardless of their political 

persuasions, to take advantage of the massive majority they 

may have at any time to effectively change . . . or change the 

rules, change the procedures, of any legislature or any business 

without the consultative process that has worked over the many 

years, not only in this Legislative Assembly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


