




















































Hansard: May 04, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 137 

 May 4, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to this Assembly, Dr. John 

Egnatoff who has joined us behind the bar today.  Dr. Egnatoff 

was the member for Melfort, the Liberal MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) from 1948 to 1952.  He has been a 

major contributor to our province and to our country. 

 

He was a Russian interpreter for the U.K. war office on allied 

command for Austria in 1945 and 1946.  He's been president of 

the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, the school trustees 

association, the president of the Canadian School Trustees' 

Association, and has held many other esteemed positions. 

 

Both he and his wife, Mildred, remain active, contributing 

citizens of our province, and I think we should be most grateful 

for their commitment. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just join my 

voice in support of the very eloquent statement made by the 

Leader of the Liberal Party for Dr. Egnatoff who is a prominent 

Canadian, but really a prominent Saskatonian first and 

foremost.  And the list of accomplishments that have been 

recited by the Leader of the Liberal Party is indeed very 

impressive. 

 

On behalf of the government and members on this side, I too 

would like to extend a welcome to a former member of the 

Assembly and an outstanding Canadian. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to join the 

Leader of the Liberal Party and the Premier in welcoming Dr. 

Egnatoff here this afternoon.  Dr. Egnatoff and I have had a 

long-standing relationship.  He may not be aware of it, but 

when I was going to teachers' college back in the '50s, he 

taught me all I know in English and I will never forget that.  

Although I don't know if Dr. Egnatoff would be willing to 

admit that in public, that I am a living example of it.  But 

certainly, sir, I would like to, on behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome you here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I wish at this time to join the members.  I 

know all of you will be very jealous to know that Dr. Egnatoff 

is a constituent of mine, and I want to inform you people that 

John has reminded me enough, more than once over the last 17 

years, that he is not responsible for me being here. 

 

But having said that, Dr. Egnatoff, I do want to join the other 

members in welcoming you here, particularly as a previous 

member of this legislature, and also for the 

excellent service that you have performed, not only for the 

people of Saskatoon but for all Canadians.  And I join the other 

members in welcoming you here and hope you have a very fine 

day in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Sale of Piper Aircraft Corporation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier regarding the ineptitude his 

government is showing towards economic development.  Mr. 

Speaker, we now hear that the Piper Aircraft deal has been 

withdrawn to sell the company to Cyrus Eaton. 

 

Mr. Premier, I understand that the Piper officials have become 

aware of events through the media that concern them -- 

specifically five things that they wish to re-evaluate. 

 

First, they are aware that the government has stated the new 

company would be immune from paying its foreign debt under 

a special law.  Secondly, they are aware that the government 

retroactively cancelled contracts with individuals as one of its 

first legislative acts.  Thirdly, that they have read media reports 

that the government intends to retroactively cancel contracts 

with Saskatchewan farmers.  Fourthly, they know the 

government has cancelled an agreement with another 

government and the Atomic Energy corporation of Canada for 

research and development.  And finally, Mr. Premier, they are 

informed the government intends to renege on its partnership 

with the two other governments and Husky Oil in regard to a 

major business venture. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you confirm that these facts are a major part 

of the reconsideration of the people in the U.S. regarding the 

desirability of doing business with your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I want to say that one thing is clear here, that no one will 

accuse the folks on the other side of not having a vivid 

imagination. 

 

What is happening with Piper very clearly is there has been a 

memorandum of understanding signed between your 

colleagues and friends in Manitoba, the Conservative 

government in Manitoba, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan, along with the Eaton group and the Blues from 

San Diego and the Hill family here in Regina.  In order to get 

that memorandum signed, there was a slight delay in putting 

the papers to the court.  That will be done in the very near 

future. 

 

Obviously the Piper Aircraft Corporation is under section 11 of 

the Bankruptcy Act in the United States.  A court will decide 

whether or not the sale takes place, and that will be done in the 

very near future.  And in essence nothing has changed from last 

week before you read in the paper that there had been a change 

in the Vero Beach situation. 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, it is now 

known that Mr. Eaton, who apparently is receiving 23 per cent 

of this deal for nothing, went bankrupt as recently as 1985; that 

he had been living on social security; that he had no personal 

assets of significant value, not even a car; that he still has major 

personal debt; and that he has a record of many failed deals.  

This is all a matter of public record, Mr. Premier. 

 

And I ask you now: will you table the results of any and all 

investigations and research your government conducted before 

getting the people of Saskatchewan into this deal with Mr. 

Eaton so that we can all be assured of the fact that this 

government is doing the job for Saskatchewan people the way 

they should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it 

interesting that only a few months ago the people on the other 

side of the House were pushing us to get the deal with Piper.  

What he's referring to about Mr. Eaton was common 

knowledge back in December 1991.  The researchers really do 

have to catch up on what's happening with this whole event of 

Piper. 

 

But I want to make it clear to you that in making the 

arrangement with Manitoba, with the government there, and 

trying to attract Piper Corporation to Saskatchewan what you 

have to realize, that the people operating and managing the new 

company would in fact be the Blue family out of San Diego 

who have a great deal of experience with manufacturing 

aircraft and also the entrepreneurs from Regina, the Hill family. 

 

We are being backed up by the Manitoba government and also, 

as we have told you publicly, a SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) loan that would do 

bridge financing on the project if in fact the court found that 

the Saskatchewan bid was the best one being put forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well the minister has 

danced all over the place in regard to this deal.  I think the 

people of Saskatchewan would like to know what research and 

background checks that were done leading up to this deal in the 

partnership with Cyrus Eaton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

that this is very, very different to the previous government's 

GigaText and Supercart and many of the deals that they got 

involved in.  There's been a great deal of due diligence done on 

the project by Ernst Young.  They have done a very thorough 

report that indicate that at price of 64 million the company 

would be viable in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

I guess I find it curious that the same old wrecking crew have 

this very negative attitude towards economic 

development.  And I would ask you, sir, to join with us, like 

your colleagues in Manitoba have done, to try to create 

economic development for the province as opposed to all of 

this negative rhetoric that is coming from your side and we've 

heard for this first week of the session.  Come with us, join us, 

and if the deal if right, bring it to Saskatchewan and create 

hundreds of jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The opposition would 

be happy to join with you in saying that this deal would be 

good for Saskatchewan, if indeed you are able to pull the deal 

together.  It looks at this point that you're not going to be able 

to pull the deal together, and that's why there's such concern. 

 

Right from the beginning, Mr. Premier, your government 

promised that they'd be open, accountable and provide 

information on every deal that they put together.  Well we see 

no tabling of any documents to support that claim.  And now I 

would ask, Mr. Premier, would you table all documents and 

information regarding the Piper Aircraft deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

that the members of the Conservative caucus were earlier 

criticizing us for putting too much information out, that we 

might lose the deal as a result of putting the information out.  

Now today they're saying, put all the information out because 

the deal is in jeopardy.  It's really difficult to keep up with your 

. . . with the cogs slipping in your mind as to what we should 

be doing, either putting all the information out or not putting it 

out. 

 

But I can guarantee you though, sir, is the simple fact that in 

due course we will be making public the due diligence report, 

unlike any of the circumstances surrounding the deals that were 

made by the previous government.  In those cases where due 

diligence was done, they weren't made public and in most deals 

you didn't know due diligence and that's why we're $15 billion 

in the hole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Investment in Bi-Provincial Upgrader 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

a question to the Minister of Energy, who I presume is 

answering the questions regarding the Bi-Provincial upgrader 

at Lloydminster. 

 

The minister has been quoted as saying that his government 

will not participate in any cost sharing of cost overruns at the 

upgrader and that his preference would be to reduce the 

province's equity rather than put in any more money. 

 

Will the minister tell the legislature whether or not he and the 

other partners have agreed on this position.  And if he does not 

have that agreement, will he tell us what process is being done 

to achieve that agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  The matter is under 

review and is under discussion with the other parties involved.  

I don't want to get into an extensive discussion of what those 

negotiations ensued.  What we have said publicly is that the 

matter is under review.  But I don't want to get into the 

discussions extensively. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I guess I should 

direct the next question to the toy Associate Minister of 

Finance, by his own definition.  This clearly shows, Mr. 

Speaker, this project has been a tremendous boost to the 

economy of the entire north-west portion of the province.  The 

direct and indirect jobs, the feedstock for upgrading, and the 

subcontracts and the upgrading of the infrastructure have all 

had a very great impact on an otherwise depressed economy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister tell us what penalties will be imposed on 

Saskatchewan for failing to contribute proportionately to the 

cost overruns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  In answer to 

that, let me say to the minister that we have fulfilled all our 

contractual obligations.  We agreed to contribute towards the 

initial construction of the Bi-Provincial upgrader.  We have 

fulfilled those obligations.  At no time did we say that we 

would contribute additional sums above and beyond what we 

contributed. 

 

I gather the Hon. Jake Epp in the House of Commons suggests 

that Saskatchewan might be subject to some penalties.  I would 

prefer it if Mr. Epp had been a little more specific.  I think if he 

reads the contract before he makes such statements, he'll find 

out that we have fulfilled our obligations.  We are simply not in 

a position to assume any more obligations. 

 

Members opposite, when they were sitting on this side of the 

House, assumed far too many debt obligations for this province 

to carry, and we have said we're not going to continue with that 

policy which has been so disastrous for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to the 

associate minister.  Mr. Speaker, the minister is clearly, and I 

think intentionally, generalizing about penalties because he 

knows this will cost taxpayers significant dollars while at the 

same time diluting our province's equity in the project. 

 

Will the associate minister also tell the House what impacts our 

diluted equity would have on our share of the subcontractors, 

our share on the feedstock supply, and will he table in this 

legislature any internal agreements, government studies, that 

will show us what these associated costs will be to the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The matter of our equity, our equity 

both prior to this decision and afterwards, has not yet been 

determined.  Suffice it to say at this point in time it may well be 

that our equity would not be diluted.  It may well be that the 

other partners would put in the money as a loan and not as 

equity.  There are any number of possibilities with respect to 

the further financing of this. 

 

We have just said, thanks to 10 years of Conservative 

mismanagement, we're not in a position to continue with it, and 

we'd rather be excused this round. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Well we know 

now, Mr. Speaker, that this government is bankrupt of any 

ideas how to create wealth.  They have cancelled the energy 

agreement and thousands of jobs.  They are very much in 

danger of losing the Piper Aircraft project.  They lose the 

economic benefits of the . . . economic spin-off of the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Associate Minister of Finance, now 

today, will he today admit that his government has taken a 

short-sighted view of economic development for this province 

by reneging on their moral obligation to co-operatively fund 

the upgrader and bring the many economic and financial 

benefits to the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Speaking, Mr. Speaker, speaking of 

short-sighted views, one of the many things about this 

agreement which concerned us was that there was no 

guarantees for this province that we would get any of the jobs 

or economic benefits back.  There never was an agreement 

which defined our benefits.  So I say to members opposite that 

there was a good deal of short-sightedness, but it took place 

before October 21, 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Information on GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  The Crop Insurance 

Corporation has a group of professional people who are dealing 

with the farmers at this time -- their agents.  Their 

responsibility is to sell the farmers the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program in an honest and factual way.  

And the agents are doing that to the best of their ability. 

 

And it's not enhanced by the fact that they only found out what 

that program was going to be on the 27th of March, but they 

have a whole . . . a lot of difficulty in communicating that to 

the farmers.  Has the government given the agents any 

direction on how to sell the programs currently being offered, 

and is the government encouraging the agents to be open, 

honest with the producers about the program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you.  A very short answer to 

that, Mr. Speaker, is yes; we are encouraging the agents to 

disseminate all the information possible.  We realized it was in 

a very short time frame that we had to sell this.  This is one of 

the reasons we extended the deadline to May 15.  And we've 

instructed the agents to be sure that they re-call all the clients 

and be sure that they have all the information.  So yes, we are 

indeed doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Our office was in . . 

. or attention was focused on a letter that we received in our 

office from the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation.  It 

says "Dear Marketing Agents," and I will quote some of that to 

you in a moment, it says -- and this is a quote:  Under the terms 

of your agency agreement, you are not in a position to speak 

out against the corporation, government or the program.  The 

views that you provide are to be those of the corporation and 

not your own personal beliefs. 

 

Did you tell or instruct them to send -- your president and chief 

executive officer -- did you instruct him that he was supposed 

to send this letter to all the marketing agents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we do indeed expect 

our marketing agents to act in a professional manner as the 

member opposite has said.  They are professionals.  They have 

a . . . they are employed by the corporation.  They have a duty 

to disseminate all the information truthfully and honestly and in 

an unbiased and non-political way to our clients, and we expect 

them to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the minister also agree that he should 

allow the agents to compare the '91 to the '92 GRIP in relating 

the information to the producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we will allow agents 

to compare anything to anything, but we want them to have 

truthful information.  The issue not is '91 GRIP and what you 

would have and could have; the issue is what's available for the 

farmers so that they can make the best possible management 

decisions this year.  And that is why we are trying to get our 

agents and our corporation employees to disseminate the 

information fully as to what the options are that so farmers can 

see the options and make their reasonable choices, management 

choices, that are best for their farm.  And do that on the basis of 

a program that's before them, and not on fairy tales about what 

might have been if the program hadn't changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, another statement that comes 

out of the letter, it says this:  As a corporation, we are prepared 

to initiate appropriate action if this contractual obligation is not 

met.  The action taken could include termination of the agent 

contract. 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it is really true that you were 

prepared to fire the crop insurance agents if they tried to be 

honest with the farmers about the programs they were being 

offered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the letter says very 

clearly that we expect the agents to live up to their contract.  

And I think any employee has the obligation to live up to his 

contract.  And we will certainly terminate somebody who does 

not live up to the terms of employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister.  What 

system will the government establish to determine whether or 

not the individual crop insurance agents are being open and 

honest and forthright with the farmers?  And who are they 

going to get to police that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have employees 

and agents of government who are in charge of running the 

Crop Insurance Corporation, and they are in the position to 

make management decisions that have to be made.  And we 

certainly do not do this on a political basis, although that may 

have been the practice in the past. 

 

This is a matter of professional work, of delivering to farmers 

the information that they . . . very vital information that farmers 

need to make decisions.  They need to have that information in 

a clear fashion, and we expect our employees to deliver that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a question now to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker.  In light of the fact that you're going to have people 

investigating whether the agents are in fact dealing forthright 

and dealing with the same kind of focus that the minister of 

Crop Insurance said, which other agencies are also going to 

have their licences suspended? 

 

Are SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) agents going 

to have their licences suspended if they don't agree or if they're 

selling two insurance companies?  Are they going to have their 

licences suspended because they don't agree with the 

government policy?  What about licence issuers?  Are they the 

next ones to go? 

 

You've got 60,000 farmers on the ropes with a contract that is 

technically illegal and has been admitted so by the deputy 

minister of Agriculture.  Are you going to allow that kind of an 

existence to go on with your ministers continually day after 

day?  The other day it was the Minister of Agriculture; today 

it's the minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  Are you going 

to keep that going? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure where 

the member opposite is coming from on this.  I 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

don't know that demanding that employees do their job and be 

supervised is somehow contrary to . . . We have these people 

with a contract.  They have a job to do.  They're employees of 

the corporation, and we certainly will supervise and expect 

employees to perform.  And I don't know . . . If the members 

opposite are suggesting that an employee does not do his job, 

that he should continue to receive his wages, I think that's 

certainly not the way we operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, they don't have a 

legitimate leg to stand on, legally or morally or ethically as it 

relates to the date the contract was issued and the date that you 

were supposed to provide information.  Now you're saying 

also, under the terms of your agency agreement, you're not in a 

position to speak out against the corporation, the government, 

or the program.  What's next on the line -- what they do in the 

community, who they vote for? 

 

And I'll tell you something, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you something 

else.  The people in my constituency who are agents are NDP 

(New Democratic Party), they're Liberal, and they're 

Conservative.  Do you want to fire them all?  The question I 

have for you, sir, is are you going to have police going after the 

agents in short order here now in order to investigate them and 

supervise them in dealing with the people that they're dealing 

with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that we will 

go after the agents to do their job as we do with any employee.  

I'm very amazed that he should bring up politics.  I don't know 

what the agents' politics are and I'm not going to be the one 

who's policing them.  And we're not going to do it politically as 

it has been done in the past.  These people are expected to do a 

job. And when they take government money to do a 

government job, we expect  them to do the job.  I don't know 

what's so unusual about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, question for the minister 

responsible for crop insurance.  Why did you ask, through your 

legal counsel, the farmers in the case in Melville to post a 

$750,000 bond? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, if he's referring to the 

court case, I think I would be ill-advised to answer on that at 

this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the information that was 

provided to us from the court said that there was 750.  Your 

legal counsel asked your advances at the court case to provide . 

. . that the farmers were to provide $750,000 worth of a bond to 

the court just in case they lost. 

 

So now, why?  My question to you is:  Why did they do 

that?  Did you try to scare off the farmers?  Why?  Did you try 

and make it so difficult for the farmers who are approaching 

the Queen?  Did you do that with the intention of making them 

not able to do that? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think farmers suing 

the corporation have the same legal rights as anybody else, and 

I'm assuming that this is a normal court proceeding, and I do 

not want to comment on a specific case here. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton. 
 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With great 

honour and pride and with tradition I wish to speak today on 

the throne speech that the Lieutenant Governor brought down 

last week.  But first though, I wish to commend you, Mr. 

Speaker, on how you conducted the House again in this second 

session of the Legislative Assembly, and I know that you will 

provide the control and the decorum that is required, the public 

demands of this House.  And I know we can count on you for 

that. 
 

I also wish to thank the mover and seconder of the throne 

speech, the member from Meadow Lake and the member from 

Regina Wascana Plains, on their introduction of this throne 

speech.  I think they did a very good job of that, and also being 

my seat mates, I would be regress not to . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member will have to move that 

podium over because it's reverberating into the mike.  We can't 

hear you. 
 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Am I heard now?  

I don't think I'll start quite at the beginning, but I don't know if 

my thanks was portrayed to the members of . . . my seat mates 

from Meadow Lake and the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains, thanking them on moving and seconding this throne 

speech. 
 

As I say, this is a throne speech of pride and tradition.  It gives 

me great pride that I speak about this throne speech, because it 

lays down a road-map, a blueprint of where this province is 

going.  We are facing serious economic conditions in this 

province of Saskatchewan.  We are seeing a previous 

administration that left the economy of this province in rack 

and ruin.  We are seeing an agricultural community that is 

severely depressed. 

 

But this also relates too to the question of tradition, and



142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

the tradition I relate to is the crossroads that took place in 1944.  

The throne speech that was brought down by a CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), later to become the 

New Democratic Party, in 1944 is not unlike the same throne 

speech we have brought down in 1992. 

 

We are talking about change, a mandate of change, the same 

mandate of change that was talked about in 1944 by that 

government under Douglas.  We are seeing an economy that 

faces the same problems that were not unlike 1944, an 

economy that had just came out of a severe depression, an 

economy that was also facing, and a citizenship that was 

facing, the ravages of war, being World War II. 

 

They were facing serious decisions in order to protect their 

citizenship of this province and to provide new light and new 

hope for those people.  And, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech 

that was brought down last week by the Lieutenant Governor 

does the same thing.  It brings the question of change and 

brings a sense of hope to a province that has been desperate for 

hope for 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- In the throne speech of 1944 at the tenth 

legislature, six points were brought down respecting that throne 

speech, and I would like to quote those: 

 

 1. It must recognize the responsibility of the people of this 

Province towards the members of the Armed Services as they 

return to civilian life . . . 

 

 2. It must create a government organization sufficient in 

scope to meet the needs of the postwar society; 

 

 3. It must implement legislation that will guarantee at least a 

minimum degree of economic security for rural and urban 

working people of this province; 

 

 4. It must pass legislation that will endow a greater measure 

of social welfare upon those who, through no fault of their 

own, find it impossible to earn a satisfactory living; 

 

 5. (And) It must implement legislation that will recognize the 

importance of social enterprise in the economic life of the 

community; 

 

Interesting words stated a little less than 50 years ago and those 

words are echoed today.  As they say, history seems to repeat 

itself sometimes -- when we talk about quality of life and how 

we outline in this throne speech the question of quality of life 

and the importance of social programs and income support 

programs. 

 

We heard our minister speak in social services the other day in 

terms of how people were treated by the previous regime under 

social welfare.  And I say to you, it was a crime, truly a crime 

to see the downtrodden treated this way.  And we have to take 

action, as this throne speech speaks, about us putting these 

people first in terms of a quality of life. 

The throne speech of 1944 also referred to something else -- 

hospitalization and medicare.  The first time in North America 

the idea of bringing forward hospitalization and it took 20 

years to bring forward medicare.  But it was the steps, the first 

steps of that dream by the premier then of T.C. Douglas. 

 

That dream continues again in the throne speech of 1992 by 

this government.  We are embarking now on the next phase -- 

that phase being the wellness model, preventative care, 

community-based preventative care.  This is very significant in 

terms of the medicare situation and I think it's appropriate, 

looking at the anniversary of medicare's inception 30 years, 

that we are embarking on this.  And again it was with pride that 

I talk about that in terms of the throne speech. 

 

It's interesting too when we talk about the constitution, when 

we talk about a strong Saskatchewan and a strong Canada.  I 

guess the province of Saskatchewan has always felt in terms of 

the constitution that we have not always had a strong enough 

voice in terms of a national viewpoint. 

 

And this was outlined in terms of the '44 throne speech, that 

these areas were remiss in terms of a constitution.  And as we 

know at that time that constitution was not Canadian.  That was 

still the BNA (British North America) Act held in England. 

 

But it did recognize the need of the national viewpoint as we 

do now, in terms of that throne speech again now, 1992, talking 

about that strong Saskatchewan, the need for a strong Canada 

and a strong central government so provinces like 

Saskatchewan are not lost within the realm of what's going on.  

These are important steps. 

 

It also recognizes too now, in terms of 1992 when we also talk 

about the theme of putting people first, is the question of 

aboriginal rights.  For far too long this segment of society has 

been ignored, downtrodden, and trampled as society has gone 

forward.  It is now time to say an end to this.  It is now time to 

take the initial steps to repay the debt that we owe to aboriginal 

people.  These steps are small.  They will take time.  But they 

are the steps that are necessary in order to protect aboriginal 

people, to give them what is rightfully theirs and always has 

been, which has been taken away in history. 

 

The other area too that 1944 talked about was two particular 

areas: the importance of the co-operative movement and the 

importance of Crown agencies, the questions of the mixed 

economy and that balance that is required in a fragile economy 

such as Saskatchewan's. 

 

We have seen 10 years of what private enterprise does to the 

province of Saskatchewan.  We have seen when government 

money is wasted to attract fly-by-night operations to operate in 

the province, some that don't even have the time before the ink 

was dry that they're bankrupt.  We need to work together as 

was done in 1944 to use the resources that we have here in 

order to achieve that. 

 

I'd then like to also quote again the area of the throne 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

speech in 1944 and how it applies to 1992: 

 

 It is the feeling of my Government that the time has come 

when governing bodies must realize their responsibilities in 

the sphere of economic life.  When resources that are 

rightfully the property of the community are being exploited, 

then the members of the community must be adequately 

compensated and protected.  When enterprises that should be 

properly recognized as public utilities are being operated by 

private interest to the detriment of the general welfare of the 

people of the Province, then it becomes the duty of the 

Government to act on behalf of the people to make sure that 

these enterprises are conducted in such a way as to yield the 

maximum benefit to the entire community.  It is the policy of 

my Government to achieve these ends by every constitutional 

and financial power at its disposal. 

 

These words ring well in respect to what's gone on in the past 

10 years. 

 

In terms of the throne speech now, we've seen the recognition 

of the public utilities particularly SaskPower and being 

involved in co-generation projects, which is to me seeing a 

project that will greatly benefit rural Saskatchewan, seeing 

small projects, not megaprojects, that will at a much less cost, 

benefit those people.  And to me that is a strong step in terms 

of a Crown agency providing that economic relief in our 

society. 

 

But at the same time, when talked about in 1944, the question 

of public utilities and being rammed by the private interests, I 

can't forget the debate of SaskEnergy.  I cannot forget the 

debate where the members opposite had decided it was time to 

remove a public utility from public control.  And I say shame 

to that. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan spoke in terms of how they felt 

about public utilities.  Clearly they wanted protection there.  

They saw that as an economic benefit.  They saw that as a 

right. 

 

And as a government here, as we outlined in the throne speech, 

this will continue to be area protection for the economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other area too, when I talked about co-operatives . . . And 

co-operatives have a special meaning in my life, being 

involved as a Wheat Pool delegate for many years and also 

involved in local co-ops and also having my money in the 

credit union system.  That in 1944 it was recognized then the 

importance of the co-operatives, and how we saw the 

incorporation of the department of co-operatives. 

 

What did we see from the members opposite in 10 years?  A 

removal of that department.  A removal of that recognition of 

how important that segment of society is in Saskatchewan.  

And we are talking about corporations that are using money 

and using talent and people within the province of 

Saskatchewan and they were ignored. 

 

But I'm glad to see that a step has been made in this throne 

speech recognizing co-operatives to participate in 

community bonds.  Again this is a very important step.  I think 

this is long overdue. 

 

The other area I want to deal with in terms of the throne 

speech, Mr. Speaker, is the area of open and honest 

government.  It's very curious the discussion we had today in 

terms of question period and discussing open and honest 

government.  And when we saw 10 years of a closed 

government, when we saw governments that, in terms of 

politics, brought politics to the lowest level; in terms of the 

public service removed that independence of the public service, 

removed the ability to have a public service that is professional 

. . . And that is a step we must take now in order to do that. 

 

(1445) 

 

Also bringing forward legislation -- information that people 

can see how the public interest has been treated in terms of the 

filing of annual reports.  We're seeing that now in terms of the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation.  And as they always 

say: it's always the tip of the iceberg -- one-tenth is on top, 

nine-tenths is underneath.  So I wait to see the nine-tenths.  

And I think truly then the members opposite . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That's right . . . will hold their heads low in 

that area. 

 

I think the other areas of democratic reform in terms of private 

members participating more in the House are very important.  I 

think the area, too, in terms of members . . . in terms of this 

House being open, in terms of more committee participation. 

 

Also the question of elections -- when they should take place.  

Looking forward to legislation in that area, because as we have 

seen in terms of the members opposite, a total disregard for the 

democratic system last June; a total disregard when they knew 

that it was time to face the piper and face the people. 

 

We talk about budgetary delays.  Had we had the election June 

of last year, if we had had that election, the budget would've 

been on time, the people would've spoken sooner, and thirdly, 

an NDP government would've been that much closer to solving 

the problems in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- As I said, Mr. Speaker, as I opened, I am 

proud to speak to this . . . to the reply to the throne speech.  As 

I said, it is a question of pride and a question of tradition.  It is 

with that pride and that tradition that I will take the message 

out of this government throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan to tell the people the direction we are taking.  

And the future of Saskatchewan, I think, looks very bright in 

terms of this blueprint we have outlined.  Thank you again, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is an 

honour and a privilege for me to have the opportunity to speak 

in support of the throne speech.  As the Honourable Sylvia 

Fedoruk, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, said in her 

opening remarks: 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

We come together today, in the spring of 1992, a time of 

renewal, to set a new direction for Saskatchewan. 

 

This new direction is required because of the legacy of 

destruction and devastation left behind by the previous 

government which chose to squander and pillage and plunder 

this fine province and the great people who live here.  We find 

ourselves today, after nine long years of Tory rule, facing the 

highest deficit per capita in Canada. 

 

We find our assets and precious natural resources given away 

at fire sale prices to friends and multinationals.  We find our 

once proud, efficient Crown corporations crippled.  We find 

our children living in poverty and on food bank lines.  We find 

our seniors looking in dismay as they see the province they 

proudly built by hard work, scrimping and saving and through 

a spirit of co-operation, now lying in virtual ruins. 

 

The previous government will long be remembered for its 

scandals, corruptions, patronage and illegal acts.  To many 

people in our province it is inconceiveable that a group of 

Saskatchewan citizens elected by the people to serve the people 

and represent them in the legislature could have done this 

horrendous disservice and betray the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over the last couple of years we have witnessed these pirates 

quietly sneaking away one by one with their pockets full, 

leaving a trail of destruction for someone else to clean up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clean up this mess is what we and the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to do.  The people know and this 

government knows that we are not responsible for this mess.  

At the same time, we know that we need to get our house in 

order and indeed our province in order because our children 

now living on the outskirts of hope certainly do not deserve to 

inherit this despicable and irresponsible deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- The deficit is the number one concern among the 

people of Saskatchewan.  The people are prepared to pitch in 

and work towards dealing with this overwhelming obstacle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are still wounded and 

bleeding from the unscrupulous antics of the previous rogue 

government.  There lingers a strong mood of distrust for 

government and authority.  And rightly so. 

 

However our government is committed to open, honest and 

accountable government.  This has already been demonstrated 

by a number of initiatives including the Gass Commission.  A 

number of other steps are outlined in the throne speech which 

will help restore public trust in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a government to be successful we need the 

trust and co-operation of the people.  To receive public 

confidence and support, this government must be open, honest, 

and accountable. 

In my constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley, agriculture is still 

the economic base in spite of the reign of terror by the former 

premier who dubbed himself the friend of the farmer.  The 

so-called friend of the farmer has left farmers with record debt 

loads, record farm foreclosures, record off-loading onto the 

province by the federal government, and the most unstable 

farm economy in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to work with farmers and 

communities in rural Saskatchewan to restore the agriculture 

economy.  We are also prepared to lobby Ottawa and make 

them live up to their responsibility of picking up the bill on 

federal agriculture aid programs.  After all, it was Mr. 

Mulroney, along with his number one cheer-leader, the former 

premier of Saskatchewan, who promoted free trade and the 

subsequent loss of our two-price wheat system so that today in 

Canada the farmer gets 6 cents from a loaf of bread on the store 

shelf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number of initiatives brought forward in the 

throne speech regarding the protection of our environment is 

impressive and shows real commitment and leadership.  The 

conservation strategy for sustainable development, the 

environmental charter of rights and responsibilities Act, the 

Environmental Assessment Commission, and the strong 

commitment to our environment by the government will ensure 

that there will be no more Rafferty-Alameda boondoggles in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- A boondoggle that sees the Rafferty dam virtually 

bone dry after four spring run-offs and one of the wettest 

summers on record.  A boondoggle that sees the Alameda dam 

with a shifting foundation that no engineer will endorse as 

being structurally sound.  A boondoggle that was plagued with 

controversy and court actions.  A boondoggle that resulted in a 

hundred million dollar cost overrun.  A boondoggle that was 

biasedly and falsely promoted in the nationally televised 

production titled wet Dreams in the Dust, a production that cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers over $800,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan should never again 

be asked to shell out hard-earned tax dollars for a premier's 

pipe dream.  And in addition, our environment should never 

again be subjected to such a ruthless and callous assault. 

 

The announcement to increase the amount of land committed to 

provincial parks and protected areas, along with the 

commitment to include an additional 1.5 million acres of 

Crown land containing important wildlife habitat in the Critical 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, is to be applauded and will 

certainly be viewed very positively not only in Saskatchewan 

but throughout Canada. 

 

The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is a very unique 

piece of legislation which allows traditional uses by agriculture 

lessees, such as grazing and haying, to continue on our Crown 

lands.  However, this Act does prohibit the clearing, breaking, 

and draining of these Crown lands or the sale of these lands 

which are very 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

important to sustaining wildlife populations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech deals with many other positive 

initiatives such as jobs and economic opportunities, quality of 

life and putting people first, which provides direction and hope 

for our people.  The travesty of injustice left behind by the 

previous government will not soon be forgotten, but we must 

move on. 

 

If we don't clean up the mess and get this province going in the 

right direction, who will?  If a government is open, honest, and 

accountable to the people it serves, and if the people from all 

segments of society are willing to do their fair share, we will 

begin to rebuild this great province.  For it was the spirit of 

co-operation, hope, hard work, personal sacrifices, and 

determination that made Saskatchewan one of the best places in 

the world to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency are 

telling me they are prepared to do their part in rebuilding 

Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I 

have complete faith in our government.  We have one of the 

most knowledgeable and respected Premiers in the nation, and 

a crew of cabinet ministers and MLAs second to none.  And 

most importantly we have the genuine and hard-working 

people of Saskatchewan to work with as we prepare our 

province for the next generation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- I am proud to support this throne speech.  But 

before I close, Mr. Speaker, lest we forget, the interest on our 

deficit during the 10 minutes it took for these remarks amounts 

to roughly $13,880.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying how 

honoured I feel to be representing the grand constituency of 

Redberry in this the second session of the twenty-second 

legislature.  My commitment is to uphold the faith they have 

placed in me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a crucial year in the history of our nation.  

Not only will we be celebrating Canada's 125th birthday, but 

we could very well witness the ultimate disintegration of this 

fair nation. 

 

As a ninth generation Canadian I feel especially concerned 

about the fate of our country.  We must approach the 

constitutional discussions with an open mind and put narrow 

self-interest aside for the betterment of Canada.  Only this 

approach will ensure the continuance of this nation. 

 

Just as I am deeply concerned about the fate of my country, I 

am equally troubled about the state of my province.  Frankly 

speaking, the wholesale destruction perpetuated in 

Saskatchewan by the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party 

sickens me.  Facing the total debt of nearly fourteen billion, our 

province lies on the brink of bankruptcy. 

Mr. Speaker, I feel a special attachment to Saskatchewan.  Both 

my parents were born here, and my grandfathers both were 

original signers during the campaign to establish the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool back in 1923.  It is therefore very 

disheartening to view the dismal state of agriculture that exists 

today in our fair province.  The Tories deserve much of the 

blame. 

 

They introduced the very flawed gross revenue insurance plan, 

or GRIP.  They dismantled the Saskatchewan beef stabilization 

program resulting in the loss of many processing jobs, as well 

as a significant drop in cattle numbers.  And just the other day, 

the Tories voted against a resolution calling for the federal 

government to deliver on its commitment to provide farmers 

with the $500 million deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop 

year. 

 

(1500) 

 

The Liberals, Mr. Speaker, are not without fault either.  The 

Trudeau years saw the dismantling of the Crow.  These years 

also witnessed changes to the usury Act, which negatively 

impact on the farmers' cash flow.  These actions are also 

responsible for much of the current farm debt crisis.  How 

much better off might we be if the interest had never been 

allowed to go above 12 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our New Democratic government realizes that 

protection of our province's farm families is fundamental to 

economic revival.  Our government has made a number of 

significant improvements to GRIP, in particular making it more 

market responsive.  Still, negotiations are taking place to move 

GRIP toward a cost-of-production formula, to reduce producer 

premiums, and to increase Ottawa's share of the cost.  Unlike 

the Tories, we New Democrats believe that Ottawa still owes 

our farmers their share of the half billion dollar deficiency 

payment.  Rest assured that our government will continue to 

pressure the federal Tories to honour that commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, in consultation with farm groups and 

lenders, appropriate recommendations from the Farm Debt 

Advisory Committee will be acted upon.  As New Democrats, 

we realize that security of tenure has always been uppermost in 

the minds of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Our government is firmly committed to job creation.  The time 

has come that our leading export shall no longer be the young 

people of this province.  There are positive signs that we are 

turning this around.  Between October and December of last 

year, Saskatchewan's population actually grew by 254. 

 

The opposition seems to think that they had some great new 

ideas during their term of office -- new ideas such as jobs for 

people who really didn't work.  Or in some cases, pay cheques 

for people who didn't really exist. 

 

Well that brings to mind the historical fact about an early 

Liberal government in this country.  They were discovered to 

have had horses on their payroll.  However, unlike 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

some of those hired by the former Tory government in this 

province, they were indeed whole horses. 

 

Unlike the PC Party, we New Democrats do not have a 

narrow-minded faith in the market-place.  Accordingly our 

government will amend The Community Bonds Act to make 

co-operatives eligible for financial support.  Likewise we'll also 

use our Crown corporations to stimulate the economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plight of our aboriginal people can no longer 

be ignored.  The time has come when they should be treated 

fairly and equitably.  Our government recognizes and will 

promote self-determination for Indian and Metis people.  The 

recommendations of the Saskatchewan Metis Justice Review 

Committee and the Indian Justice Review Committee will go a 

long way towards furthering that goal.  Most importantly our 

government is sincerely committed to the settlement of 

outstanding treaty land entitlements. 

 

Faced with a deep financial crisis, we must find innovative 

ways to deliver quality services.  The wellness model of health 

care is an effective response to this crisis.  A more 

community-based and directed system based on prevention of 

sickness will usher in the next generation of medicare. 

 

The Health Services Utilization and Research Commission will 

identify areas for improved efficiencies, while a provincial 

health council will give consumers, health providers, and 

community leaders much needed input.  The people of 

Saskatchewan can be reassured that an NDP government will 

uphold the fundamental principles of medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our New Democratic government has a sincere 

commitment to the environment and sustainable development.  

We have already demonstrated this commitment by cancelling 

the AECL/Saskatchewan Power memorandum of 

understanding.  Another example of a Tory bad deal. 

 

This agreement would have cost the provincial treasury $25 

million and would have quickly taken us down the road to a 

CANDU 3 nuclear reactor, even though the province's energy 

needs are covered until at least the year 2003.  Instead our 

government created the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation 

and Development Institute which will study all energy options 

in an objective manner. 

 

We will introduce the environmental charter of rights and 

responsibilities Act, and an environmental assessment 

commission will be set up to ensure open and effective 

assessment of major economic development projects.  

Furthermore, SaskPower is now evaluating potential 

co-generation power projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will conclude this address by affirming my 

support for the throne speech.  Saskatchewan faces difficult 

times, but this is also a time of great opportunity.  By capturing 

the spirit of co-operation and community, fairness and 

compassion, Saskatchewan people will be able to weather the 

storm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's been a little while 

and a long while in waiting to get a chance to speak to the 

Assembly in response to the throne speech, Mr. Speaker.  At 

the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a 

motion, seconded by the member from Kindersley, and it will 

be an amendment to the throne speech motion, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a speech the throne speech was.  Too bad, 

Mr. Speaker, there was no answers to the many questions all of 

us have.  It's been a long, long wait -- several long months, in 

fact.  And the member for Redberry was just talking about 

what a wonderful job they were doing and what a terrible job 

my government was doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to point out to you some of the points that the 

members brag about in the throne speech -- things that the NDP 

want to take credit for.  And this is just a small summary 

because I realize that you aren't really fussy about a whole 

bunch of readings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Spar Group in Swift Current.  That was the 

former PC government and the now Premier uses it as an 

example of waste and mismanagement.  Harvest Meats of 

Yorkton was expanded and supported, and at the time the 

Premier, today's Premier, the leader of the opposition of the 

time, said it was an example of SEDCO being abused.  

Advanced Technologies was initiated by a community bond 

offering under the former PC government. 

 

And of the more than 700 companies considering locating in 

the province, more than 700 began consideration under the 

former PC government -- part of our global decentralization 

initiative.  The now Premier said it was cruel to force 

employees to move from their homes. 

 

The electro co-generation proposal, Mr. Speaker, was called for 

and developed under a previous PC government.  The now 

Premier called it piecemeal privatization of SaskPower.  

SaskTel International was created by the former PC 

government in 1985.  The then leader of the opposition said it 

was an attempt to fragment SaskTel. 

 

The Round Table on Environment was created by the previous 

PC government, and the now Premier called it a half-hearted 

commitment.  Now they're bragging about it.  The state of the 

environment report was initiated under our government, Mr. 

Speaker, the Dumont technical institute.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

that's just a small portion of the things that we've done and the 

now NDP government are trying to take credit for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a time to criticize and I think there's a time 

to take credit for what you've done and time to give credit for 

what others have done.  Mr. Speaker, this government don't 

seem to be able to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wait has not only been long just for the 

members on this side of House that have been asking and 

seeking answers from the NDP government, but also hard for 

the people of Saskatchewan who are already feeling 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

betrayed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was hard to watch the news and listen to the 

radio and hear each day of more and more betrayals, of more 

and more deception from a government that promised so many 

things, from a government who promised openness and 

honesty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's even worse not to be able to question the 

government for these actions.  The NDP government has been 

running scared for several months.  They have been making 

changes to everything, from GRIP, health boards, and all other 

boards behind closed doors. 

 

Last year the NDP said they would get more money for farmers 

and address the farm crisis in Saskatchewan.  The NDP said 

they would take care of seniors and those with lower incomes 

and eliminate poverty altogether.  They said, Mr. Speaker, they 

would freeze taxes.  Those were promises they promised -- 

freeze taxes. 

 

The NDP said they would provide open and honest 

government.  They said they would put more money into health 

and education. And all the time the NDP are fighting for 

something called a social charter.  Just what is a social charter?  

Well if the goings-on in the past few months in Saskatchewan 

go along with what the NDP think a social charter is, it means 

taxing phones and cars, paying more for electricity and natural 

gas.  And, Mr. Speaker, to top it off, they are talking about 

premiums on health care, and I say talking, Mr. Speaker, 

because personally I don't think they will do it.  I think it is 

budget by media.  And that's some social charter.  Mr. Speaker, 

the only thing to be gained through the NDP social charter are 

the populations of Alberta and other provinces. 

 

Now the NDP are proposing premiums -- premiums from the 

people who wave their hands in the air claiming to follow the 

footsteps of one Tommy Douglas, the NDP who've said they 

would restore our province's health system.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 

we are now led to believe that not only the uproar from the 

general public, but the uproar within their own caucus have 

caused the NDP to withdraw from that proposal.  And 

personally, Mr. Speaker, I would hope so. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I would hope so not because, Mr. Speaker, we have 

campaigned on a platform of no medicare premiums.  What 

we're saying, Mr. Speaker, is they promised not to do it, and 

they're breaking their promises.  That is to me was where the 

betrayal . . . that's the betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan.  

That is where the deceit comes in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is from the NDP who claimed year after year 

health care was underfunded and that four or five per cent 

increases given by our government, the former PC government, 

were not enough.  They said it was not enough, Mr. Speaker.  

They said they would do so much better and provide so much 

more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's sad.  Mr. Speaker, I say it's sad 

because there is no one person in Saskatchewan -- not one 

senior, not one university student, not one parent or child or 

teacher -- that has not affected by the NDP's betrayal, not one.  

And I challenge any member in this Assembly to find me one. 

 

Everyone in this province is paying for more health, education, 

power, phone, car insurance, and boy, the list goes on and on.  

And we haven't even seen the budget yet.  What are other 

hardships will that bring?  Heaven only knows.  And this is a 

government that said four and a half billion dollars is enough; 

any government that can't live on that budget should not be a 

government.  That's a quote, Mr. Speaker, from one of the 

senior ministers on that side of the House before he was in 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP made a lot of promises and many of you 

remember the document that I outlined in this House.  We 

remember, Mr. Speaker, all the promises that you were making 

and all of the banns that you were asking us to make.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, they made promises that in 1991 dollars totalled 

over $2.7 billion in each year. 

 

Those figures have yet to be challenged, Mr. Speaker.  I done 

an update last year, the last year we were on that side of the 

House, and those figures have never been challenged.  They've 

never been challenged.  And I'm glad to see that the choir 

leader is here, Mr. Speaker.  I was beginning to feel a little 

lonesome up here without the . . .  Mr. Speaker, I challenge the 

member to audit those figures and come back and prove them 

wrong.  Promise . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Change like it did in '82, Murray. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes, the same thing.  And, Mr. Speaker, while 

we're on the subject, let us remember these are extra programs, 

these are extra services the NDP promised.  This is the extra 

services you promised to the people of Saskatchewan.  And 

that's a lot of money, 2.7 billion over and above the 4.5 billion 

that we were spending. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I tried to point out to the members that that 

was a lot of money.  I tried to point out to the members at the 

time that it was not reasonable to try and force us to spend 

more money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP knew at the time they could never 

deliver on those extra services.  They couldn't deliver on the 

goodies to the public.  They knew what they were promising.  

They knew it was a load of boloney.  Can I use that word?  The 

Gass Commission proved that, Mr. Speaker, but they didn't 

care; they went and done it anyway.  They didn't listen to 

anyone, Mr. Speaker, even though they knew the pie-in-the-sky 

promises were so expensive and they knew that those promises 

alone would make it impossible to deliver, given the economic 

times. 

 

But something is much worse, Mr. Speaker -- something that I 

think is unforgivable.  They knew, Mr. Speaker, they knew at 

the time that they were making those demands on us and those 

promises to the people, that they could not deliver. 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

The Premier may deny it and the Finance minister pretends to 

still be in a state of shock.  But, Mr. Speaker, they knew.  They 

knew by their own Gass Commission, they knew by the 

chairman of the Gass Commission and the prospectus and 

many other forms of proof -- they knew.  They can't deny, Mr. 

Speaker, any longer.  I have people . . . I met people yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker, who were saying to me, how much longer do they 

think they can fool us?  They're saying to me, they did not fool 

us at all.  And while they did vote for them, they are very 

disillusioned right now. 

 

What's worse than that, Mr. Speaker, what's worse is your 

deception, the deception of the NDP, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm 

talking about the deception, the blatant manipulation of the 

people of this province.  Mr. Speaker, that is unforgivable. 

 

A couple of my colleagues have mentioned many more of the 

pre-election promises spoken by the NDP, promises I know the 

NDP had no intention of keeping, but nevertheless promises 

they thought would get them elected.  The election of 

deception.  The 1991 election will be remembered for a long 

time by the people of Saskatchewan as the election of 

deception. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP said a lot of things before they 

became government.  And it is obvious that the public believed 

what they said, and if they hadn't the NDP would never be 

sitting on that side of the House today.  The people of 

Saskatchewan put their trust in those people. And it is 

interesting to see the NDP set a new world record for 

back-pedalling since getting elected. 

 

Just what did the public get in return for their votes?  What did 

they get?  Well, Mr. Speaker, parliamentary rules forbid me to 

use the words I would like to use, but let's just say the public 

got a much thinner pocket-book.  They also got told, Mr. 

Speaker, some pretty tall tales.  The real word that fits here is 

also unparliamentary.  But all of the members here and all the 

members on that side of the House and everyone else here 

today knows what the word is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact for those of you who still might be a little 

unclear, I would like to quote the Leader-Post article in front of 

me.  Mr. Speaker, this is . . . and I know from previous you 

don't like me to read the whole thing so I won't do that, sir.  But 

this is an article in the Regina post and it's by a very 

well-known political editor and I think everyone should read 

this.  But I will just quote a couple of things.  February 6, '92, 

Dale Eisler.  Dale Eisler wrote this.  I wasn't going to mention 

the man's name, because I didn't know, you know . . . but he 

wrote it, Mr. Speaker.  The members asked who.  It's here, I'll 

table it. 

 

 The NDP will defend this purge by hiding behind the deficit 

argument and claim it is all part of downsizing and the 

elimination of redundant positions. 

 

 But that is just more of the deception.  (The fact is) that (this) 

is (a) planned, orchestrated and well executed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole article is, I think, defined in the 

last two words by Mr. Eisler, and I quote: "They lied."  That's 

what he said.  I quote, Mr. Speaker, "They lied." 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what the people of Saskatchewan got.  Now 

I didn't say that.  He's referring to the NDP government in the 

article . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don't know.  If I 

am, I'm sure I will be told.  And it is certainly not my object to 

be unparliamentary, but I do believe that we have to tell the 

truth once in a while. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . in this 

House, yes, in this House.  Well, Mr. Speaker . . . In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to . . . no, I won't, no. 

 

But like many things that the NDP are trying, Mr. Speaker, is 

trying to defend their actions.  And I quote: "But that is just 

more of the deception."  And that is not all Mr. Eisler says, Mr. 

Speaker.  There is much more -- much, much more.  And I 

would suggest you read it, if you want to know what the people 

of Saskatchewan think about you over there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, now I've been in politics for a few years, 

and now I have read Mr. Eisler's column many times.  In fact I 

know what it's like to take a few hits from Mr. Eisler myself.  

But in all of the years that I've been here and all of the columns 

I have read, I have never seen or read Mr. Eisler call any 

government what he did the government opposite me today -- 

never.  Which would indicate to me, Mr. Speaker, that he felt 

quite strongly about his article . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You'll have to speak up if you want me to respond. 

 

And I guess it just doesn't get any more straightforward than 

that, Mr. Speaker.  The people have been deceived, misled, and 

betrayed.  Yes, they have been betrayed. 

 

And what is worse, Mr. Speaker, is the members opposite don't 

care.  That's what's worse, they don't care.  It isn't possible for 

them to claim they care and still do what they are doing to this 

province.  You don't care.  You sit there and you smile and you 

giggle and you chuckle because you are government.  You 

think that the end justifies the means. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP care, they are talking out of both 

sides . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I would ask members not to 

interfere when a member of the House is speaking. 

 

I would also draw the attention to the member of Wilkie to 

make his words through the Chair rather than to individual 

members in the House. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I realize that I was 

out of order a bit there. 

 

How can the NDP, Mr. Speaker, claim to care about the lower 

income people of Saskatchewan while they are raising power 

rates, phones, car insurance, and everything else in sight.  Mr. 

Speaker, every person has to have lights, power.  They have to 

have a phone.  As a matter of fact we want our old folks to 

have phones so they can call for help if needed. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

Mr. Speaker, all of those things are being raised.  The power 

rates are being raised.  And we hear the chuckles going on.  I 

guess the old folks don't need them.  But, Mr. Speaker, this is 

their answer to eliminating poverty.  Creating it maybe; 

eliminating it, I don't think so. 

 

How can the NDP claim to care so much about education when 

they are slashing funding, stopping the construction of 

much-needed schools, and looking to close rural schools all 

across this province.  Is this caring, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, how about the farmers?  What are we doing for 

the farmers?  Well I have calls from constituents every day 

with all sorts of questions and complaints about what the NDP 

is doing.  And farmers are among the angriest. 

 

The NDP told the farmers they would get $500 million 

immediately from Ottawa.  The now Premier said he would go 

down and demand $500 million.  Well I guess he hasn't gone 

down there yet, because we haven't got the money. 

 

And he would improve the gross revenue insurance program, 

GRIP, so the producers would be much happier.  Sounds good, 

Mr. Speaker.  Sounds good. 

 

(1530) 

 

The NDP said, we will consult with farmers and farm groups 

from all over the province to ensure we get the best deal 

possible for our farmers -- farm groups and farmers.  Now they 

consulted with the farm groups, but not with the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was up in Paradise Hill when there was a rally 

there.  The media from Lloydminster was there.  They were 

trying to get an audience with the agricultural minister.  He 

wouldn't even answer them.  He wouldn't commit himself to an 

interview.  And who was he meeting with?  Invited, invited 

people.  The farmers were trying to get to talk to him.  They 

wouldn't . . . He wouldn't even listen.  He wouldn't even meet 

with the farmers, but he would meet with invited people whom 

he could probably depend on their support. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that doesn't sound so bad either.  But what 

has happened to the GRIP?  What's happened to the GRIP 

program?  It's bad, Mr. Speaker.  In order to try and fix one 

component, they ruined the whole thing.  All of . . . everyone 

knew that there had to be some fine tuning to that program.  

Farmers told us.  They needed some reason to do their best and 

grow the most they could and not be penalized.  We knew that.  

That had to be fixed.  And they fixed that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have now is something that the more you 

grow, the more you get; the less you grow, the less you get.  

That's not what insurance is all about.  Insurance is when you 

lose something, you have something there to start over again.  

That's what insurance is about.  And I've got farmers, Mr. 

Speaker, in Wilkie who tell me the so-called improvements the 

NDP made to GRIP will make the program far too expensive 

and they can't afford it.  They can't afford to belong to this 

program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm pleased to 

know I 

have a new choir leader. 

 

Farmers are about to upset the changes made to GRIP, Mr. 

Speaker, because it was supposed to have been improved, 

considering the input of farmers and farm groups.  The NDP 

said, Mr. Speaker, we will make it better.  We will improve the 

program.  We know farmers. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, considering how farmers feel about the 

changes, I think the only farmer the Minister of Agriculture and 

his GRIP group spoke to were the figures on his Fisher-Price 

toy farm.  One reality . . .  Mr. Speaker, one really has to 

question how good a program is when 1,500 farmers have to 

organize themselves just to be listened to, just to have the input 

they were promised by the government.  It happened in Regina, 

it happened in Shaunavon, it happened in Paradise Hill, and it's 

happening in towns and every coffee shop across the province. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The NDP don't care.  They 

don't care.  They are government and they don't care what the 

people say.  Mr. Speaker, for those not attending the farm rally 

at the Agridome in April I want to tell you almost 100 per cent 

of the producers voted to restore GRIP to the original 1991 

program.  And I think the only people voting against the 

original 1991 GRIP were a couple of former NDP MLAs. 

 

And when the crowd had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to vote 

on the new 1992 version of GRIP, even a few of the NDP 

MLAs would not stand in support of their own new and 

improved GRIP.  That should tell you, Mr. Speaker, a little bit 

of something about the new and improved program.  After all, 

Mr. Speaker, like one farmer said: there's a big difference 

between fine tuning a program and gutting it. 

 

The bottom line here is that farmers have been betrayed along 

with the rest of the people, the rest of the people of the 

province.  Just like Mr. Eisler said -- he said the big "L" word, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has made some pretty interesting choices.  

While the people are being told to tighten their belts, 

executives like Jack Messer and Carole Bryant are building 

bathrooms in their offices and are driving $50,000 cars. I 

understand that has been looked at and maybe there's some 

changes because the people have found that the cookie jar was 

there and they had their hands in it. 

 

While we're being told by the government we're all in this 

together, co-operate and we'll get out of this together, keep a 

stiff upper lip, personal assistants to the Premier are receiving 

80 per cent pay hikes -- 80 per cent pay hikes. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would like to draw to the attention of 

the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster that she had her 

opportunity to participate in this debate and I would appreciate 

it if she did not interfere with the present member speaking. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I guess we take 

the comments from where they come from. 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly are not in this together.  When some 

people get 80 per cent wage increases, hospitals, education, 

welfare people are being cut back, how are we all in it 

together?  How can some people drive Lexus cars and other 

people not even have a car to drive and call it all in here 

together? 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are not in it together.  And while the 

government runs behind closed doors to make all these secret 

decisions, the public reaches a little deeper into their pocket, 

Mr. Speaker, to pay for these programs that we're all in 

together. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had one constituent say to me: the member from 

Riversdale said over and over that 4.5 billion was enough to 

run this province.  He said he would do away with 

harmonization because the government didn't need any more 

money.  He said that, and he did it.  About the only promise he 

kept.  He said he would do away with harmonization; the 

government didn't need any more money.  If this is true, why 

am I paying so much more and getting so much less?  This 

question was asked me, and I think it's a good question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the member from Riversdale or one 

of his colleagues to answer that question.  Why are we paying 

more and getting so much less?  Is that not a fair question? -- 

particularly when we have a quote from the members when 

they were not in government saying: 4.5 is enough, we don't 

need any more money.  I think it is a fair question.  I would like 

somebody to answer that for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question.  Why are we taxing the sick?  

The leaks that we're getting says that there's going to be about a 

hundred per cent raise in the minimum on drugs.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, who buys drugs?  It's the sick.  They don't go buying 

drugs for fun, I don't think -- some people may but generally 

most people don't. 

 

And why are you raising every utility in sight?  All the old 

folks need . . . all the poor people need light, heat.  Why are we 

doing everything that they said they would never do?  That is, 

Mr. Speaker, what we call deception.  That's why we're saying, 

you said you didn't have to do it, you wouldn't do it, and the 

people of Saskatchewan believed you.  They believed you.  

They voted for you.  You're now government, but you're still 

doing it anyway because you don't care. 

 

The member from Riversdale said: we don't need any more 

money.  He said with proper management he could live easily 

within a 4.5 billion budget and deliver all of his promises.  

That's what he said. He could deliver all those promises with 

4.5 billion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that the member from 

Riversdale had no intention of keeping his word.  It is 

unfortunate everyone in Saskatchewan is paying for his 

dishonesty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lawyer from Riversdale had a choice between 

a few cents on a hamburger or raising telephone and insurance, 

of all things even contemplating health care premiums. That 

shouldn't have even been on the table according to their past 

record, according to the things they said. 

The now Minister of Health was in this very House, said never, 

ever would we ever put on health premiums.  And in fairness, I 

don't think they will.  I think the flak that they got through their 

media budget . . . they've chose to withdraw from that. 

 

So what did he do?  He chose to impose a flat tax on everyone.  

He decided it was better to put more of a burden on lower 

income people -- on seniors, single-parent families -- to impose 

taxes that everybody has to pay rather than gain $200 million 

from a voluntary tax, Mr. Speaker.  And I say voluntary 

because there was a choice.  Under the harmonization, Mr. 

Speaker, when I talked to my constituents, I like to use an 

analysis like this.  If I met a friend uptown and it was getting 

close to Mother's Day and I would say to him, have you bought 

something for your wife, and he'd say no.  So together we go to 

a store and he buys a $4,000 fur coat for his wife for Mother's 

Day, and I buy a $2,000 coat because that's all I can afford.  

The guy that pays the most pays the most tax.  That is 

voluntary tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't pay tobacco tax.  I don't pay any tobacco 

tax.  That's voluntary because I don't smoke; that's a voluntary 

tax.  That's a self-inflicted penalty that you pay.  If the same 

two people went to a restaurant, one had steak and lobster and 

the other had a hamburger, who'd pay the most tax?  The guy 

with the steak and lobster.  That's voluntary tax, Mr. Speaker.  

But now even the poor people, everybody has to pay that tax. 

 

Where's the promise of living within $4.5 billion?  Mr. 

Speaker, the election of deception, that's where it is.  That's 

where it is, Mr. Speaker.  And I can just imagine in a NDP 

caucus meeting, it's like all of the members arguing over who 

gets to break the next promise. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let's look at it.  We've already broke a 

couple of promises to the seniors and to lower income families, 

not to mention university students, the sick.  Well I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, that just about covers everyone.  And it's a sad thing, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's downright unconscionable and totally 

unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pretty soon now the government will have to stop 

betraying the people of this province because there will be no 

people left to betray.  Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, or as I 

conclude, I would like to table this motion, move an 

amendment to the motion, seconded by my colleague, the 

member from Kindersley: 

 

 That the following words be added to the motion: 

 

 But regrets that the government has misled the people of 

Saskatchewan in their partisan effort to break clear 

commitments not to increase taxes or impose health care 

charges; and further regrets the government's continuing 

campaign against individuals and their families by political 

firings, restrictions on freedom of speech, threats to 

retroactively break legal contracts, and its campaign of 

political terror in regard to the entire body politic of the 

province; and further regrets that the government has failed 

to provide any 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

economic leadership or positive solutions to the challenges 

facing our people. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the 

time and that's all for now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

The Speaker: -- If the members will just give us a moment. 

 

Order.  I am somewhat concerned with a particular phrase in 

the amendment and I was wondering whether the member 

would entertain to delete a particular phrase.  If a member were 

to use these words in debate, I certainly would rule it out of 

order.  And the phrase that I am concerned about is "its 

campaign of political terror in regard to the entire body politic 

of the province." 

 

That if -- order -- if a member were to use that in a speech in 

the legislature, it would be ruled definitely out of order and 

unparliamentary.  And by deleting it I don't think it does . . . 

takes away from your amendment at all.  If the member would 

accept my suggestion that he delete it, I would recognize the 

seconder and they could then present a new motion with that 

phrase deleted. 

 

If that is not unacceptable then I think I would have to rule the 

whole amendment out of order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, or perhaps a 

point of clarification on your part, which aspect of that phrase 

is that which would make it unparliamentary for this House? 

 

The Speaker: -- Easy enough, two words: "political terror."  

Simply, it's the two words, political terror.  And I think that that 

is a phrase that is simply not used in the legislature and I would 

certainly rule that out of order if anybody used that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . If he has a point of order, I will 

recognize a point of order.  Does the member have a point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm looking for clarification. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I have given an option to the 

member from Wilkie to either delete that phrase in his 

amendment, which I say takes nothing away from his total 

amendment; if that is unacceptable to the member, then I will 

rule the whole amendment out of order.  I am quite prepared to 

accept a deletion of that phrase and let the seconder continue 

and move another amendment with the same seconder, with 

that particular phrase deleted.  If that is acceptable to the 

member, then the seconder can continue. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, for the expediency of time, rather 

than redo the whole the thing, we will accept your ruling. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right then, the amendment . . . In the 

amendment to the address in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne, it has been moved by the member for Wilkie, seconded 

by the member for Kindersley: 

 That the following words be added to the motion: 

 

 But regrets that the government has misled the people of 

Saskatchewan in their partisan effort to break clear 

commitments not to increase taxes or impose health care 

charges, and further regrets the government's continuing 

campaign against individuals and their families by political 

firings, restrictions on freedom of speech, threats to 

retroactively break legal contracts, and further regrets that the 

government has failed to provide any economic leadership or 

positive solutions to the challenges facing our people. 

 

That is the amendment that is before us, seconded by the 

member from Kindersley, and the debate will continue on the 

main motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the 

government for finally reconvening the legislature so we can 

receive answers to our many questions.  I must say though that 

I'm not surprised by the lack of plan in this throne speech.  

After hearing the throne speech, I am convinced the NDP didn't 

have a plan and still don't have a plan.  There are many words 

that can describe this government.  Some of my colleagues 

have quoted editorials.  Some have quoted constituents, and I 

have a few of my own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the member from 

Riversdale is a successful politician.  His party won decisively 

in the last provincial election.  His many years as an MLA are 

tangible proof of his political skill.  Unfortunately and perhaps 

not surprisingly, political skill seldom translates into 

trustworthy leadership. 

 

The differences between a politician and a premier are many.  

A politician looks for the success of his party.  A premier looks 

for the success of his province.  A politician thinks of the next 

election, while a premier thinks of the next generation.  A 

premier wishes to steer, while the politician is sometimes 

satisfied to drift depending on which way the wind is blowing.  

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale is a politician, not a 

leader.  In fact the article that I have with me today from the 

Leader-Post of January 31, 1992, states, and I quote: "Back in 

the days when he was (in) opposition leader, Roy Romanow 

promised the moon, the stars and more money to (the) 

Saskatchewan's civic leaders." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is true that the member from Riversdale 

made a lot of promises during his stint in opposition and during 

the election.  And the choices that he made during the first six 

months of power point to the conclusion that he is indeed a 

politician and not a leader. 

 

The most obvious examples with this member's litany of 

broken promises . . . the member from Riversdale and the rest 

of the NDP were fully aware of the province's financial 

situation from square one, but not tell the public so.  No, Mr. 

Speaker, the member's own Gass inquiry stated that the 

province's books were always open, and there was no hidden 

deficit.  In fact, the NDP concedes the point by stating in the 

prospectus filed in April that they have talked about here in the 

last few days, and I 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

quote: the 1991 financial statements have been prepared using 

accounting principles consistent with previous years.  

Department of Finance believes the 1991 financial statements 

present fairly the financial position of the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this very document signed by the Minister 

of Finance to present to the United States, a sworn statement 

that proves the books were in order, and proves the many 

deficit figures the NDP have been throwing around is a hoax. 

 

Bruce Johnstone put it well in his editorial on November 23, 

1991, Mr. Speaker.  The article says, and I quote again: 

 

 You'll recall last week that Finance Minister Ed Tchorzewski 

solemnly announced that the deficit for 1991-92 will be 

$960.3 million, rather than the $265 million projected in the 

spring budget. 

 

 "I am sure . . . the people of Saskatchewan will be . . . 

shocked as I was to discover the extent of the deficit, and 

how badly they had been misled," said Tchorzewski, with a 

straight face. 

 

 Yet honest Ed knew (all along) that the $960.3-million deficit 

is as phoney as a three-dollar bill. 

 

Close quote.  Close quote.  A smoke and mirror show, Mr. 

Speaker.  Instead of being honest they chose to make up figure 

after figure of a deficit that has roamed anywhere from $500 

million to $1.2 billion on a given day.  Instead they choose to 

mislead the public so everyone could be ready for the big NDP 

axe to fall on their heads.  So instead of saying, you've betrayed 

me, the general public will say, well at least you've spared my 

life. 

 

So when the elaborate hoax to convince the public . . . so why 

the elaborate hoax to convince the public that the member from 

Riversdale had no idea what the province's financial situation 

was, that there was a hidden deficit?  Because the member 

from Riversdale is a politician and not a leader. 

 

He knew the restraint measures the former Tory administration 

were implementing to address the deficit problem were in part 

unpopular with the public -- measures such as wage restraints, 

cut-backs to the civil service, and harmonization of the E&H 

(education and health) tax.  A leader would have recognized 

these as necessary for the well-being of the province for future 

generations.  But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale is 

a politician and what he craves is power -- power for power's 

sake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prior to the election the member from Riversdale 

exploited the public's distaste for strong medicine and went one 

step further.  He promised that an NDP government would be . 

. . among other things, remove the provincial sales tax, increase 

funding for health and education, end poverty, and balance the 

deficit and budget.  Having won election based on these 

promises, the member must now scramble to find excuses to 

break the promises he knew he could never keep. 

So now we have an unprecedented campaign by the NDP 

government to try and convince the public that it's somebody 

else's fault, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.  

Good politics, Mr. Speaker, but bad leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- While there are grand words in the throne speech 

about medicare, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is intent on 

its betrayal.  The so-called wellness model is as empty a slogan 

. . . designed to hide the closure of hospitals, user fees and 

cut-backs they said they would never do. 

 

A commitment to open and non-partisan government has 

proven to be a hollow one.  We have seen oral contracts, oral 

contracts for some of the top Crown presidents that cannot be 

released to the public because they do not exist.  What a way to 

be doing business in this province.  Now we have the president 

of SaskPower with an oral contract -- never seen before.  The 

appointments to boards and commissions have been including 

such notable experts as the former NDP MLA for Estevan.  

Just defeated candidates, the defeated candidate in my riding, 

Kindersley, recently got an appointment to the STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Campaign managers for the NDP party, NDP 

lawyers, and NDP election workers -- all of these people 

obviously more than qualified according to these folks across 

the way.  We have seen hundreds -- over 500 to be more 

precise -- political firings by the NDP, all the way from top 

bureaucrats, those that have been with the government for over 

20 years, to secretaries and single mothers trying to do their 

jobs. 

 

After such actions, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale 

gloats, gloats in the throne speech of hiring over 580 people, 

new people.  I don't think it's anything to brag about, replacing 

workers fired by yourself in the past few months and replacing 

them with NDP appointments -- every single one of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale said it takes courage 

to do these things.  He said it takes courage to take the steps his 

government is taking.  He's one to talk about courage.  Where 

was he, the member from Riversdale, when 600 farmers were 

on the front steps here asking for an opportunity to speak with 

him?  Where was he then?  Where was the courage then?  Or 

how about even bigger demonstrations, like the one at the 

Agridome?  Where was he then? 

 

(1600) 

 

Where was the NDP . . . Where was the member when NDP 

were cancelling energy agreements?  I will tell you where he 

was, Mr. Speaker; he was ducking his responsibility, skirting 

reporters and the rest of the public.  Some courage.  The 

member obviously needs a new dictionary to define what the 

word means. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech also speaks of jobs and 

economic opportunity.  What possible connection do the new 

contracts for Spar Group in Swift Current or Harvest Meats in 

Yorkton have with an NDP government?  What possible 

connection?  Well everyone in the province is happy to see 

these companies prosper.  I for one certainly don't see any 

connection between them and an NDP government.  They are 

trying to take credit for everyone else's work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other examples as well, like the community bond 

corporation.  It was a program developed by the previous 

administration and well accepted across this province.  Now 

the NDP wants to take credit for these new jobs and 

investment, like that of Advanced Technologies in Weyburn is 

creating through the community bond program. 

 

All of these projects mentioned in the throne speech have 

nothing to do with the NDP and everything to do with the 

former Tory administration.  And I would like to thank the 

NDP for complimenting the former administration by including 

them in the throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP solution for economic 

development is creating another Crown corporation: 

SaskEnergy.  While the rest of the world is turning toward 

privatization to renew and invigorate their Crown corporation, 

this government wants to set up a new family of Crown 

corporations. 

 

The NDP also speak of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 

and Trade) and other trade agreements and claim to want to be 

part of these negotiations.  It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, no 

company or organization would want to enter into any 

contracts with this government given their record of breaking 

them.  Just look at the public employee contract, the AECL pull 

out, and now the breaking of contracts with every farmer in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked my friends in the farm and business 

sectors if they would enter into a contract with this NDP 

government and the answer is a resounding "No!"  No, they 

would not enter into an agreement with these folks. 

 

Why would anyone believe the NDP would honour a contract?  

No one believes this Premier or this government.  They have 

absolutely no reason to believe them. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the throne speech 

says the "Long-term stability for our farm families is central to 

our economic recovery." 

 

What kind of cruel joke is the member from Riversdale trying 

to pull off at the expense of our province's farm families?  At 

farm demonstrations all over this province, at 

government-sponsored informational meetings all over the 

province, farmers have categorically rejected the 1992 GRIP 

program. 

 

One farmer called and said the new GRIP program doesn't 

stand for gross revenue insurance program any longer.  It 

stands for get ready incoming poverty 1992 

NDP style. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Considering the rate increases and coverage 

decreases . . . premium increases and coverage decreases 

maybe the NDP should take his suggestion and change the 

name to exactly that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP defend the changes made to the program 

claiming they take care of moral hazard, claiming farmers were 

working the program to benefit themselves.  What about the 

moral hazard of the government, Mr. Speaker, the real moral 

hazard the farmers of Saskatchewan are faced with -- the same 

government that stated any changes made to the GRIP program 

would be received by farmers in written form before March 15. 

 

Well I'm a farmer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I didn't 

get written notice.  Did any of the NDP MLA back-benchers 

that are farmers receive written notice?  Did you receive 

written notice, any of them?  Not a single one of them; not a 

farmer in Saskatchewan received written notice of the changes.  

Another contract broken. 

 

I ask the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of this 

province: don't you believe in contractual obligations?  Mr. 

Speaker, the farm community often confirms a deal on a 

handshake, but this NDP government has shown them a new 

kind of leadership, and it's not an honourable one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government's example says, forget the 

handshake, go ahead and sign a contract, and hope for the best 

because if it doesn't suit us, we'll break it -- just break it to suit 

themselves. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Deemed to have been written. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Deemed to be written, exactly that.  The contract 

that they are trying to put on to farmers now was, we have 

deemed to have received notice.  That's what the farmers of 

Saskatchewan have to live with -- deemed to have received 

notice from this government.  These contracts are not worth 

anything. 

 

Not only are they trying to force farm families to enter another 

contract, the NDP GRIP contract for '92, but they are also 

saying to the farm families to sign a waiver saying that the 

changes are just fine.  Well they're not fine with me.  I have a 

copy of the waiver in my office and I have no intention of 

signing such a thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all the member from Riversdale had to do 

was look out his office window on Monday, April 27, and he 

would have found out that these changes are not just fine.  It's 

no longer farm families that are taking . . . it's no wonder farm 

families are taking the government to court.  The NDP are 

breaking the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I say every single farmer in this program is 

upset, I wonder why the back-bench NDPers in this 

government don't stand up to the Premier and the Minister of 

Agriculture.  They talk to their neighbours, they know this 

program is contractually wrong, morally 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

wrong, and it's a program that farmers do not want.  It's as 

simple as that. 

 

Where is the member from Saskatoon Broadway, you know, 

the member from the famous farm family who said her father 

went to jail in support of farm families.  I think it would be an 

appropriate time for her to follow her father's footsteps and 

stand up to her caucus, stand up for the farm families of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Does that member and other members of the . . . farm members 

of the NDP caucus understand the changes that have taken 

place by their own government?  Do they realize the contract 

has been broken?  Does the member from Swift Current realize 

the contract has been broken?  Do they realize the coverage is 

down?  Do they realize the program is no longer predictable?  

Do they realize the program is no longer bankable?  Do they 

realize they no longer have a guaranteed per acre target 

revenue? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rural members opposite must not understand 

the program or they certainly would not support it.  I know the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster has told people in her 

constituency that they should have an option of either '91 or '92 

GRIP.  I would like to ask her if she's caved in to her caucus? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Or will she stand today and say that she would 

like to give the farmers of this province the opportunity to 

choose?  I spoke to farmers here on Monday, April 27, that 

were from her constituency.  They said they went and visited 

her in her constituency office and asked her that very question: 

should farmers have the option -- '91 or '92.  And she said yes, 

they should have the option.  That's exactly what she told 

people in her constituency.  I sincerely hope that she just didn't 

make that comment to her constituents just because she thought 

that that's what they wanted to hear. 

 

It would be interesting also to know what the member from 

Shaunavon has been telling his constituents -- 1,200 people 

from the surrounding area joined at a meeting at Shaunavon to 

condemn the program; condemn it.  And we also understand a 

number of them went to his office and ripped up their party 

card in disgust with this program and with this NDP 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I would like to ask that member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster once again, Mr. Speaker, do you still 

believe the farmers of this province should have the option 

between '91 and '92 GRIP?  No response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  A member, he may not be aware of it, 

but is not to refer to any comments made by other members 

while they are in their seats.  And I would also advise him, and 

I would appreciate if you'd direct your comments through the 

Chair rather than through other members in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think that I certainly 

appreciate your ruling on that, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like you to ask the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster, does she support changes . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I would also like to remind the member, he's 

not to involve the Speaker in the debate in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Sorry, Mr. Speaker.  I guess I'd have to direct that 

question then to the Premier in question period some time in 

the future.  And we'll ask him at that point to accommodate us 

with an answer from . . . whether the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloyd believes the program should be optional. 

 

Has the Premier of this province listened to the farmers of this 

province?  I don't think he has.  He wouldn't even go out on the 

steps of this legislature on April 27 to speak to them about the 

program.  Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the Minister of 

Agriculture was also not listening that day. 

 

I think someone like the Premier should have gone out there 

and tried to bail him out.  The Minister of Agriculture, I think, 

has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, does he have the support of the 

Premier, especially considering how the minister has totally 

screwed up this GRIP program.  He probably wonders if he has 

the support of his cabinet and the further support of the NDP 

caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important consideration the Minister of 

Agriculture should be thinking about is, does he have the 

support of the farm families of Saskatchewan for these 

changes?  No, he does not have it.  And I think it's becoming 

increasingly clear; province-wide, farmers are banding together 

to show this government that indeed they do not have the 

support of the farm community.  That's why they're taking this 

government to court. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, we've all been growing accustomed to the 

NDP breaking promises.  They are the promises from here to 

eternity that the NDP government has reneged on. 

 

Why should the people of this province believe anything this 

government and this Premier has to say any longer?  Not even 

having the Premier go on province-wide television was able to 

convince the people of Saskatchewan that the NDP and the 

Premier didn't know the economic conditions of this province.  

His address was a good preview for the television program that 

came on next, America's Funniest People. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- If only it had been titled, Saskatchewan's least 

believable man.  Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment to the 

motion by the member of Wilkie as put forward and second 

that amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I will be of course voting against 

the amendment and voting for the original motion. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make my address in approximately three 

major areas.  As soon as I make my introductory remarks, I 

want to shift into the issues of the throne speech as they relate 

to northern Saskatchewan, and also to the issues relating to 

aboriginal peoples, because the throne speech talks about the 

great need for compassion at this stage in our history.  And I 

believe that the throne speech lays out some of the basics that 

we'll need to build on as we move forward into the future. 

 

Now in regards to the member from Wilkie and the member 

from Kindersley, I would just like to make a few comments on 

some of their statements.  I noticed that, you know, the member 

from Kindersley was making a comment on a handshake and 

so on.  And I remembered we were sitting here at the last time 

in the legislature when the member from Estevan was doing a 

lot of handshaking in Quebec inside a big limousine, when he 

gave away over $5 million of our Saskatchewan taxpayers' 

money to GigaText. 

 

And I remember doing a lot of handshakes in many other areas 

where we've lost millions and millions and millions and 

hundreds of millions of dollars.  So when he talks about a 

handshake, we know that the handshake of the . . . from the 

member from Estevan has been highly destructive for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- I might say that the other word that has been 

talked about by the member from Wilkie was the whole issue 

of deception.  I find it absolutely amazing that the member can 

talk about deception.  We know that the greatest deception that 

has occurred in the history of the province of Saskatchewan as 

far as the whole area of fiscal accountability, you know, has 

been that which has been committed by the previous 

Conservative government. 

 

The greatest deception always occurred also around election 

time.  I notice that the last time back in 1985 when we were 

preparing for the election and finally had it in '86, wherein I 

was first elected in Cumberland constituency, they said that the 

total deficit during that year would be approximately, I think it 

was about 375 million.  Well it ended up to be about 1.2 billion 

at that time.  It was $800 million out.  When you're out by $800 

million by the former member from Lumsden who is now 

talking about . . . you know, they were talking about patronage 

a little while ago -- who is now of course a person in our justice 

system. 

 

Now this person of course was $800 million out now this 

previous election.  The other fact is this, that they said that we 

would be $265 million in deficit for this year, and actually it's 

turned out to be over 900 million.  So again, as far as deception 

goes, it's $700 million.  So in just two years, as far as 

Conservatives are concerned, and just in case the member from 

Wilkie has forgotten about this, and the member from 

Kindersley, the total amount just of those two years is $1.5 

billion.  That's how much the deception was -- 1.5 billion. 

 

The member from Kindersley has asked me again because I 

think he does not know that in the last sitting the 

Tories were very poor in their mathematics.  But it takes quite a 

while for them to start understanding, you know, the meaning 

of accounting and accountability, and I'm pretty well happy to 

present them with those figures again. 

 

Now as it relates to another theme that I overheard being 

thrown around was this theme about not caring and also the 

lack of courage. And they specifically talked about the issue of 

leadership.  But when I looked at the leadership from across . . . 

when I looked at that aspect, a lot of people have been asking 

who is showing up at the farm gate in regards to the huge 

gatherings. 

 

Well the member from Estevan never really did show up at one 

of the largest demonstrations in the history of farmers in this 

province over at Rosetown.  He wasn't there.  He didn't show 

his face.  There was absolutely no courage, you know, by the 

member of Estevan in that regard. 

 

And when the farmers arrived here in the legislature and 

addressed some of their grievances, I said, where was the 

member from Estevan?  He was nowhere to be seen.  

Somebody said that he was over in China.  I don't know what 

he was doing in China, but some people were saying that when 

we privatized . . . Taylor at that time, from the legislature, and 

having the fancy offices over in Hong Kong, somebody said 

that maybe he was out visiting those offices and looking at the 

value of those offices there. 

 

So when we're talking about not caring and not having the 

courage, here we have their leader not showing up at some of 

the biggest demonstrations in regards to the farm crisis in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And again, not even showing up at 

that when we were here.  And that's where I say hey, if there is 

a leader that doesn't care, it's the leader of the Conservatives 

and the member from Estevan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- The other thing I've noticed, you know one of 

the members across mentioned in their remarks was the whole 

issue of public ownership.  And of course the opposite of that 

was privatization.  Now of course our government operates 

under the principle of a mixed economy approach.  And we see 

the very, very strong importance in our throne speech in 

regards to the tremendous development, you know, provided 

for by private industry, and we well recognize that. 

 

We also recognize the aspect of course of public ownership and 

also co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan's history.  

Now when I looked at the issue of privatization and how much 

it had cost us, you know, through the past, I would like to 

remind the members that one of the reasons why there is such a 

tremendous cumulative debt of 9 billion is the fact that we did 

sell off part of the Crowns.  And when you combine that 9 

billion with the Crown sector, we have approximately $14 

billion in the cumulative debt.  Now part of the reason there of 

course, as I said, is privatization. 

 

I remember when we were looking in regards to 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

Weyerhaeuser in the last two years when we were in 

government last time, we were making 20 million and 21 

million for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

part of this money we then utilized for the people of 

Saskatchewan, whether it was into building roads or whether it 

was into building and improving our health and educational 

system. 

 

So we were utilizing, you know, the money that we gained 

from the public . . . (inaudible) . . . in regards and putting it 

back into the economy of Saskatchewan.  Now that it happens, 

it is very important to know that the same company, 

Weyerhaeuser, hasn't paid one penny in regards to the public 

treasury as relates to the principal sum on the money that they 

used, you know, in this province.  So I'd like to mention that. 

 

And as a member from the North as well, when we look at 

Cameco, we used to own of course the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation.  And when the Saskatchewan 

Mining Development Corporation was around, it was one of 

the finest companies in the world.  It was one of the best 

companies in the world. 

 

We were getting about 20 per cent return on investment on that 

company.  And we were making 52 and $61 million in the last 

two years of operation.  So we were making over $110 million, 

you know, in the last two years of Cameco.  And we were 

reutilizing that money for northern development which this 

government, either when they were in government or in 

opposition, never even mentioned, you know, in northern 

Saskatchewan for aboriginal people. 

 

And so when we talk about privatization and how much it's 

benefitted the province, well there's a whole history of 

privatization and now we're supposed to give us, you know, the 

greatest benefits in the history following the Maggie Thatcher 

formula.  And really what it has left us is in tremendous debt 

that all the future of our children are going to have to pay for. 

 

And I'd like to delve into a little bit of a detail on one of the 

privatizations that occurred in one of the major debate in our 

final case, and that was the whole debate on the PCS, on the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And I remember after 

six, seven years of operation of the PCS by the Tories, we had 

lost from about 2,200 jobs to about . . . We had about 2,200 

jobs in that potash industry and we dropped down to about 

1,200 jobs. 

 

Now during that time one of the most important things that 

came about in that debate was the information that we shared 

with the people of Saskatchewan.  And that information was 

this.  We looked at the of course the Liberals who always are 

governing in the same fashion as the Tories.  So I looked at it 

in broad historical terms during that debate.  And I remember 

that time when we were debating, Mr. Speaker, that in the last 

six years of the Liberals, we were able to gain from the 

corporations, which were basically American corporations.  

And I remember the member from Kindersley talking about 

America in his last comments just a little while ago.  It 

reminded me about the former leader of the Conservatives who 

tried to annex Saskatchewan with the United States; I think his 

name was Collver. 

And their mind is always in with the Americans.  And I 

remember at that time the Liberals were in the same boat as 

well.  Ninety per cent of our potash industry of course was 

owned by the Americans.  And at that time, when we looked 

upon it, how much of a return did we get in regards to paying 

for our medical services or paying for our health or paying for 

our system? 

 

And I remember during that time of the debate that in the last 

six years of the Liberal government we were only able to get 

about 15 to $16 million a year, a little over $2 million a year in 

the last six years of Liberal rule in the province of 

Saskatchewan as far as our potash resource was concerned.  

They said at that time of history that potash was like oil was to 

the countries in the Mideast.  And sure it was, because we had 

the best potash deposits in the world. 

 

So when we look at the history, we saw this Liberal 

government looking at about 15, $16 million.  And then when 

we came into power back in '71, a lot of people were talking 

about that terrible, terrible socialist tradition, that we were 

going to go in and expropriate all the mines in the potash 

industry and start our new company.  And really nothing 

happened in regards to that since. 

 

We tried to come out with a reasonable approach of regulating 

the potash industry.  We tried to do it by taxation and trying to 

get proper information at that time in relation to how much 

return we would get from the potash companies.  And in fact 

we were unable to get good co-operation from the companies 

who were 90 per cent owned by the American corporations.  

And we were unable to get the information to be able to do 

proper planning for the future of our children and of our 

families and the seniors in our communities. 

 

So when the debate was on during that time in regards to 

potash, therefore the election was called in '75 and there was a 

great scare that we would completely bring Saskatchewan 

under a great fall and that would be the worst economic 

disaster Saskatchewan would have because those NDPers were 

going to have public ownership of the mines. 

 

And so in '75 of course we were taken to court by the 

companies, and we did lose the court case.  And, you know, 

from there stemmed the need for a special section of the 

constitution in being able to sell potash internationally which 

was 92(a), which we were able to attain through the good work 

of the attorney general of that time and premier Blakeney.  At 

that time the attorney general of course was the member from 

Riversdale. 

 

(1630) 

 

And we were able to then get the information that was required 

in regards to the whole potash scene as it related to the 

constitution.  So we make gains for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and the member from Riversdale who is now 

our Premier was a strong part in regards to this history. 

 

So when we look at the throne speech debate and we're looking 

at the new era, it's very important to look at this in 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

historic context so when we are dealing with things we know 

what happened in the past and where we're going forward into 

the future.  So when we looked at that aspect and the 

companies fought us tooth and nail during that time in that '75 

election, we did win the election and the people gave us a nod, 

and we went ahead.  And by the fall of that year we had the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan formed because in legal 

terms we could only start out by developing it through the 

corporate legislation of the province of Saskatchewan to 

establish the PCS at that time. 

 

Now when we look at that six years hence from there of NDP 

rule and a lot of people said that the corporations would not be 

benefitted.  We had balanced budgets every year.  All the 11 

years that the NDP with the public corporations had balanced 

budgets.  We've never missed in the 11 years of power with the 

public corporations. 

 

And then when we looked at those six years of power of NDP, 

we find that in regards to how much money went to the public 

treasury it was $986 million.  You compare that to the Liberals 

who in six years went 15 and $16 million.  We were able to get 

through the corporations the $986 million to the public 

treasury, which we then had one of the greatest histories of 

building the province in the areas of health and in the areas of 

education, and in the areas of road building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- So when I see the members talking about this 

scare that they always talk about in regards to the Maggie 

Thatcher new tradition, which I predict that they would have 

never won that election if they hadn't changed their leadership.  

She was going to have been turfed out, and the only way they 

could do it is come out with a new leader.  And that put the 

people out a little bit on a stop gap measure, and they narrowly 

won the election. 

 

But I would say that in regards to the Conservatives under 

years of privatization, they privatized.  They started privatizing.  

That's all they could do is privatize and give away money to 

their friends and give away money to the big companies. 

 

And, you know, during that period in time and within a 

six-year period we looked at the six years of Tory rule in the 

province, how is it related to the potash company of 

Saskatchewan, and the amount of money that we received was 

$274 million -- over $700 million lost into the public treasury.  

That was because of the royalty tax rollbacks and everything, 

because they had to pay for the election promises because of 

the monies that they received from the corporations. 

 

So that is the history of the province of Saskatchewan just in 

regards to the public treasury as far as the time when we had 

public corporations and PCS running full blast.  Liberals were 

15, $16 million to the public treasury; $986 million . . . $984 

million for the people of Saskatchewan when the NDP was 

here, was around. And when the PCs took over it was 274 

million.  And we lost over $700 million. 

So when we're looking at trying to understand the situation of 

our debt, you know, our accumulated debt which is now 9 

billion, you know, plus 5 in the public sector, in the public 

corporate sector, it's absolutely amazing when I hear the 

member from across, you know, talking about the fact that it 

was privatization that was the basis of Tory strategy.  And yet 

it was privatization which lost us a thousand jobs in potash and 

lost us $700 million in revenue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- I want to now head into the issue of the North, 

and I know that there was a lot of things covered in the throne 

speech which lays out part of the framework in regards to the 

future on building our great province.  I look at the issue of 

North and aboriginal people therefore in my next statements. 

 

As it relates to the Conservatives, I find it absolutely amazing 

that in all their years in power it was absolutely shameful, it 

was absolutely terrible that they did not even mention people of 

northern Saskatchewan during those years.  They did not 

mention aboriginal people.  They did not mention Indian and 

Metis people because they were scared that if they mentioned 

Indian and Metis people in their throne speeches or mentioned 

the North, they figured that it would scare away the vote or 

something. 

 

They were scared to deal with Indian and Metis people in a 

public fashion.  The only time that I heard them during that 

year when I was a member was negative comments.  When we 

look at the history of racism in the world and we look at what's 

happening in the United States, we know that some of the 

leadership from across were very, very negative when it came 

down to Indian and Metis people. 

 

And I remember, you know, talking about disparaging 

comments that were made by the members, and I won't name 

them.  And it's very, very, very important when we look at this 

that leadership -- whether you're on this side of the House or on 

that side of the House -- has to be able to have a leadership of 

compassion, a leadership that respects people, a leadership that 

says yes, we will be fighting racism and a system of oppression 

that puts and keeps people down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- So when I look at the new government, I look at 

in comparative historical contrast with the Conservatives that 

didn't even have the decency to mention Northerners and 

Indian and Metis people in their years of power. 

 

When we listened to the original throne speech, we talked 

about . . . in our last sitting on the House, we talked about 

economic development and the need for economic 

development corporations in northern Saskatchewan.  That was 

our first Bill in the House in our last sitting.  We put northern 

Saskatchewan people first as it related to economic 

development corporations.  That's what our government did.  

Now when I look at this throne speech, we are now dealing 

again with northern issues. 

 

One of the most devastating aspects of people in the 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

world, one of the greatest senses of culture and identity is the 

whole issue of work.  That indeed when you look at work, it is 

such an important aspect that when it starts shifting in global 

proportions right now in the international context, there's many 

displaced workers here and there in this and that country, this 

and that state, and this and that province. 

 

And it's very important to recognize the fact, the 

interconnection, not only between the well-being, when we talk 

about the wellness model, the well-being of people as it relates 

to jobs.  When we look at jobs, we recognize that when you 

look at the historical works, the Canadian Mental Health 

Association had a book called unemployment, its . . . body and 

soul, back in 1982.  Now whether you look at . . . What they've 

showed in that text was this: that for every 1 per cent rise in the 

unemployment rate, there is a 4 per cent rise in suicides.  For 

every 1 per cent rise in unemployment, there is a 4 per cent rise 

in suicides. 

 

There is a lot of stress that it puts on families.  When 

unemployment hits, people start blaming each other, fights take 

place in families, people from the same community start 

shooting each other down because they are unable to get the 

jobs.  We knew that in regards not only to the crisis in northern 

Saskatchewan, we are now seeing it in the rural areas.  We 

knew the tremendous problems that unemployment causes. 

 

And when we look at the throne speech, we are starting to see a 

framework being built.  We are seeing that in northern 

Saskatchewan we are having a northern works program.  A lot 

of people have said hey, that's a start.  We've got about 150 

jobs upcoming, you know, this coming year.  And we want to 

be able to continually look at that and say hey, there's another 

aspect as well. 

 

I would like to look at a little bit of the history therefore on 

jobs during the Conservative reign as it relates to northern 

Saskatchewan.  When I was working with the former member 

of Cumberland, Lawrence Yew, in regards to northern 

Saskatchewan, right off the bat we recognized the aspect that 

the Conservatives, when they got elected in 1982, quickly did 

away with the monitoring committee to look after jobs, 

environment, contracts for small businesses, and workers' 

health and safety.  We had a monitoring committee looking 

after that aspect when we were in government in 1982. 

 

The Conservatives, when they come into power, didn't have the 

decency to even call up these people who were membership in 

that committee, because in their own textbooks they figured we 

didn't even exist in northern Saskatchewan.  There was 

absolutely no way that they would recall such an important 

committee that wanted to look at employment in the mines. 

 

Within a short period of time during that time from '82 to '84, 

the numbers of people working in the mines, which had been 

around 50 per cent and 55 per cent . . . I remember when the 

NDP were around when it dropped down to 47 per cent at the 

mine and there was a lot of people saying, what goes here; how 

come we can't live up to the 50 per cent?  And there was a lot 

of cry out there during that time.  But at least we were hovering 

around 50 

per cent on the employment of people at the mines. 

 

When the Conservatives came in that employment rate dropped 

down to about 10 and 15 per cent, one-fifth of what the NDP 

record was.  It took a lot of work by the member at that time, 

from the two members from the North, the member from 

Athabasca, and the member from Cumberland, looking at this 

issue all the time.  And through their work and their effort they 

were able to come out with a little bit of a better figure and 

shamed the government into trying to get a little bit of a better 

deal for the people in the North. 

 

And as time went on, the figures did rise to about 25 per cent.  

But I might add that the figures were a little bit different than 

the original figures when the NDP was around. 

 

When the NDP was around we had tougher criteria.  We used 

the definition of a Northerner as 15 years and half your 

lifetime.  When the Conservatives came into power they 

changed that definition, which meant you could be counted as a 

Northerner within three years.  So their set of statistics is very 

different than ours.  Ours was on a tougher criteria and yet we 

had 50 per cent of the people hired, and theirs was dropped 

down to about 10, 15 per cent.  So part of the improvement in 

the record was because simply of a change in the definition of a 

Northerner. 

 

(1645) 

 

So when we look at the jobs issue and we are trying to start out 

with a new northern works program of 150 jobs, that's a very 

important plus, you know, for the people of the North.  A lot of 

the people, as I mentioned before, talk about . . . when I talked 

about the mental health association and I talked about poverty 

and unemployment, it's very important to recognize that this 

issue was not only recognized by important groups such as the 

Canadian Mental Health Association, but it was also 

recognized by the major work, you know, just a few years back 

on sustainable economic development and Brundtland 

Commission report. 

 

The Brundtland Commission report talked about the need to be 

able to look at jobs and environment in unison, that we needed 

to look at balanced jobs and economic development.  And at 

that time also they said we have to look at the question of 

poverty, because poverty when people are oppressed and 

conditions and when they were not even recognized by the 

people in the North, they also . . . and when they didn't have 

sewer and water systems, there was a lot of environmental 

problems at their community level as well as the jobs question. 

 

So when we were looking at it, it's important to look . . . 

therefore not only are you looking at jobs and environment, but 

it has to be balanced in the equation to poverty because it is an 

important part of the equation on that Brundtland Commission. 

 

That's why when people, you know, continue to fight for jobs 

at the rural level or at the urban level, that you have to look at 

the history of the North, and recognize that when you look at a 

community and the unemployment rate, you know, after all 

these years of Tory rule is about 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

80 per cent in a lot of the communities.  So we have to start 

looking at a way of improving this aspect. 

 

The aspect as it relates to the environment is also very 

important.  The sustainable development in our new 

environmental assessment body will be very important in being 

able to come out with something that balances, you know, the 

aspect of environment as it related to the throne speech. 

 

The other thing that's very important is economic development 

has to be looked upon in regards to balancing it off with the 

health of people at the community level. Because unless you 

have a healthy population to go out and work, it is just not 

simply a question of simply getting a job.  A person has to be 

physically and mentally healthy in a job situation. 

 

And in many cases part of the issue lies in at the infrastructural 

level of communities.  One of the things that was very slow in 

coming as far as the Conservatives were concerned, was a 

sewer and water system and the development of sewer and 

water system that was highly neglected, you know, by the 

Conservatives. 

 

When we were in power during the '70s, the sewer and water 

systems developed to a great extent in the North, especially in 

the southern fringes of northern Saskatchewan.  And we were 

proceeding at a rate that we would have probably finished off 

the sewer and water systems already if we had been in 

government.  There was still left about 15 communities without 

sewer and water. 

 

And the Conservatives have been going on a snail's pace on 

this.  While they were pretty quick at giving $5 million to 

GigaText or $122 million to Cameco, in regards to the sales of 

the shares on Cameco, they were very slow in building the 

infrastructure of the community when it related to having good 

drinking water, you know, for the children of our community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Our health costs are rising in the North 

basically because that basic need of water and sewer is not 

there.  And the throne speech has made an important point that 

we are going to be proceeding with the need for sewer and 

water development in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The other aspect as it related to the North is this.  For many 

years one of the crisises in the North occurred when the Liberal 

government that was operating the federal government.  They 

created a condition where there was less help for people in the 

promotion and the development of housing.  So the housing 

crisis, you know, fell back in '81.  And CMHC (Canadian 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation) and the housing, you 

know, went down.  And we had our own Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation which, you know, had been part of this 

important development.  We had built a lot of houses in the 

North. 

 

Now when the Conservatives took over in '82, what happened 

was this: the housing crisis went down.  I want to tie that back 

into the jobs and to the suicide rates.  In my own community 

alone, in a three-year period following 

that Tory rule and the Liberal rule from the federal level, about 

13 people committed suicide in my own community.  That 

amounted to over 1 per cent of the population. 

 

When we look at that figure, that 1 per cent population, that's 

about 18,000 for the city of Regina -- 18,000 people.  If 18,000 

people committed suicide in the city of Regina in a three-year 

period, we would have a world catastrophe.  When it happened 

in the North, in my home town in Cumberland House, the 

Tories didn't even mention it.  All they did was cut back on the 

monitoring committee for mines and the jobs that we needed in 

the mining industry.  All they did was keep on cutting back on 

the important services -- community health workers in northern 

Saskatchewan and everything like that during that period. 

 

So when we look at the important question of having jobs in 

the housing industry, I was very pleased when I looked at the 

throne speech, that we were going to go back to start working 

on housing, that we're going to get new houses and we're also 

going to be working on renovations. 

 

A lot of people said that we need jobs to rebuild our own 

houses.  Because there was a lack of a maintenance program by 

the Liberal and Tory governments at the federal level, they 

lagged behind from what the needs of the people were and also 

lagged behind because of the Tory strategy on housing, you 

know, during the years of Tory rule.  A lot of the people said, 

hey some of our houses have become very run down.  We want 

to be able to come out and have a . . . They asked us when we 

were running for election to come out with a renovation 

program.  And now I see in our throne speech a renovation 

program for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So that is a very, very important aspect because when I looked 

at the North there, when the Tories never mentioned anything 

about the North in their 10 years of power, when they never 

mentioned anything about Indian or Metis people in their 10 

years of power, when I looked at this government, we looked at 

the aspect of jobs in northern Saskatchewan on the northern 

works program.  We were able to say yes, we're going to deal 

with the poverty question and review the issues as it related to 

social services in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Yes we would look at the environmental question that the 

North was concerned about.  Yes we would look at sewer and 

water systems.  Yes we would look at housing.  Yes we would 

look at these things and be able to work out in not only a spirit 

of compassion, but a spirit of co-operation with the people of 

the North and for Indian and Metis people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- I want to say, in my introduction I mentioned 

that I would be dealing with the North and I would be dealing 

with aboriginal peoples.  But I want to interlace that a bit with 

the issue on education. 

 

Having spent a few years in the field of education as a teacher 

and as a consultant and as an administrator 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

working in teacher education and also being a principal of a 

community college and having also worked as the executive 

director of Gabriel Dumont Institute, I was very pleased in the 

throne speech when we looked at the need for a continuous 

change in our educational system.  I saw the aspect of a 

Saskatchewan Education Council being set up, as well as 

reviews being done in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) on the improvement of our 

delivery services to our students, who are our future in this 

province. 

 

I also looked at the aspect of distance education, but again an 

important aspect that was neglected by the Tories who had 

never mentioned Indian-Metis people.  I was very impressed 

with the fact that the Metis people in this province, who were 

completely forgotten by the government and even the leader at 

that time made disparaging comments about the Metis, that 

indeed we looked at the fact of the Metis being referred to in 

our throne speech.  And we are now looking at a Dumont 

Technical Institute in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We will be proceeding, therefore, with a Dumont Technical 

Institute.  And many of the Metis people have been saying, 

look, we have strongly fought for jobs; we are looking also to 

being able to stand up with the same certificate as any other 

Saskatchewan resident.  We want to be able to say that these 

certificates count. 

 

And the Dumont Technical Institute will be a very important 

addition in regards to being able to deliver services to the Metis 

and non-status Indians of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- As it related to the throne speech, I would like 

to move on into the issue of Indian and Metis people. 

 

I would like again, for historical context as I have done as it 

related to the province as a whole and as it related to the North, 

I would like to introduce my remarks by making some 

historical concepts of expenditures that is related to Indian and 

Metis people. 

 

When I looked at the history of the Liberal governments and 

the Conservative governments as it relates to Indian/Metis 

people in the North, this is what I found out when I checked 

out the Public Accounts. 

 

The Public Accounts of course state what was spent by the 

province of Saskatchewan on a yearly basis.  And while some 

of the information is not 100 per cent complete, I would say at 

least from looking at it, it's pretty close.  So when I looked at 

the records, I found that when I looked at the last and the best 

years of the Liberals, I wanted to know how much they spent 

on Indian/Metis people in the North.  This is what I found out.  

Out of their total budget of expenditures they spent about 2 per 

cent of their budget and it totalled 8 million at that point in time 

in history. 

 

When I looked at the Conservatives and I looked at their 1989 

figures, their expenditure for Indian/Metis people in the North 

was 1.2 per cent.  It dropped from the Liberals.  And their total 

expenditure was about $58 million. 

When I looked at the NDP here back in 1982, I looked at the 

figures.  We spent over 4 per cent of our budget on 

Indian/Metis people in the North.  And the amount at that time 

was $128 million.  We spent about $70 million in that one year 

more than the Conservatives did as it related to northern 

Saskatchewan, on Indian and Metis people. 

 

So when you look at it in historical context, when we look at 

the historical context, we spent over two times more money . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, I do leave this 

chair until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


