




















































Hansard: May 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 387 

 May 14, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to stand in the Assembly and introduce to you and to my 

colleagues in the legislature approximately 21 grade 5 and 

grade 6 students and their chaperons from Centennial School 

which is located in the central part of my constituency on 

Dalgliesh. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are located in your gallery and I'd ask all 

members in the Assembly to join with me in welcoming these 

students.  I look forward to meeting with them after question 

period to discuss some of the events of the day.  Welcome, 

students from Centennial School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a group of 

38 grade 7 students from Westberry School in Kindersley.  

They're seated in your Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Their 

teachers are Brent Triffo and Candace Friesen, and their 

chaperons are Henry Dunfield and Tolanda Baker. 

 

I'll be meeting these students and their teachers and chaperons 

for pictures and refreshments following question period.  I'd 

ask the Assembly to please join with me in welcoming these 

students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to introduce on behalf of my colleague, the member for Regina 

Rosemont, 18 grade 5 and 6 students seated in the west gallery.  

These students are from Ken Jenkins School and are 

accompanied by their teachers, Wally Sadowsky and Judy 

Hunter.  I will be meeting with them shortly after question 

period, Mr. Speaker, and look forward to a short visit with 

them then. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I'd like to introduce to you and to the members 

of the Assembly here today, through you, a good friend of mine 

and Member of Parliament for The Battlefords and Meadow 

Lake, Mr. Len Taylor.  And I don't believe I will be meeting 

him for refreshments afterwards. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Abortion Funding 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Health.  My question, Mr. Speaker, centres around the 

information that we received yesterday through a ministerial 

statement. 

First of all, I compliment the minister on looking at a way of an 

educational program to advise young people on unwanted 

pregnancies.  However, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province back in October -- in fact, two-thirds of the people in 

this province -- spoke out in a plebiscite and told the political 

parties of the day, during that election campaign, unequivocally 

that they do not want their taxpayers' dollars going towards the 

funding of therapeutic abortions. 

 

There is no disputing that, Madam Minister.  However, Madam 

Minister, we find that in the last few days you've cut funding 

for prescription drugs, diabetics; cut funding for eye 

examinations and ambulatory services; decreased funding for 

nursing home residents, hospitals, and nurses.  Madam 

Minister, there wasn't a plebiscite regarding these cuts.  In fact, 

I believe you promised the opposite. 

 

Can you tell us how you decided that you have no money for 

these critical areas, but you found money for something people 

spoke out very loudly and clearly about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The member 

opposite knows that the legal and constitutional implications 

with respect to the funding of abortions are such that a province 

cannot de-insure abortions.  The member opposite knows that.  

Because from 1982 to 1991 the government opposite . . . the 

party opposite, who were then in government, chose not to take 

any steps whatsoever in this direction.  They chose not to take 

any steps. 

 

If they felt so strongly about it at that time, I would ask them 

why didn't they take any concrete measures.  And you know 

why?  Because they knew it was illegal.  Because they couldn't 

take any measures. 

 

Instead they chose to put forward a plebiscite the day before an 

election, for totally political reasons, playing with people's 

lives and raising expectations.  They put forward a plebiscite 

just before an election -- that they knew they were going to lose 

-- because they would never have to implement it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, you talk about a legal opinion, 

and certainly I think the final word "opinion" is the word that 

we all are interested in.  An opinion, I might add, Madam 

Minister, which is contrary to what people have said.  Even so, 

Madam Minister, your government is quite fond of forcing 

your will on people and passing legislation that bypasses the 

law.  In fact you did it to government employees and you're 

doing it to farmers. 

 

Madam Minister, had you even considered legal opinions 

which clearly show that the move is well within your 

jurisdiction?  Aren't there opinions out there, Madam Minister, 

that would indicate . . . and I believe the federal Justice 

minister has given you that option, Madam Minister? 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

chosen to play politics with a very, very serious issue, and 

that's really what that plebiscite was all about.  That's what that 

plebiscite was all about.  Our independent legal opinions and 

opinions we've received from the Justice department have 

clearly set out that it is illegal and unconstitutional.  Now I 

want . . . and so I want the members opposite to understand that 

very clearly. 

 

We however have heard what the voters said in the plebiscite, 

and for that reason we have instituted a policy to try and reduce 

the number of unintended pregnancies in the province.  Our 

goal is to reduce teen-age pregnancies and unintended 

pregnancies.  And hopefully -- now I don't know whether we 

will achieve this -- but hopefully in doing that, we can also 

reduce the number of abortions obtained by Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Now I want to make this clear.  I say, obtained by 

Saskatchewan residents, because there are many women 

leaving the province today to obtain their abortions in other 

jurisdictions, under the former government. 

 

And so these statistics are going to be very difficult for us to 

compile.  But our goal is to try and reduce those abortions.  

That's what we're aiming for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Madam Minister, when it comes to life . . . 

and I believe very sincerely that there's a real value in life from 

the moment of conception.  And, Madam Minister, it is exactly 

that fact that is causing people, the fact that the former 

government did . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the government members not to 

interrupt when he's asking a question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, I want to remind you that I 

believe the Premier at one time made a comment that he 

personally is against abortion.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, as 

well, you and your government have indicated that you are 

willing to listen to people and you're going to be consultative.  

In fact, Madam Minister, you've also indicated that you will 

accept the will of the people.  Well it appears that again you 

have not listened totally to the will of the people.  And your 

Premier indeed has put his political agenda ahead of public 

interest. 

 

Madam Minister, can it be the real reason why you are ignoring 

public demands is because your NDP (New Democratic Party) 

Party has again blinded you to the reality of what the public of 

this province really desire? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I believe that the public of this province 

want their government to follow the law.  That's what I believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And I believe . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've asked the government members 

not to interrupt, and I ask the opposition members not to 

interrupt when the minister is speaking. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And I believe that the very cheap 

political games that the members opposite have played with 

this issue is reprehensible.  And I want to know where the 

member who just posed the question was for the last nine 

years.  I saw him sitting on these back benches, Mr. Speaker.  

He was not able to convince his government to de-insure 

abortion funding.  He was not able to. 

 

And did they make any attempt at all to reduce abortions, Mr. 

Speaker?  No.  Instead they withdrew programs that would 

have contributed to reducing the number of unintended 

pregnancies.  They cut back on support services for poor 

people, many of whom are single mothers, for example, Mr. 

Speaker.  The members opposite took no concrete steps 

whatsoever to deal with the problem, which is unintended 

pregnancies. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, first of all, the fact that you 

have indicated in this House that a number of women were 

leaving the province, is a strong indication of the direction our 

government was going. 

 

Secondly, regarding where I was as a minister . . . secondly, as 

a minister, I just want to remind Madam Minister that I didn't 

indeed sit in this House for nine years.  I've just been here since 

1986. 

 

Madam Minister, I would also suggest to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the former government gave the people of 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to speak out in a plebiscite.  And 

as the Minister of Justice indicated a few days ago, 53 per cent 

voted on your behalf.  But I would also suggest, of that 53 per 

cent, more than two-thirds who voted for you voted for you on 

the basis that they believed that you would honour the 

plebiscite that was put before them. 

 

Are you saying that plebiscites -- giving people an opportunity 

to speak out -- are political?  I think that, Madam Minister, 

that's absurd. 

 

Madam Minister, if you will not honour the three plebiscites 

presented on October 21, '91, I'm wondering if you will again 

disband the fourth plebiscite that was put out on October 21 

that gave your party the mandate to govern, and indeed give the 

people another chance to vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make the 

comment once again that implementing the plebiscite results 

would exceed the constitutional authority of the province, 

violate equality requirements under the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms and the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code, and violate the requirements of the Canada Health Act, 

which would likely result in financial penalties to the province. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

And I want to say that the members opposite knew that when 

they put that plebiscite forward and tried to play with the 

feelings and emotions of Saskatchewan people as they moved 

into an election that they knew they were going to lose -- that 

they knew they were going to lose.  And they knew they would 

never have to implement the provisions or the results of the 

plebiscite, Mr. Speaker.  That's the political games they were 

playing.  And for nine and a half years they did nothing to deal 

with this problem which is to reduce unintended pregnancies.  

That's their commitment to life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, the former government gave 

people an opportunity to express their opinion through a vote.  

And the former government also, in giving the people the 

opportunity to express their opinion, gave them the assurance 

that if re-elected, they would indeed abide by the plebiscites 

that were placed out there. 

 

You've also indicated, Madam Minister, that you've sought 

legal opinion.  Well I've also indicated as well, Madam 

Minister, that there are opinions on the legal side . . . legal 

opinion on the other side as well. 

 

I'm asking you if you will table any information that would 

justify your claim, and I'm also asking you, Madam Minister, if 

you wouldn't indeed challenge the legislation to see whether 

indeed you could as a government discontinue funding for 

abortions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we did make our opinions 

available to the public, from MacPherson Leslie and Tyerman.  

It's my understanding that opinions of the Justice department 

aren't normally released, although we did receive opinions from 

the Justice department as well that stated the same thing. 

 

We also received opinions from the pro-life group which were 

considered in the whole mix, were reviewed by the Justice 

department, and I feel that they very adequately dealt with 

those opinions in their legal analysis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the member's question opposite 

about referring the matter to a court, I want to make this 

statement.  This is a decision for the government to make, Mr. 

Speaker.  The government has made this decision based on the 

legal opinions which are very clear, very clear and very 

precise, having discussed all the philosophical and moral 

implications as well.  Thank you. 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture and it relates to the NDP government's desire to 

impose its will on people at any cost. 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday the courts granted farmers something 

that you refused to do.  Farmers asked for extension to the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) deadline so that they 

could decide what their options were, so that they can opt out 

of the program that has 

been recklessly gutted by you, Mr. Minister.  They had to go to 

court to do that.  You refused to honour their requests, and you 

told them to take a hike.  Now you are being told to take a hike, 

Mr. Minister.  Will you take the next step and give the farmers 

the 1991-92 as an option so that they can choose which 

program they really want to have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to correct the 

impression left by the member opposite with respect to the 

court-ruling yesterday.  The ruling has indicated that farmers 

will continue to have the right to opt out until a court 

judgement is made.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health said that 

your government is prepared to follow the law, just indicated 

that a little earlier.  The judge was very clear in her ruling, Mr. 

Minister.  She said that, and I quote: 

 

 "It would appear that . . . (you have) put the cart before the 

horse." 

 

 "If the Crown and agents of the Crown undertake costly 

system changes before effecting the necessary legal changes, 

they cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown, or its agents, 

have voluntarily incurred." 

 

It is your incompetence, Mr. Minister, that she is talking about.  

It is your inability to put the farmers' interests ahead of your 

political agenda and your personal pride, and that's what has 

gotten in the way of the farmers. 

 

Will you today stop your crusade against farmers and allow 

them the option of the '91 or the '92 GRIP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the comments of the 

member opposite interesting.  The process that was followed in 

Saskatchewan was the process established by their committee 

that would have reported to them as they reported to us.  There 

may be a difference in that we listen when we consult, and we 

implement the results of the opinions of people who tell us 

what they believe about programs. 

 

I find it very interesting that you would talk . . . that they would 

talk about the rights of farmers when they listen to their federal 

counterpart, who I presume they're supporting, when he says he 

is going to renege on their third line of defence commitment, 

that he believes that he shouldn't give income support to 

farmers.  They not only don't challenge that, but in the House 

they voted against the $500 million that farmers and the federal 

committee itself indicated last year was owing to farmers.  And 

they voted against third line of defence.  I find it curious the 

kind of contentions and . . . (inaudible) . . . it makes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Just so the minister understands very clearly, 

I'll ask the very simple question, all without any preamble:  will 

you give the farmers the option between '91 and '92 GRIP? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the program that has been 

designed by farmers and implemented by the government this 

spring and in conjunction with their committee, the 1992 GRIP 

is the program which is in place for 1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have sent 

farmers a letter telling them they must sign a waiver absolving 

you from any legal responsibility if they want to sign up for 

insurance.  You also are promising to bring forward legislation 

that forces farmers to accept the program that they find 

unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this you are admitting your own incompetence 

and in making farmers sign the contract under duress.  Will you 

tell this Assembly and the public whether you intend to 

introduce this Draconian legislation and if so, when? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 

member opposite that farmers have had their program 

information.  They've had a couple of months to consider it.  

They have dropped out in a relatively few numbers.  About 3 

per cent of the farmers have decided to opt out choosing one 

option or the other in the program.  About 2 per cent have 

joined back in.  I even understand that there's a brand-new 

member in the program from the statement he made in the 

House, if I'm not mistaken, sitting opposite.  And I congratulate 

him on that wise choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you required your deputy to 

sign the affidavit that was presented to the court, and it says 

this: 

 

 These amendments will include a provision in which the 

notice of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have been 

given prior to . . . 

 

. . . March 15 to the producers.  When are you going to table 

that legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the business of the House 

will be decided by our House Leader.  The fact is that the 

provisions for the 1992 program were brought forward this 

spring.  And the members opposite in conjunction with their 

federal counterparts have been putting road-blocks in the way 

of the implementation of proper income support for farmers 

from day one. 

 

I ask the members opposite when they're going to get off their 

cheap political games and start worrying about the real interests 

of farmers so they have a farm income 

protection program that is adequate and that holds the 

responsibility to the federal government for income support 

that's as a result of losses because of international trade 

practices.  That's not the responsibility of Saskatchewan 

farmers or the Saskatchewan province. 

 

When are you going to join us and really stand up for farmers 

and the needs they have in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you stand there and you keep on 

saying the same thing -- blame somebody else, blame 

somebody else, blame somebody else.  It's your responsibility 

for the decisions that you made.  It's your decision to make 

changes to GRIP, and you decided to do that. 

 

Now I have a copy of suggested changes to GRIP from the 

people who are closest to the program and closest to the 

farmers.  They submitted it to you, and it was from the 

marketing agents.  They said: producers often feel that 

spokespersons who have the government's ear do not 

accurately convey the down-on-the-farm opinion. 

 

Mr. Minister, this brief contains many reasonable changes to 

GRIP.  Did you even consider this brief, or is this why you put 

a gag order on your marketing agents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to consult 

with respect to the new program was broadly offered.  We 

received recommendations not only from marketing agents, but 

from many farmers and farm organizations, and it is their 

recommendations that were brought forward in a report by 

producers to the government, by a committee that was the same 

committee and basic structure as had been previously 

established. 

 

And the member opposite knows without standing there and 

playing silly games, that the changes that were recommended 

were based on serious flaws in the existing program.  It 

continues obviously to be an imperfect program.  As I've said 

before, you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, but we 

will continue to work with farmers to design the kind of 

income support that Saskatchewan farmers deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the marketing agents referred 

this information to you.  And now I'm going to ask you a very 

simple question: will you guarantee to me that the information 

provided to me by these marketing agents will not give you 

cause to fire them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure the question 

deserves a response.  The fact is that we listen to people.  I 

have phone calls from marketing agents and farmers and others 

in the community on a daily basis.  And I go home and I visit 

my community and we talk about these things.  The fact is that 

people are feeling very 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

comfortable about consulting with this government, an 

experience I'm sure they never had the opportunity to enjoy 

before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, it is painfully 

evident that you have no idea what you are doing to farmers or 

the farm economy with your budget, the way you presented the 

budget, the way that you cut farm programs right . . . just about 

every one that there was, just as your Premier, Minister of 

Finance, and the Minister of Health have no idea what they are 

doing -- no plan, no consultation, no new ideas. 

 

Mr. Minister, for farm families of the province, will you back 

off your revenge campaign against rural Saskatchewan?  Will 

you give farmers this whole year to work out their GRIP 

program and then give you some new and innovative ideas that 

even the marketing agents know more about than you do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I surely don't have to remind the members 

opposite about what the state of affairs is in Saskatchewan.  

The presumed deficit this year, as a result of the legacy you left 

us, was a $1.3 billion potential deficit this year which we had 

to address in this spring's budget. 

 

I have met with the affected groups.  It is clear that this kind of 

a budget has an impact on everybody in Saskatchewan.  It is 

clear that the people in Saskatchewan understand that this issue 

needs to be addressed.  And it's clear that they're willing to deal 

with these tough issues along with government and not play 

around with silly talk like I get from the members opposite. 

 

They're willing to take the hard news and deal with it.  I've met 

with the cattle feeders.  I've met with the hog producers.  I've 

met with the grain farmers.  They know these are tough 

considerations, and they know that across Saskatchewan 

everyone is dealing with this budget.  And everybody's going to 

be putting their shoulder to the wheel to bring Saskatchewan 

back to the proud position we were in before it was devastated 

by the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

you know you're legally wrong because you're going to have to 

bring in legislation.  You know you're morally wrong and 

you're ethically wrong.  Why don't you admit that and give the 

farmers of the province of Saskatchewan the reasonable option 

of '91 GRIP or '92 and let them show you which is the one they 

want? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member from Arm River 

have a question?  Otherwise I would ask him not to interrupt. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think the member from Arm River was 

just intervening . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The minister also knows that he is not 

to comment on remarks made by the Chair.  Directly to the 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry about that.  I want 

to say to the member opposite that the fact is that the member 

from Arm River did in fact indicate in the House that he is a 

member of the new program.  And maybe you two should have 

a discussion about the quality of this program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, given the fact that 

the court in Regina yesterday said that your Minister of 

Agriculture is legally wrong, that he has proved himself to be 

morally wrong, Mr. Minister, will you now do the right thing 

and ask that your Minister of Agriculture, before he brings in 

Draconian legislation in this legislature to set aside the 

legitimate wishes of farmers, will you, sir, instruct that minister 

to stay those court proceedings and get on with doing the right 

thing in this province, and that is giving farmers a choice -- a 

choice that farmers will prove to your government, sir, the way 

that agriculture should be run in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the 

member opposite to read a little more carefully.  The ruling 

indicated that farmers should have the right to opt out of the 

program until such a time as the court decision is made.  I 

should remind the member opposite that in putting in place last 

year's program, the federal-provincial agreement was signed on 

September 18, just about a week after most of us had our grain 

in the bin.  Thank you very much. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

GRIP Deadline 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make a 

statement on an issue to some importance to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  As Mr. Speaker will know, the deadline for 

opting out of the gross revenue insurance program or GRIP has 

been delayed due to a court decision. 

 

It is important to remind producers that they are still required to 

make their decision on program coverage and price selection 

by May 15, 1992.  The province and the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation are implementing the court decision on 

the opting-out provisions of the 1992 gross revenue insurance 

program. 

 

But I must remind producers that they must make all other 

decisions regarding crop insurance coverage and price selection 

by May 15, 1992.  As well, all other program requirements 

such as their obligation to file seeded acreage reports continue 

to apply.  Any producers who require additional information on 

their crop insurance 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

contracts or on any of the requirements for 1992 GRIP are 

encouraged to contact their crop insurance agent or the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation directly.  Their 

toll-free number is 1-800-667-3300. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is important to realize that despite such 

actions as yesterday's court decision, 1992 GRIP is here to stay 

because it is what producers have asked for. 

 

There are a number of factors known to all members of the 

Assembly in regards to this program.  First, it is well known 

that the federal government enacted a program which had been 

rejected by its farmers advisory committee.  Second, as was 

clearly shown during the recent provincial election, farmers 

across Saskatchewan had rejected GRIP in the form it was 

presented and were demanding changes.  The previous 

administration had set up an advisory group to suggest changes 

to the program, and on the change of government we instructed 

what was essentially the same advisory group to find those 

solutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of who was in office this winter, the 

changes to GRIP would have been recommended in the same 

fashion.  The difference is that we made the decision to listen 

to farmers and implement their wishes.  This program does not 

meet all needs, no safety net program ever will.  But far more 

farmers are satisfied with new GRIP than are rejecting it.  But 

for whatever reason, there are those who continue to throw up 

road-blocks to prevent our farmers from having the kind of 

program they need.  And now the federal government is 

announcing that it has every intention of reneging on its 

commitment to a third line of defence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes to GRIP will survive these 

road-blocks because they are what producers want.  I think the 

real question we must deal with is what motivates the members 

opposite, their federal cousins, and their former colleagues in 

their attempts to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I ask the opposition to have an 

opportunity to reply, I want to remind ministers that a 

ministerial statement is not to be of a political nature.  It is to 

set down only the policy of the government and not to contain 

a political statement of any kind.  And in the future if that 

happens, I will intervene and not allow the statement. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would have raised it on a point 

of order, and I'm glad you made your decision.  I want to point 

out to the Minister, number one, he thinks he's smarter than the 

court.  He thinks he's smarter than farmers.  He thinks he's 

smarter than marketing agents.  And, Mr. Speaker, all I have 

asked him to do is give the people a choice to do what they 

want to do.  And you were political and I will be political.  You 

do it outside and get the farmers to choose.  You haven't got the 

courage to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to 

amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 

and to make consequential amendments to certain other 

Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move that an Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly and after some consultation with the opposition, I 

move, seconded by the member for Regina Hillsdale: 

 

 That, notwithstanding rule No. 3 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the 

Assembly adjourns on Friday, May 15, 1992, it do stand 

adjourned until Tuesday, May 19, 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Toth. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, once again it's a privilege to participate on behalf of 

the constituents that I represent in Saskatoon Broadway on the 

debate on the first budget of our newly elected government. 

 

Since being elected on October 21, 1991, our government has 

had to grapple with the aftermath of nine and a half years of 

Tory waste and mismanagement -- waste and mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker, that has left the citizens of our province 

wallowing and wallowing in debt. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

This has not been an easy task for the 55 members of our 

government.  We have had a $14 billion debt staring us in the 

face with all of the accompanying problems of bankers and 

bond dealers and credit agencies threatening to lower our credit 

rating. 

 

Obviously this has had a serious impact on our ability to 

borrow money.  Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we have had to lower 

government expenditures and raise revenue.  And so the 

process of trying to lower expenditures and raise revenues in 

the fairest way possible began once we were elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the taxpayers of this province that 

this has not been an easy task for the government members.  In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that none of us, and I say 

none of us, were elected to do what we have done.  What we 

have done, Mr. Speaker, is increased taxes, cut services, and 

lay off employees. 

 

When I began my political life over 10 years ago, times were 

relatively good.  I'd always thought that while life here in 

Saskatchewan was pretty good, it could always be better.  But 

that was 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker.  Life here in our province 

has been tough.  It has been really tough in the past 10 years 

under the rule of the Conservative Party. 

 

Some of our citizens, Mr. Speaker, have suffered, and they 

have suffered dearly in the past 10 years.  Working people have 

seen their wages decrease.  There are citizens who are making 

less money today than they made 10 years ago.  Poor people 

are living on less.  Seniors are living on less.  Students can't get 

jobs.  Young people can't get into post-secondary institutions.  

Full-time workers now have part-time jobs.  And the list goes 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People have suffered.  And our government -- I want to say to 

the people of Saskatchewan -- know this.  People have lost 

hope and many no longer have their dreams of a better future. 

 

Our budget, Mr. Speaker, is a tough budget.  It is a bitter pill to 

swallow, there is no doubt about that.  I am the last person and 

our government is the last people . . . we are the last people that 

want to see user fees for chiropractic and optometric services.  

We are the last people that want to see an increase in the 

deductible for the prescription drug plan. We are the last people 

that wanted to eliminate the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

But these decisions were made.  These choices were made by a 

government that is determined to regain our economic freedom 

from the whims of the Wall Streets and the Bay Streets.  This 

budget, Mr. Speaker, is about Main Street, Saskatchewan and 

making decisions for our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- This year the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will 

pay $760 million in interest on the debt -- debt run up by the 

Tory predecessors. 

 

Think about what $760 million could have done.  We 

could have had no tax increases, Mr. Speaker, and we could 

have maintained our former level of services.  Taxes went up 

by $312 million and expenditures were cut by $344 million.  

We could have balanced the budget and had a surplus if we 

didn't have to pay $760 million in interest rates -- interest that 

is leaving this province to the Bay Streets and the Wall Streets 

and people living outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a start to Saskatchewan's 

economic recovery.  We have cut expenditures, including MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and cabinet 

expenditures, but there is much more to be done.  I know the 

public have good ideas for more government savings and I 

want to hear from the public.  Every MLA in this legislature 

wants to hear from the public if they have ideas about how we 

can save more money.  If you have an idea, I say to you, let 

your MLA know so that we can follow up on it.  And we will 

follow up on every solitary suggestion. 

 

I know civil servants and people who work in hospitals, 

nursing homes, schools, have good ideas.  Let us know.  Let's 

work together so that we can make the savings together, Mr. 

Speaker.  I would say to the people working in institutions that 

are publicly funded that you know better than we do.  Let us 

know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we have increased revenue by 

$312 million.  While individual and consumer taxes have been 

targeted as much as possible towards those who can pay, there 

is still much work to be done in creating a fair tax system.  It is 

my view that our government must now begin to reorient the 

tax system so that it is fairer.  The flat tax, Mr. Speaker, has got 

to go. 

 

(1445) 

 

Given the federal government's desire for constitutional reform, 

Saskatchewan is in a good position to talk about reform of the 

income tax system which at present, Mr. Speaker, is unfair.  

Wealthier Canadians do not pay their fair share of taxes, and I 

would say wealthier Saskatchewan citizens also don't pay their 

fair share of taxes.  Saskatchewan is in a very limited position 

to make them pay. 

 

The time has come, Mr. Speaker, for a fair taxation system in 

our country and in our province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

say to the taxpayers of this province that it's time that our 

government looked at a fair taxation system.  And I would 

propose that our government set up a committee or a 

commission to look at how we can reorient the tax system 

within Saskatchewan so that everyone pays their fair share. 

 

While we have increased taxes in the fairest way possible, 

given our limited ability to change the tax system, we have also 

tried to protect those who are the most vulnerable in our 

society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to be spending $28 million in 

additional funding for those persons having to live on social 

assistance.  Child hunger programs in this province will be 

increased by 35 per cent.  Saskatchewan's child tax credit has 

increased by 25 per cent or $250 per year per child.  Grants for 

child care centres have gone up by 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

21 per cent.  Income plans for low income seniors have 

increased by $120 annually.  Home care funding, Mr. Speaker, 

has increased by nearly 20 per cent or $38 million.  And special 

allowances for disabled persons, many of whom live in my 

riding, have increased by 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important people in this province who 

have been left out of the former government's desire to create a 

fair and humane society, the people living in northern 

Saskatchewan, will see their northern food allowance doubled 

to $50 a month.  And I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that 

$4 million is going to be spent in northern Saskatchewan to 

improve water and sewer systems.  And I'm also pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, that we will spend more than $20 million -- or pardon 

me -- we will have $20 million more to spend for people who 

require counselling, such as teen mothers, and family violence 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn for a moment to the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) memorandum of 

understanding with SaskPower.  The member from the Liberal 

Party the other day in this House talked about the need for the 

NDP government to continue the process with AECL and 

SaskPower.  Mr. Speaker, it is the opinion of this caucus that 

that deal was a bad deal.  It simply meant that more money was 

going to be spent on a bad deal.  And it simply meant, Mr. 

Speaker, that we could not afford to enter into any more bad 

deals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I came to know after being 

elected as a government member of the legislature was that this 

former government, the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, 

entered into $1.2 billion in bad deals.  These people were so 

desperate for economic development that they would do 

absolutely anything to get people to come to our province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the taxpayers of this province 

that because of their desperation and because of their inability 

to know a good deal from a bad deal, we have a $14 billion 

deficit.  And the days of entering into bad deals simply for the 

sake of having a deal are over.  They are over. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are citizens living in 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan that would have liked to see our 

government go forward with a deal with AECL.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we would have spent over $25 million on a path that 

would eventually have led to the development of a nuclear 

reactor, a nuclear reactor that would have cost the taxpayers of 

this province over $1 billion. 

 

Well I would say to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that we 

can't afford these kinds of projects any more.  Not that we ever 

could afford these projects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 

taxpayers of this province, there are other, alternative forms of 

economic development that will lead to new power production, 

that are environmentally safe, that use renewable energy 

sources, and that don't cost as much 

money, and they are in fact located -- decentralized -- 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

And the alternatives, Mr. Speaker, are biomass, wind power, 

co-generation, solar, supply side management, and 

conservation.  These kinds of programs, if entered into by 

SaskPower, would lead to more jobs, safer forms of energy 

development, and we could meet the electrical needs of the 

citizens and the companies in our province in the future, Mr. 

Speaker.  We do not need to build a capital intensive nuclear 

reactor which in the long run creates very few jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we look to our neighbours in Alberta, we will 

find that the Alberta government has entered into this kind of a 

project.  We do not need to re-invent the wheel.  Our 

neighbours in Alberta have a program for renewable energy 

projects.  Mr. Speaker, the renewable energy projects in 

Alberta have stimulated their economic growth while at the 

same time developed renewable sources of power that are 

environmentally safe. 

 

They have a centre that allows for a mandate to advise the 

Alberta government on renewable energy technologies.  They 

promote the development and use of renewable energy 

technologies.  They support economic diversification to the 

development of renewable energy and energy conservation 

technologies.  And they encourage, Mr. Speaker, private 

developers to construct and operate projects on renewable 

energy generation, energy recovery, and energy conservation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the way we've got to go in the future -- not 

nuclear reactor, not huge megaprojects like Rafferty-Alameda, 

but a new direction, new ways where we have renewable 

energy sources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can have small power producers of biomass, 

wind, hydro, solar, geothermal, peat resources, and 

co-generation.  The public does not have to fund these projects, 

Mr. Speaker.  Small, independent producers of power can enter 

into long-term contracts with the Power Corporation for our 

future electrical needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I've spoken for a moment about a potential 

economic development initiative for the people of this 

province, an economic development initiative, Mr. Speaker, 

that would be decentralized.  It would mean that people living 

in rural Saskatchewan could enter into long-term contracts with 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation.  It means that we would 

have a renewable energy source in our province like wind, 

biomass, peat moss, co-generation.  It would mean economic 

development and it would mean jobs.  And the people of this 

province are desperate for jobs. 

 

It would mean no new public money; the money would be put 

up by private investors.  And it would mean that SaskPower 

would have to change its corporate thinking, reorient its 

corporate thinking to not take on all these large projects 

themselves but enter into contracts with small independents. 

 

I think that the Government of Saskatchewan has the will for 

economic diversification.  I think they want to create 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

new jobs.  We don't have the money to do it, but the private 

sector certainly does.  And I think we can enter into new 

partnerships that will create our electrical future needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to again talk about government 

spending restraint.  As I said earlier, our government has 

reduced its expenditures.  We have tried very, very hard to 

bring expenditures in our government under control. 

 

And I just want to, for a moment, talk about how we as MLAs 

and cabinet ministers have tried to reduce our own government 

largess.  Mr. Speaker, I am proud that the cabinet in this 

province decided to take a 5 per cent salary cut to show the 

people of this province that they meant business.  I am proud, 

Mr. Speaker, that we no longer have legislative secretaries.  

They have been eliminated.  Under the former government, I 

think there was only one or two people on this side of the 

House that wasn't in cabinet or didn't have a legislative 

secretary position with a $7,000 per year amount of money 

attached to it.  We have the smallest cabinet in 20 years.  And 

all of these things, Mr. Speaker, have saved the taxpayers of 

this province $1.4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allowances for extra duties by members of the 

legislature have been reduced.  MLA communication 

allowances have been cut by 25 per cent.  And if constituents 

don't get three or four news-letters per year from MLAs, there's 

a reason.  We have cut back on our communication 

expenditures. 

 

All out-of-scope public service salaries have been frozen.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think in some cases some of those salaries 

should be cut back.  Some of the senior civil servants in this 

province, from my point of view, are earning too much money.  

There are people who have taken salary reductions in the 

private sector.  There are people who don't have jobs.  They 

have seen their full-time work go to part-time work.  And I 

think that anybody who earns 80 or $90,000 a year in this 

province doesn't need to earn that kind of money, and I'm not 

afraid to put those views on the public record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also seen department and advertising 

budgets cut by 29 per cent.  We've also eliminated over 40 

boards and commissions, and we have eliminated over 500 

government appointments.  And I think there's more work to be 

done in that area. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have cut Crown corporation car 

allowances by some 50 per cent.  I can assure the people of 

Saskatchewan there'll be no more Lexuses anywhere in the 

Crown corporations or government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also decided to down-size government.  

We have seen the Department of Social Services consolidate all 

employment and training programs to eliminate duplication. 

 

The Family Foundation has been eliminated, and its functions 

have been absorbed into other departments.  The 

communications policy division unit in the Department of 

Education has been eliminated, and Crown corporations have 

been directed to reduce operating costs.  The Farm Ownership 

Board and Farm 

Land Security Board have been merged to reduce 

administrative costs.  And funding available to physicians has 

been reduced. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, we have reduced expenditures by 344 

million, but it's just a beginning.  More waste and 

mismanagement will be eliminated as governments review 

their operations and as citizens identify ways for government to 

reduce government spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there are many other people in this 

legislature who want to respond to the budget, and I want to 

give them an opportunity to do so.  I can assure the taxpayers 

of this province that this government is on the road.  We've 

been derailed a few times, Mr. Speaker.  We will make 

mistakes; we are only human.  But we're not unlike any other 

family in this province. 

 

If a family is in a position where they lose . . . a certain 

member of the family loses their job, sometimes you have to 

cut back.  You've only got a limited amount of money.  

Sometimes you do things that you don't want to do.  If you're 

unemployed and your children have piano lessons or they take 

skating or they go to hockey and you have to pay, sometimes 

when you don't have a job you can't afford to do those things 

any more, but it's important to the growth of that child. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we're not unlike an unemployed citizen.  

This government essentially has no money.  We have done 

things we haven't wanted to do.  But we're going to continue to 

do the kinds of things we have to do in order to get our 

government finances under control, back on the rails, so that 

we can begin the new tomorrow that our government and our 

Premier talked about during the October 21, 1992 election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- We know that there are lots of citizens in this 

province that aren't happy, but you elected us to make choices.  

And we may have made some wrong choices, but we had the 

courage to make choices.  We will continue to make choices, 

Mr. Speaker, but we have some more time between now and 

the next budget. 

 

The new budget process will begin in June of this year.  Our 

next budget will come into this legislature probably in March 

of 1993.  We will be consulting the public.  We will consult, 

Mr. Speaker.  It was difficult to consult in the past six months 

because of the kinds of constraints we were under.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we will be consulting the public in the next year.  We 

want their input into our budget, our second budget.  We know 

that the road ahead will not be easy, but we have the courage, 

and we have the commitment, and we have the fortitude to 

forge on because the new tomorrow is around the corner.  I 

firmly believe that, and our government believes that, and our 

Premier believes that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I just want to ensure the public that we will do what we 

have to do in the fairest way humanly possible.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I had the honour 

of moving the acceptance of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 

and today I'm pleased to speak briefly in support of the budget 

speech. 

 

I want to first of all compliment the Minister of Finance and 

the Associate Minister of Finance.  I think they've done a very 

excellent job in very trying circumstances. 

 

The throne speech was very visionary.  The budget speech is 

hard-nosed and practical, and the throne speech I think offers a 

lot of hope.  The budget shows determination, and the throne 

speech provides the blueprint for this government's term, while 

now again the budget provides the building materials. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, the budget completes the public 

presentation of this government's plan -- its plan for recovery 

and its plan for restoration. 

 

The throne speech stated that we would bring back common 

sense and competency to the managing of our finances.  It 

promised that we would provide open, honest and accountable 

government.  It said we would protect the disadvantaged and 

renew our spirit of co-operation and our spirit of community.  

And I add, Mr. Speaker, we intend to restore courage and 

leadership to the operations of this government. 

 

I applaud and I admire the Minister of Finance for having the 

courage to deal with reality in his budget. This budget shows 

leadership by conviction, not followship after polling. 

 

Governments are elected to govern in tough times as well as in 

good. The Minister of Finance and the Premier are leading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my southern neighbour, the member from The 

Battlefords, spoke very eloquently on the reason why tough 

decisions have to be made.  He reminded us not only are Tory 

times tough times, they remain tough for some time -- not a 

great deal unlike the odour of a well-known animal remains. 

 

So no need to go into detail here after their financial 

mismanagement, their yearly deficits, regular as the swallows 

coming back to Capistrano.  No need for overkill. 

 

The Associate Minister of Finance said that the Tories' motto 

seemed to be, let's make a deal.  It doesn't matter if the price 

was right; just let's make a deal.  If you were a Tory or a Tory 

friend, it was come on down; let's make a deal. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing about the Tory 

whining about this budget that does amuse me: it's another 

example of the colossal inconsistency. 

 

During the election, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

went all over the province saying, where's your plan?  Where's 

the plan?  He had none himself, except to run another series of 

deficits, so he asked for 

ours.  Where's the plan?  Where's the plan?  A good line, 

maybe, except it didn't fool anyone. 

 

Now though, Mr. Speaker, they've changed their tune.  Now 

that we brought down this tough budget they're running around 

saying, we're breaking all the promises we supposedly didn't 

make during the election -- we're breaking the promises that we 

supposedly didn't make during the election.  I can't hardly 

believe it.  It's the same clear, concise thinking they 

demonstrated in government. 

 

I also noticed, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Thunder 

Creek keeps repeating the Tory line that we knew that they 

knew that their budget figures were cooked so we shouldn't 

have been surprised.  Boy, it'd be nice to be a Tory and not 

have to worry about what comes out of your mouth. 

 

My good friend and colleague from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University said that the former government acted 

like irresponsible spenders.  He said, use your Bay card to pay 

your Sears card to pay your MasterCard.  That was his 

comparison, Mr. Speaker.  He forgot to add that when you run 

out of money you put it on your Tory card -- your Tory card, 

Mr. Speaker.  This card is accepted internationally and you can 

just keep right on charging.  And charge they did. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the opposition Finance and jump-rope 

critic accused us of cooking the books.  Can you believe that?  

He said that we added charges to the Tory debt that need not 

accrue to the budget.  We have thereby inflated the deficit by 

over one-half a billion dollars, he said.  If, Mr. Speaker, if the 

member from Thunder Creek were right -- and he's not -- that 

would mean that the Tory deficit is only really thirteen and a 

half billion dollars, not 14.  Is he bragging that their deficit's 

only thirteen and a half billion dollars?  To which I can only 

say, good grief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 12 years I've been involved in the 

management of credit unions, so I do know something about 

finances, something about the accumulated effects, the often 

disastrous effects, of accumulated debt.  But like many other 

people, I have trouble wrapping my mind around that figure 

without breaking those figures down -- $14 billion of dead 

weight, yearly interest payments of $757 million to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I did some calculations, Mr. Speaker, to break that down.  That 

works out to $2.082 million per day of interest.  Broken down 

even further that's $86,757 an hour, or, Mr. Speaker, $1,446 per 

minute, for every minute that I'm standing here.  That's the 

amount the former premier spent on a European hotel room.  I 

like to take some pride in knowing that this speech will be 

worth, by the time I'm finished, will be worth about $25,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- On the deficit.  That's the size of the beast that 

we're attacking, and its scary, Mr. Speaker.  But no one ever 

said putting our finances in order would be easy. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

Mr. Speaker, in my throne speech address I talked about what I 

think are the roots of our party -- how they go back to the 

Saskatchewan tradition of co-operation and of sharing, of 

banding together to confront both a hostile environment and the 

large, entrenched interest from outside of the province.  I said 

then, and I believe even more now, Mr. Speaker, that part of 

that tradition has led Saskatchewan people to the belief that 

government is their instrument, their tool to further their 

struggle against the larger elements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the other hand, Tories, right wing governments of all types, 

think that government is their enemy for some reason, Mr. 

Speaker.  An article recently in The New Yorker magazine 

stated that: 

 

 . . . for the past decade the whole ideological structure of 

American "conservatism" has depended on the constant, 

relentless reiteration of the claim that all government is 

necessarily evil.  The Bush Administration has come to 

depend for its continued political existence on successfully 

turning American minds against any conception of the state 

as the guarantor of the common welfare, and has managed to 

make even the most conventional arguments for social 

compassion sound like the entering wedge of totalitarianism. 

 

That's the philosophy of the previous administration, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if government is the enemy, what do you do?  

You plunder it if you manage to get a hold of it.  You rip it off, 

as do many of the Tory friends like George Hill.  You mortally 

wound it by running up massive deficits, to cripple its 

effectiveness -- government by the scorched earth policy, Tory 

governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to again refer to my colleague from 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University.  He spoke of the tough times, 

how we have to cut back in our life-style, how we have to start 

eating hamburger instead of steak and lobster.  We have to start 

eating what we can afford.  Well I'd like to add one thing to 

that, Mr. Speaker:  not like the Tories who talked boloney and 

ate steak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- There are many, many positive aspects of this 

budget, and one of the ones that I want to highlight and one 

that affects my constituency in Meadow Lake very much, Mr. 

Speaker -- it's the announcements made by the Minister of 

Social Services.  We're going to see funding for child hunger 

programs rise by 35 per cent.  We're going to see additional 

funding for child care centres.  The overall social assistance 

budget was increased by more than $9 million this year to 

begin the government's attack on poverty. 

 

And I'd like to quote from the minister, if I could.  She says 

that the increases are targeted to help recipients most in need -- 

persons who are disabled and those living in the North.  All 

these changes will take effect August 1, 1992.  And all of these 

are initiatives, Mr. Speaker, that I'm very, very proud of. 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend an olive branch to the 

opposition -- some sense of hope for the members opposite.  

My father, who has been a CCF (Co-operation Commonwealth 

Federation) NDP member all of his life, Mr. Speaker, says that 

before he dies he's going to give up his membership and buy a 

PC (Progressive Conservative) membership.  His reason, Mr. 

Speaker, is that he just can't stand to see a good New Democrat 

die. 

 

So there is some hope, Mr. Speaker, not just for the members 

opposite but for all the people of Saskatchewan.  And I want to 

give my assurance that I will be voting in favour of the budget.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, today I'm pleased to have the 

opportunity to rise and enter into the debate on the budget 

speech. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I wish to commend our minister, our 

Finance minister, in his preparation and delivery of his budget.  

This exercise of building the budget was a horrendous 

undertaking.  To take a province's financial mess and put it into 

a workable plan has indeed taken a great deal of planning, 

consultation, and discussion. 

 

As a member of the government caucus and someone who has 

had some first-hand experience in preparing budgets and 

designing budgets, certainly at a much lesser magnitude, I have 

some appreciation for the tasks and the work that has been put 

behind us. 

 

Our province's future is now ahead of us and this New 

Democratic government has a recipe that has many different 

ingredients in it.  And some of those ingredients, Mr. Speaker, 

are going to be bitter and they're going to have a bitter taste.  

But we all know that this budget is viewed as bringing 

short-term pain, but for the future we will have long-term gain 

and prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend my appreciation to the 

people of the province, and particularly the members of my 

constituency in Yorkton who attended the pre-budget meetings 

with the Finance minister, and on many separate occasions, 

with me. 

 

Getting involved in shaping what the future of this province 

would be for us was an exercise I very much appreciate having 

an opportunity to participate in.  And I know, Mr. Speaker, that 

that will be the practice of our government in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also personally pleased with the final 

product of our budget for several reasons.  Firstly, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a budget that was not designed and prepared by a 

handful of politicians or by a collection of bureaucrats, but is a 

budget that had the full participation of the government caucus, 

members of the public, public consultation, and departmental 

involvement. 
 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this budget looks at the fundamental 

aspects of our campaign strategy of October of 1991, which 

was to get the Saskatchewan financial house in order and to get 

the province back on the rails again. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, our budget takes into account the 

basic principles of our New Democratic government, which is 

to make those difficult, tough choices in a caring, 

compassionate, and fair manner. 

 

Without a doubt, and confirmed by the many telephone calls 

and personal contacts I have had in my office in Yorkton, my 

home, and here at the legislature, this is a difficult budget and 

has made some very, very tough choices.  But I believe that the 

tough choices is what our government was elected to make and 

what the people of Saskatchewan asked for when they said that 

they wanted a fair and accountable process.  And this budget 

clearly reflects those guidelines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a New Democratic government will put people 

first.  We will continue to protect the most vulnerable in our 

society.  Funding for the child hunger program increased in our 

budget by 35 per cent.  The Saskatchewan tax credit increased 

by 25 per cent.  And $20 million more are being provided for 

programs like those to deal with family violence; our 

government's commitment, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate hunger 

and poverty in this province that is known to be the 

bread-basket of the world.  That's our first priority, Mr. Speaker 

-- people first. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to get a handle on our staggering 

provincial debt left to us by the previous Tory administration, 

the throne speech and this budget have prepared the foundation 

and begun the construction in rebuilding Saskatchewan.  We 

have opened the books of this province for total public 

disclosure and accountability.  And we are already 

implementing several recommendations of the Gass 

Commission.  A government of its word and a government in 

action. 

 

We have cut millions of dollars in waste and mismanagement.  

We have scaled the decks with an amalgamation of government 

departments and reduced administrative structures.  Tough 

decisions, Mr. Speaker, but necessary to reshape our future and 

that of our children. 

 

We are leading by example by cutting cabinet ministers' 

salaries and reducing communication allowances for MLAs; 

almost 40 boards and commissions dissolved or reduced, 

eliminating some 500 government appoints.  Operating 

expenses of the government will be reduced by 3 per cent 

where the past Tory administration's grew by 6 per cent 

annually.  Out-of-scope salary ranges have been frozen.  

Advertising budgets, Mr. Speaker, have been slashed by 29 per 

cent in all government departments.  Crown corporation car 

expenses have been cut by 50 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago, shortly after the Finance 

minister's budget announcement, the Conference Board of 

Canada chairman stated on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) radio that other provinces could look at 

Saskatchewan as a model in their trek to get a hold of their 

financial deficit budgeting, further adding that the 

Saskatchewan budget of 1992 was a good start on 

the road of turning this province, Saskatchewan's dismal 

financial picture, on to a new channel -- a renewed confidence, 

Mr. Speaker, in the economic and financial status of our 

province, the sign of new confidence in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in making the difficult choices, our government 

has indicated our commitment to stimulate the economy.  As a 

government and certainly as a member representing the fifth 

largest city in Saskatchewan and having the third-largest retail 

sector in the province, I recognize and appreciate the role and 

value of small business and our community . . . small-business 

community in our province.  The initiative to assist small 

business through the reduction of the small-business tax is a 

welcomed initiative, and by the elimination of the PST 

(provincial sales tax) on October 21, and the demise of the 

PST, as well welcomed by the retail community in our area and 

district. 

 

Furthermore our government's commitment to create thousands 

of jobs through our Crown corporations, which will see capital 

and environmental projects, summer student employment, and 

new housing initiatives, are further positive steps in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, in rebuilding Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has stayed the course in 

protecting rural Saskatchewan and keeping the farm families 

on the farm.  We have established the six-year lease back 

program for farmers who have transferred land to lenders.  We 

have developed the voluntary debt mediation process that 

allows lenders and farmers to resolve difficulties in the early 

stages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have examined alternate forms of financing, 

such as community-based land trusts.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have spent $208 million . . . almost 80 per cent of the 

agricultural budget will go directly or indirectly into farm 

support programs in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 14.8 million to support research and development 

of new agricultural industry and opportunities; and $1.6 

million, Mr. Speaker, for continued support for ethanol 

development. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is truly a budget aimed at keeping 

Saskatchewan farm families on their farms.  And I know that 

through these initiatives and future work and consultations with 

the federal government, farmers and farm organizations, we 

will succeed in bringing to a halt the statistic of some 15,000 

farmers who have lost their livelihoods and their farms, as was 

the case during the 10 years of Tory administration in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Tories say that they were the friends of 

the farmers, creating 15,000 farm casualties.  Some friends, I 

say, Mr. Speaker -- some friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is in the transition, and we're going 

to have some change, some major change, because this is what 

the people of Saskatchewan have requested.  Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan, contrary to the words the member 

from Estevan made yesterday, were in fact fed up and 

disillusioned with politics and politicians, with him and with 

the Tories. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, there was an attempt by the member 

from Estevan to place our budget deficit of 1992 at $517 

million in a light where it created major pain with no gain.  He 

cited, Mr. Speaker, almost all of his annual deficits of the 10 

years, except for the one for 1991-92, which looks like will 

come in somewhere about 880 to $900 million as per debts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is our stepping-stone.  That's from where this 

government begins.  That's where the NDP story for the future 

begins.  Mr. Speaker, in just six short months we were able to 

reduce the 1991-92 deficit by $150 million.  As well, we have 

come in under budget with some $350 million less than the 

Tory deficit of 1991-92.  Those, Mr. Speaker, are the facts. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I fully realized as a rookie MLA, the 

true meaning of deceit as I observed the member opposite 

make statements that are truly contrary to the facts of this 

province.  Mr. Speaker, it is precisely that kind of action, that 

behaviour and those theatrics, that give politicians the label of 

being dishonest, dishonourable, and deceitful.  But I state 

unequivocally and without hesitation that that was Tory politics 

and I know we will never encroach the valued principles of our 

government and certainly will not encroach the values of this 

member from Yorkton. 

 

To say, Mr. Speaker, that the 1991-92 deficit is $265 million, 

after telling us in this House for the past week and a half that 

we knew, that they knew that it was much greater; and that 

Gass reported in mid-February that the debt was in excess of 

800 million; and to have the member blatantly insist that the 

debt of 1991-92 is $265 million is most deceitful and I suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, is politics in its most distasteful form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the opposition to attack our government and 

accuse us of lacking compassion to people because of the 

lay-offs and the cut-backs which are related specifically to the 

debt of this province that they left for us is truly an 

unbelievable statement for the members opposite to be making, 

coming from a previous administration that was totally and 

completely oblivious to the sensitivity of people's lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about those 400 dental nurses their 

government corralled in the Saskatchewan Hotel at 9 a.m. one 

morning and 20 minutes later told them that they were out of a 

job?  Not just insensitive, Mr. Speaker, but inhumane. 

 

And what about the brown box brigade that went around the 

province and gave people three hours time to pack their desks 

and clear out while the custodians stood by, watching a 20-year 

civil servant pack his desk so they didn't steal any government 

property and told they were fired but never got a reason? 

 

That was the Tory way of treating people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have the audacity 

and the gall to stand there and pretend that they even 

understand the meaning of the word compassion.  I suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, true political hypocrisy. 

Mr. Speaker, the Tories spent our money.  They drove the 

people out of the province.  They sold our assets.  And you 

created our debt which will take us years to climb out. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, an NDP government turned this province 

around twice before and, Mr. Speaker, we're going to do it 

again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget of 1992 is our first 

attempt to clean up the mess and the hypocrisy of the past.  It's 

not going to be easy, but the blueprint is clear.  To the people 

of Saskatchewan, we've already opened the books, and they're 

going to see open, fair, and accountable government. 

 

We are, Mr. Speaker, a people's party, and we will consult, and 

we will work together in implementing new policies and 

change.  And we are going to make some mistakes, Mr. 

Speaker, along the way, and we're going to ask that the people 

of Saskatchewan assist us and understand, because 

Saskatchewan is our community and together we're going to 

rebuild it with the values of compassion and fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I am very pleased to be a part of the 

government and support the approval of the government budget 

of 1992.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I recognize the member from Regina North 

West . . . pardon me, Regina Albert North. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would be honoured to 

represent either of the two above-named constituencies, but of 

course I'm intensely proud of the constituency I reside in, that 

being Regina Albert North, and I'm also proud of my 

colleague, the member from Regina North West, for his 

representation in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise to address the budget of 1992.  And I do so 

with some mixed feelings, frankly.  It's doubtful that any of us 

on either side of the legislature, any of the people in the public 

did not have certain criticisms of this budget.  It's doubtful that 

anybody in Saskatchewan has not heard somebody that would 

have done something different if they were the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

And I think that's safe to say, that were any other individual the 

minister, they would have made some minor changes.  Some 

would have perhaps chosen to not raise taxes, to not deal with 

the problems of the province.  Some would have chosen to put 

the blinders on, as the former government did for nine and a 

half years, and say, well if we see no evil, if we hear no evil, 

and if we speak no evil, there will be no evil. 

 

And of course that may work in stories, in Alice in 

Wonderland, that sort of thing, but it's not the economic reality 

and it's certainly not the reality for Saskatchewan -- my 

province, our province -- as we head through the decade of the 

'90s and prepare for the turn of the century, 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

a turn of the century that will bring new hope.  I think there's 

new hope in Saskatchewan before that, but this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is the start of that new hope. 

 

But before you can improve where you're at . . . or improve 

your situation, you must recognize where it is you're at.  And 

the government of the day, headed by the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier, the first thing we did was 

promise we would be opening the books.  And what did we do?  

We set up the Gass Commission and opened the books. 

 

(1530) 

 

Much squawking from former government members as those 

books were opened and revealed a litany, day after day after 

day of misspending, day after day after day of waste, day after 

day after day of things that ministers should have known about 

-- in all likelihood did know of many of those things -- and 

chose to see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil.  Thus they 

chose to ignore the reality of Saskatchewan. 

 

They chose to ignore the problems, and because of that, they're 

relegated to a small minority in opposition.  And we have what 

I would only describe as a large majority in government, with a 

mandate to not only open up the books and find out where it is 

we're at, but to implement a blueprint to improve our province, 

to give some hope for our children and our children's children. 

 

Because we're at a crossroads.  We're at a time when we can 

either choose to straighten out Saskatchewan's fiscal mess, we 

can either deal with that in a realistic fashion, come to grips 

with it now, or we can risk foreclosure, we can risk no longer 

having any ability to borrow money to continue to sustain a 

life-style that tax revenues just don't support. 

 

If we do that, what the ramifications are, is perhaps it would be 

next year, perhaps it would be the year after that, it might even 

be a couple of years after that when government pay cheques 

start to bounce.  And, Mr. Speaker, I know that teachers and 

health care professionals, I know farmers, I know other people 

-- there's thousands of people work at Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, my former employer -- all of the above may not forgive 

us for increasing their taxes.  For that, I'm regretful.  For that, I 

hope they can understand what it is we're trying to do.  But 

they may not forgive us for tax increases. 

 

They may not forgive us.  Certainly there's every reason to 

suspect that a significant number of the 300-plus people that 

were fired will not forgive us.  We've asked them to pay the 

ultimate price as we try and grapple with the mess we've 

inherited -- the ultimate prices, that of loss of job.  They may 

not forgive us, and for that I am truly sorry. 

 

But I know one thing.  All of the people that I mentioned above 

will not forgive us if government pay cheques start to bounce.  

And in February of any given year, we have to tell teachers you 

can please teach for the rest of the year, but we're sorry we 

can't pay you.  And we say to doctors and nurses and 

chiropractors and all others in the health care field, well it's 

nice, the service you're giving is wonderful and we're asking 

you to continue it but we 

have no ability to pay you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'd like to ask for leave to introduce 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I'd 

like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

House, a group of 166 students from Holy Cross School in 

Prince Albert.  I understand that they're supposed to be in the 

west gallery, but given the number I'm almost sure that they're 

sitting in your gallery as well.  And as the member from 

Carlton said: that's a lot of chocolate milk.  We'll be meeting 

for drinks and questions in a few minutes, and I'm certainly 

looking forward to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied by a number of people.  

Maurice Chalifour, Simone Robinson, Sister Verley, Colette 

Matheson, Henriette Joubert, Reg Doucette, Yvonne Pelletier, 

Judy Kuling, Les Mewis, Reina McBeth, Pat Winsor, and 

Lorne Ashby.  I ask all members to join with me in giving them 

a warm welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, with your permission or 

permission of the House, I would like to add my words of 

welcome to the students from Prince Albert. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The students that are here today are 

residents of both . . . they are residents from Prince Albert 

Carlton and residents from Prince Albert Northcote 

constituency.  We're really glad to see you down here students, 

and you can thank your teachers for arranging this and we wish 

you all a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE continued) 
 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That is a lot of 

chocolate milk for my colleagues from P.A. to purchase.  Mr. 

Speaker, the hundred-and-some students from Prince Albert 

and the chaperons required to keep them in order just fit the bill 

for what I was explaining. 
 

Can you imagine in the middle of a school term telling the 

teachers we no longer have a pay cheque for them, but will you 

please see this year through?  And the same could be said, if 

we had not undertaken what we have with this budget, if we 

had chosen to ignore the fiscal reality, the same could be said 

not only for schools, but for hospitals, for highways, for every 

service that the Government of Saskatchewan is involved with 

financially.  No money. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

And the threat is there.  The threat is real. 

 

That's why, Mr. Speaker, I speak in favour of this budget.  I am 

delighted that the Minister of Finance consulted as widely as he 

did.  I am delighted that we had as much opportunity as we did 

for input into the budget before it was actually presented.  All 

that input as you know, was not without some price.  But the 

fact is, at the end of the day we have a budget that is as 

compassionate and as fair and as equitable as is humanly 

possible in the province of Saskatchewan in 1992. 

 

There are choices in this budget that nobody, nobody would 

want to make, but choices that had to be made now or risk 

losing everything -- hard choices made in a firm, 

compassionate, fair-handed manner by a government that is 

firm, fair, compassionate, and consultative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reality we discovered through the Gass 

Commission and through the Provincial Auditor's report and 

when we opened the books, the reality we discovered is we 

have an operating debt in Saskatchewan, a provincial budgetary 

deficit of $8.1 billion; add to that a Crown corporation debt of 

$5.1 billion; add to that a further $1.8 billion in loan guarantees 

-- all of which are new loan guarantees, new in the last decade 

to operations such as Weyerhaeuser and Saskferco and the list 

goes on -- you come up with a grand total of $15 billion debt, 

$15 billion debt. 

 

Now by itself $15 billion doesn't mean a whole lot, but what 

was the debt a decade ago?  What was the debt when the 

Conservative government took office in April, 1982?  The 

answer is: in the operating budget -- which now has an $8.1 

billion deficit as I mentioned before -- there was actually not a 

deficit but a surplus of $136 million.  Surplus -- $136 million.  

The wizards across the way, the now opposition, magically 

transformed $136 million surplus into an $8.1 billion 

dead-weight debt. 

 

Crown corporations now have a debt of $5.1 billion.  Crown 

corporations, when the wizards across the way were in 

government, when they formed the government the Crown debt 

was $3.2 billion total.  That includes SaskPower, SaskTel, all 

of the Crown corporations, Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan.  All the debt totalled $3.2 billion; it's now $5.1 

billion. 

 

And I have to ask myself, what have we got to show for the 

additional nearly $2 billion debt in the Crown sector?  Well 

let's see.  Sask Forest Products is no longer a Crown.  Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan is no longer a Crown.  Saskoil 

was sold.  SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation) gone.  Sask Minerals gone. 

 

How in the world can anybody sell off so massively, sell off 

assets, and lose money while they're doing it?  It's absurd.  But 

the absurdity is, all of us in Saskatchewan have to now pay the 

price.  All of us do because . . . It's like, if I can liken it to a 

errant son that takes over a farm.  The parents give the farm to 

the son and say: here's our farm.  We've worked 35 or 40 years 

to build up this operation.  It's now running real well.  We're 

ready to retire.  We've set aside enough money that we can look 

after ourselves.  You look after the farm. 

And the farmer, the young son decides, oh I've got a taste for 

the wild life -- spends his days and most of his nights in the 

beer parlour.  And after a year the son says: gee, the farm didn't 

make me any money, but I've still got my taxes to pay.  I've 

still got bills to pay.  So the son sells a quarter section of land. 

 

Well that works for one year. Spends the next year . . . Perhaps 

on holidays this year. He found the errantness of spending all 

his time in the beer parlour.  So he takes a holiday and goes to 

Hawaii for a month or two.  And at the end of the day, at the 

end of the year, gee, the bills are still coming in; gee, the farm 

income isn't there.  Well they'd better sell another quarter 

section of land.  Only what's changed is land prices have slid 

and there's nobody willing to buy the land at what it's worth, so 

they pay a lower price. 

 

But now this new farmer is a price-taker, not a price-namer, so 

the land gets sold cheap and this process just rolls on and on 

and on.  Imagine the same story repeated over a 10-year cycle, 

and that's exactly what has happened with the people of 

Saskatchewan.  We've had a 10-year cycle of selling off our 

assets for ever decreasing amounts of money, and now we're 

left collectively paying the bill. 

 

Fifteen billion dollars debt now in 1992 when in 1982, a 

decade ago, when the former Conservative government took 

office, there was a total of $3.2 billion debt -- nearly five times 

the debt in 10 years.  And importantly, Mr. Speaker, in that 10 

years they weren't buying assets or building up the assets of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  They were selling off the assets at 

fire-sale prices. 

 

And now we're left with the 1992 budget where the best thing a 

government could do was make choices, hard choices in many 

cases, choices that no government would want to make -- but 

choices that are designed to save our province and to provide a 

future for our children, a province that has opportunity, a 

province that will again move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been recognized, this budget. The Globe 

and Mail, Saturday, May 9, headline: "Province still 

trend-setter, this time fighting debt."  And there's a picture of 

the now Minister of Finance and a very flattering column 

commending the Minister of Finance for recognizing what is 

the biggest problem in Saskatchewan right now and dealing 

with it. 

 

 Leader-Post headline: "Minister takes long-range view."  

Again May 9.  And as I've just been trying to point out, this is a 

long-range view budget.  This is a budget born out of despair, 

but with a long-range look into the future, with a look at 

helping Saskatchewan people that need help the most. 

 

(1545) 

 

I can't help but agree with my colleague, the member for 

Yorkton, who not long ago just before I took my place in the 

legislature was referring to the now Leader of the Opposition's 

remarks of the other day in this Legislative Assembly.  Mr. 

Speaker, I thought those remarks were 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

particularly absurd when I heard them.  I thought somehow the 

logic was still lacking.  It's been lacking for quite some time, 

but the logic was still lacking in that the argument that I heard 

was, we were snookered by the civil servants with this budget. 

 

And I want to tell you that that is why the former government 

got into trouble right from day one.  Saskatchewan, when they 

took office in 1982, Saskatchewan had the finest civil service 

in Canada -- the finest in Canada.  And they didn't believe in it.  

They thought they were being snookered.  They get good 

advice from the finest civil servants in Canada, and they chose 

to ignore it.  At every turn, they laid the blame on the 

bureaucrats.  They laid the blame on the civil servants. 

 

The civil servants that have worked . . . many of them put a 

lifetime into building this province into making our 

government run, into making it efficient, into providing 

opportunities not only for themselves, not only for their 

children, but for their neighbours, for their communities, and 

for our entire province.  And yet we have the former Leader of 

the Opposition ranting and raving about us being snookered by 

the civil servants in this budget.  That's part of why we're 

where we are today. 

 

We had an administration that refused to take advice, that 

refused to take professional, competent advice.  In fact at every 

turn they refused to take any good advice, so we're stuck with 

what's left. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the civil service was a very 

professional civil service.  There is still a civil service full of 

the finest people in the world.  We have got an excellent civil 

service, one that needs to be encouraged rather than told they're 

snookering the people of Saskatchewan -- telling us they're 

snookering the government of the day when no such thing is 

happening, when we're getting good advice, not only from civil 

servants, we're getting good advice from the people of 

Saskatchewan.  I'm getting good advice from my constituents, 

and I'm following through with that advice wherever I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget . . . I want to turn to health care and I 

want to say that we were listening.  I have here a publication 

put out by Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union and 

they say no to premiums, no to health care premiums.  They 

say some things that, had we introduced premiums, frankly are 

not terribly flattering to the government. 

 

But we listened, not just to RWDSU, we listened to our 

constituents, we listened to the people of Saskatchewan.  I 

continue to travel the province.  I continue to talk to people all 

across the province, and I'm delighted to say that we're able to 

act on some of the things . . . some of that advice.  We're 

certainly able to hear it.  We act when we can. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker . . .  And one of the things that I 

regret us having to do but we had to, was the changes in the 

prescription drug plan.  But there's a couple of things I want to 

say about that.  One is that families that are the heaviest users, 

if I may describe it that, of prescription drugs, that the doctors 

prescribe the most drugs for . . .  And remember there's a 

reason when prescription drugs 

are prescribed.  I'm not trying to cast blame on anybody.  If you 

have a health problem that prescription drugs help, it's the 

doctor's job to prescribe it and your job to take those 

prescription drugs. 

 

Families who spend more than $940 a year on prescription 

drugs under the old plan are now better off under the new plan.  

Families that spend more than $940 per year are better off 

because under the new plan, after a family has spent $750 on 

prescription drugs, the co-payment drops to 10 per cent. So that 

for every dollar worth of prescription drugs you need you pay a 

dime, or for every hundred dollars you pay $10. 

 

That's the first thing I wanted to say about the prescription drug 

plan.  The second thing, Mr. Speaker, is fundamentally why 

prescription drug costs are escalating.  And I have a Star-

Phoenix report.  This story originated in Ottawa but it's May 

13, 1992.  "Prescription drug costs on the rise" is the headline. 

 

 The average cost of a prescription has soared nearly four 

times faster than Ottawa and drug companies claim, says a 

new study by one of Canada's largest drug plan operators. 

 

 The report by Green Shield Prepaid Services, which runs 

drug plans for companies such as Ford, General Motors and 

Chrysler, found that the cost rose an average of (get this) 11.4 

per cent a year between 1987 and 1991 (11.4 per cent each 

year in a four-year period). 

 

 The Patented Medicines Prices Review Board, the 

government watchdog, said in its latest report that the price 

of patented brand-name medicines increased an average of 

3.1 per cent a year between 1987 and 1990. 

 

 Ottawa increased (and this is why). . . Ottawa increased 

patent protection in 1987 for brand-name drug companies . . . 

 

It was a controversial move at the time.  It was a move that the 

New Democratic Party, I know as an opposition MLA then in 

Saskatchewan, we spoke about this.  And I know our federal 

counterparts in Ottawa were decrying this very move, and 

exactly what we said was going to come to pass has in fact 

happened.  That move respecting prescription drugs was a 

move that was linked to the Canada-U.S. free trade deal. 

 

And what the new patent drug Act or the new in 1987 patent 

drug Act did, is it's limited the ability of generic or no-name 

drug manufacturers to turn out lower cost copies of prescription 

drugs.  So there's more patent protection on brand-name drugs 

and fewer generic drugs to keep costs down. 

 

We said at the time it was going to result in disastrous 

increases in medicine costs.  Proof is in the pudding -- 11.4 per 

cent increase per year for four years.  It's a 45 per cent, 

roughly, increase in the cost of prescription drugs in one 

four-year time frame.  Is it small wonder that a government that 

is teetering and trying to keep ourselves and our province from 

the brink of insolvency, is it any 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

wonder we have to deal with our own prescription drug plan 

now?  Of course it's not. 

 

I want to, dealing with health care, deal one more thing with 

health care and that's respecting the abortion question, the 

whole matter of choice, Mr. Speaker.  What we have, and we 

saw it earlier today in question period, we saw a now 

opposition decrying that the government of the day has its 

hands tied respecting de-insuring abortions from our health 

care plan.  There's legal reasons, there's Acts that would be 

violated, it's unconstitutional, it goes against the Canada health 

plan, it's against the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  That's 

just three minor pieces of legislation that tell us that we could 

not de-insure abortions even if we wanted to. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members opposite, if it is 

that simple, as they now claim it is, where in the world were 

they for nine and a half years while they were the government, 

a Conservative government in Saskatchewan, and we had a 

Conservative government in Ottawa for the same period of 

time, much of the same period of time.  Where were they?  If it 

requires a legislative change, great.  Where were they?  If it's a 

provincial matter, great. 

 

You were the government.  Why didn't you act?  If it's a federal 

matter, great.  Talk to your Prime Minister, your kissing cousin 

in Ottawa who's still Prime Minister despite the lowest popular 

opinion ratings of any prime minister in Canadian history, alive 

or dead. 

 

I mean, if it's a federal matter, talk to your federal cousins.  If it 

was a provincial matter, why did you dither for nine and a half 

years?  And now you're decrying, oh gee, the NDP isn't 

moving.  I tell you we are moving.  I'm very proud of the 

ministerial statement that the Minister of Health made 

yesterday where she addressed the cause of unwanted 

pregnancies and where there's a commitment to deal with the 

cause in a hope that by preventing unwanted pregnancies we 

may reduce the need for abortion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud of this budget for a couple of 

things.  Before I take my place, I just want to say that what this 

budget did is provided protection for those in our province least 

able to protect themselves.  We have seen, for instance, a basic 

allowance for a single employable person increased by $55 a 

month; childless couple, basic allowance increased by $90 a 

month; single parent with one child, increased $110 a month.  I 

mean, this is pretty remarkable stuff in an area where rates 

were depressed for far too long. 

 

We have tried to deal with hunger in a meaningful way.  

Children are hungry, Mr. Speaker, because of a lack of money.  

Nobody with $5 in their pocket would choose to go hungry.  

They would spend the $5 on food. 

 

This government has dealt with the matter of income 

redistribution, protecting the poorest, protecting those least able 

to protect themselves.  This government has also done things 

for injured workers.  We have a Workers' Compensation Act 

review that is going to be delivering its final report some time 

in August or September.  There is already some limited 

improvement in the way The 

Workers' Compensation Act is enumerated.  There will be 

more improvements in the future. 

 

We have a government that has increased its tree planting 

program.  I notice that the budget has gone up in tree planting 

and in forestry, up to one and a half million dollars this year.  

It's going to result in more trees being planted, and of course 

trees to be planted require people to plant them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've addressed jobs.  There are areas of job 

creation that my colleagues have spoken about, so I'm not 

going to bore the Legislative Assembly with further talk of it. 

 

But before I close, I want to again address the former premier, 

now Leader of the Opposition's comments of yesterday.  And 

just briefly.  I don't want to start tackling some of the things he 

said in that that's just a disagreement between two members. 

 

(1600) 

 

But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I was driving home last 

night after the legislature adjourned and I was angry.  I was 

frustrated and I was bitter about the corruption of truth that was 

taking place.  I was frustrated to no end.  And I thought, you 

know, this kind of reminds me about my 15-year-old dog.  

Lucky will beg for any scrap of food.  She is absolutely 

shameless -- absolutely shameless.  And if you refuse to pet 

her, she'll nuzzle up and get your attention.  She is absolutely 

shameless.  And, Mr. Speaker, that was the type of an act we 

saw by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday.  Absolutely 

shameless.  No thought to truth or reality -- nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I take my place I just want to again say how 

proud I am of a budget that was introduced out of despair, a 

budget of hope and future, a budget that is going to see 

Saskatchewan through this decade and get us started on the 

proper road to financial fiscal success, and a budget that sets us 

on the road to much better things in the future.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I've been meeting and talking to my 

constituents since the budget came out last week and they have 

many concerns -- many grave concerns.  The concern that tops 

the list is that the NDP government is going to destroy this 

province.  People are more than unhappy, Mr. Speaker.  

They're downright miserable.  About the only good government 

thing that they're happy about is that they have a Progressive 

Conservative MLA. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- They can say they didn't believe the 

NDP during the election.  They can say I told you so to those 

who elected this government.  They can say, Mr. Speaker, don't 

blame me -- I didn't vote for them.  Unfortunately, they still 

have to pay for the utility rate increases and the tax hikes. 

 

The farmers in my constituency still have to take the hit on the 

NDP's elimination of the tax exemption on fuel.  They 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

have to live with a $900 rebate which is just a fraction of what 

they put out for the hike in fuel costs.  They will still have to 

pay for the changes in GRIP.  They will have to pay despite the 

fact that they were not consulted on the changes to this 

program. 

 

Despite that, the changes to GRIP are in courts.  Despite that 

they want to stick to the 1991 GRIP, they have no choice.  The 

NDP budget hurts the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

It hurts everyone in Saskatchewan.  The NDP are spreading the 

misery equally among all the people. 

 

The NDP continually state that it is necessary to do away with 

harmonization.  They claim it was detrimental.  They say they 

had to scrap harmonization for bookstores and restaurants.  

They say if they wouldn't have scrapped harmonization, it 

would have cost Saskatchewan 7,000 jobs.  They could not 

show how or where these jobs would be lost.  They just said it 

would be so. 

 

The Minister of Finance claims he had a report proving this.   

Yet, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance ducks the issue of 

producing a similar report for his government's increased taxes.  

He wouldn't even answer our questions on whether there was a 

report in existence.  We can be certain there was such a report.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we are certain that the reason the Minister 

of Finance won't produce it is because of its contents.  The 

contents of that report will show the devastating effects of the 

NDP budget on Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine how many jobs will be lost because of 

this NDP budget.  Just imagine how many jobs will be lost if 

harmonization would have lost 7,000.  Tax increases in this 

budget are not the only concern, Mr. Speaker.  It distresses me 

greatly when I hear of some of the proposals to cut funding to 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that you are a true supporter of the 

educational system.  Your support for education is well 

documented.  When in opposition, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

opposition members stated that the former administration was 

underfunding education to the point where the president of the 

University of Regina had to go out and beg for money. 

 

The NDP opposition repeatedly asked why the previous 

administration didn't give education a higher priority for our 

young people, for their future, so that our young people could 

have access to a higher education to ensure them a guaranteed 

future in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our youth are very important.  Their future is 

Saskatchewan's future.  My children are still young, but in a 

few years they may wish to attend a university.  When that 

happens it would be nice to still have a university for them and 

their peers to attend -- a university to attend which is affordable 

for them and their parents. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the reality is the current government is 

cutting funding to the universities -- cuts of 2 per cent in each 

of the next two years.  These are real cuts of 2 per cent off of 

last year's budget; 2 per cent and no allowance for the 

institutional rate of inflation which would amount to about 7 

per cent total decrease in 

funding; cuts which translate into a 13 per cent increase in 

tuition fees, cuts to staff, to programs, and a 2 per cent drop in 

funding to university services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the university system Saskatchewan 

people were advocating and working for.  These cuts are not 

just to universities, but they are also to the elementary and high 

school system -- the K to 12 system. 

 

The NDP government was looking at proposals to eliminate 

rural schools and rural school boards.  Mr. Speaker, the 

children in some rural areas are already making long bus rides 

to get to their schools.  If those schools are closed, it will mean 

even longer bus rides.  Mr. Speaker, no one wants young 

children to be forced to ride school buses in the wee hours of 

the morning or to return home in the dark on cold winter 

nights. 

 

The member from Riversdale has talked of the federal 

government off-loading costs onto the provinces.  Just what 

does he think is happening when his government cuts grants to 

school boards across this province?  The school boards cut 

back; they eliminate programs and staff.  Mr. Speaker, they 

also raise taxes -- taxes to continue the needed programs they 

can still afford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is off-loading by the province; off-loading by 

the NDP government onto the local taxpayers of the school unit 

districts; off-loading onto the local municipalities, both rural 

and urban.  Local tax increases across this province because of 

grant cuts to provincial school divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Riversdale promised to support 

the teachers and to maintain education.  In fact, he stated in the 

Moose Jaw Times-Herald, February 19, 1988, and I quote:  

Don't let any government tell you they don't have enough funds 

for education; the money is there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan going to make good on his promises?  When are 

the members of the Premier's government going to hold his feet 

to the fire and make him fulfil the promises that were made 

while he and his colleagues were in opposition? 

 

The member for Saskatoon Riversdale knew the state of our 

economy.  He may not have believed his own rhetoric as to 

how bad things were, but he knew.  Mr. Speaker, a quote 

comes to mind when thinking of the NDP Party and their claim 

of not knowing the state of the province's financial affairs.  

John F. Kennedy said: When we got into office, the thing that 

surprised me most was to find that things were just as bad as 

we'd been saying they were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government -- a government which from most 

of their remarks recently is still making the transition from 

opposition to government, or perhaps I should say from 

opposition to opposition -- this government while in opposition 

stated that there was enough money to run the government 

except for waste and mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, either there was less waste and 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

mismanagement than was implied or the present government is 

involved in even more waste and mismanagement, because 

they are both increasing taxes and cutting programs. 

 

Tax increases in the form of utility rates.  These are tax 

increases which we must all pay, whether we have the ability to 

pay or not.  We have to heat our homes, we have to pay our 

phone bills, we have to pay the power bills, we have to pay 

more for fuel.  And now we have to pay 8 per cent E&H 

(education and health). 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now have to pay to see an optometrist.  We 

have to pay to see a chiropractor.  Families in this province 

now have to pay a $380 deductible for the drug prescription 

plan -- over 200 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Diabetics now have to pay for all their supplies.  The NDP 

have increased the cost to diabetics for insulin.  They now have 

to pay $23 a vial when they used to pay $1 under the old plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how will families cope if any of their members 

are diabetic?  It will be extremely hard, Mr. Speaker.  I feel for 

them.  I just wish that you on that side of the House would feel 

for these people as well.  Mr. Speaker, our low income families 

and our seniors will suffer greatly from this NDP budget. 

 

Speaking of seniors, Mr. Speaker, Prairie Villa Senior Complex 

recently opened in Redvers.  The member for Weyburn was 

there as the government representative and I must say he did a 

fine job.  Unfortunately that member will not get many more 

opportunities to open such facilities.  As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP government has put a moratorium on such 

capital projects.  I guess you could say that they have been 

eliminated by this NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, are the pioneers of this province not to get any 

older for the next four years -- for the next four years -- until 

the people of Saskatchewan again have an opportunity to 

replace the government in this province? 

 

Another capital project which is currently under way in our 

constituency, but which would not have proceeded under the 

current administration is the construction of a new hospital in 

Oxbow.  This facility replaces an older unit which was not 

capable of handling the long-term care needs of our 

community's seniors. 

 

The new facility is an integrated facility providing both acute 

care and long-term care for levels 3 and 4 patients.  I look 

forward to the opportunity of joining the member from the 

government in opening this facility. 

 

Speaking of capital projects, Mr. Speaker, let me say a few 

words about the Rafferty-Alameda project.  Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley certainly has spoken on 

this issue.  Mr. Speaker, if you talk to most of the people in my 

constituency they would agree that this was an excellent 

project.  They applaud it. 

 

It may have gone over budget, Mr. Speaker, but I think once 

again the people of my constituency would agree 

that the cost overruns can be directly attributed to the member 

from Indian Head-Wolseley and his cohorts in their fight to 

prevent the development and completion of this project. 

 

This project has been involved in litigation almost from the 

start, which greatly added to the costs.  In not one of those 

court actions was the Government of Saskatchewan found to be 

wrong.  The Rafferty-Alameda boondoggle that the member 

spoke of is his responsibility.  The member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley can take full responsibility for those added 

costs. 

 

I have requested that the minister responsible for SaskPower 

and Souris Basin Development provide me with the total sum 

of money spent to fight these court cases.  I have asked this of 

the minister in February during a committee meeting for Crown 

corporations.  As of yet I have not received their reply. 

 

(1615) 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley was concerned about 

water or the lack of water in the reservoirs at the Alameda and 

Rafferty sites.  Mr. Speaker, Alameda had a water depth of 35 

feet last summer.  There was abnormally high run-offs last year 

and in this spring's melt.  There was no water saved from this 

spring's run-off.  I ask, Mr. Speaker, why? 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley talks of the structure 

not being sound.  The Alameda dam, Mr. Speaker, is an earthen 

structure.  Earth settles and compacts over time.  This was 

expected and was taken into account.  To use this as an 

example of a boondoggle is simply a red herring, a red herring 

from the reds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also very disturbed to hear that the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation is censoring their 

employees in word, thought, and deed.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  

Are the politicians trying to prevent crop insurance agents from 

providing their clients with the full range of information?  Mr. 

Speaker, are they saying that no government employee or 

person receiving income from the government can speak out 

against any government program or action? 

 

Under this NDP ruling, would it have been fair for the previous 

government to have fired all those SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union) employees who stormed the 

legislature and spoke out against Fair Share?  Why are you 

instructing and demanding that your agents push the market 

price option in crop insurance?  Why are the agents not simply 

allowed to explain the various options and the pros and cons of 

each? 

 

The choice of option should be left to the farmer.  He will 

make the choice that best suits his particular operation, not the 

choice that best suits the financial status of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation or of the Minister of Finance. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture and a group of supporters went to 

Ottawa last fall seeking money from the federal government.  

The Minister of Agriculture has just visited Edmonton and met 

with the Agriculture ministers from 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask, where is the money?  All we received from 

the Minister of Agriculture was a bill for his expensive trips, 

but no money.  The minister speaks of the need for the federal 

government to meet its responsibilities in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers across Saskatchewan in the last two 

weeks received a payment from the federal government for the 

FSAM-2 (farm support adjustment measures) program.  All we 

have received from this Minister of Agriculture and the 

Minister of Rural Development is increased premiums in crop 

insurance and GRIP and decreased coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a recent trip to Nipawin I had an opportunity 

to discuss with farmers in that area their concerns about the '92 

GRIP program.  Their concerns, Mr. Speaker, were no different 

than those of the farmers in southern Saskatchewan.  They 

were concerned about decreased coverage in cases of crop 

failure, drought, disease, or frost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers across Saskatchewan need to be given a 

choice between GRIP 1991 and GRIP 1992.  If the GRIP 1992 

is such a great program, farmers across Saskatchewan will 

choose it.  If however that is not the case, farmers will choose 

GRIP 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural producers of Saskatchewan must 

be allowed to make that choice for themselves and not be 

dictated to by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our farmers are having a tough enough time with 

it as it is.  On top of the increased premiums for GRIP, they 

now must contend with the elimination of their fuel tax 

exemption.  They must now contend with the fact that they do 

not have a tank for purple gas.  Will the government be 

providing funds to the farmers if they do not have a separate 

tank for clear fuel and purple?  Not likely, Mr. Speaker.  

Because once elected they have forgotten about the farm family 

strife. 

 

The member from Regina Albert North spoke of farmers taking 

holidays in Hawaii.  I would like to tell the member that very 

few farmers in my constituency take holidays, let alone 

holidays in Hawaii.  And, Mr. Speaker, while they're not gone 

on holidays they also do not spend the majority of their time in 

the local bar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan do not have the 

money to take holidays or to sit in the bar.  And that is why, 

Mr. Speaker, why rural hotels are having such a difficult time.  

People in rural Saskatchewan no longer have the funds 

necessary to be able to frequent their local watering hole. 

 

One of the other issues that came up when I was visiting in 

Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, was the FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) program.  Farmers there were very 

concerned that this program remain in place. 

 

Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association presented a news 

release, and it talks about the FeedGAP program and its $13 a 

tonne that the farmers were receiving from 

this program.  And I would like to quote from Brian Perkins, 

president of the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association: 

 

 "FeedGAP served as an offset to the Western Grain 

Transportation Act.  It stimulated the feeding industry, which 

in turn strengthened the demand to keep cattle in the province 

to be fed.  A removal of FeedGAP and the introduction of 

interest on the livestock cash advance will cost a producer 

feeding a 600 pound calf to finish $30 per (a) head." 

 

Mr. Speaker, that $30 represents the total profit, the total return 

to most producers in this province.  Without that $30, without 

the FeedGAP program, there will not be cattle, there will not be 

hogs fed in this province. 

 

One producer last week, after the budget came out, told me that 

he had plans for a major expansion of his hog operation, and 

he's now cancelling it.  He would have employed seven people 

there, Mr. Speaker, and those jobs are gone; they will never be 

there.  That was one producer, Mr. Speaker, and there are many 

more producers across this province which were in similar 

situations.  The hog operations will not proceed, the cattle 

operations will not proceed, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, they will 

slowly decrease. 

 

Packing plants in Manitoba, when Manitoba took their 

FeedGAP program out, ceased to exist.  They no longer have a 

packing industry in Manitoba because they no longer have a 

feeding industry in Manitoba.  The animals that would 

normally have been fed in Manitoba, go some place else.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, the animals which would be fed in Saskatchewan 

will now go to Alberta or they will go across the line and go to 

Nebraska or Colorado to be fed. 

 

So rather than using Saskatchewan grain, providing jobs for 

Saskatchewan people, those animals will now be eating grain 

from Alberta or from the U.S. (United States) and providing 

jobs in those jurisdictions.  And, Mr. Speaker, we lose across 

the board.  We lose the income on which would be taxed for 

the corporations doing it or the farmers, and we lose the taxes 

which would have been collected on the wages. 

 

Another quote from Brian Perkins, that these changes would 

mean that Saskatchewan producers would be $4.09 less 

competitive per head than producers in other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are too intent on fighting the deficit that 

they have continued to bloat since they became in office.  The 

Finance minister is too worried about his reputation for 

presenting balanced budgets to worry about the hurt of 

Saskatchewan people.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP have imposed the 

greatest tax grab in the history of this province on the people of 

Saskatchewan.  They have hacked and slashed at spending and 

increased taxes across the board. 

 

In the budget you have made some changes related to border 

communities.  You are allowing legal gambling in hotels along 

the U.S. border.  And this is good.  Something 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

needs to be done to assist those businesses.  However what you 

gave with one hand, you took away twice as much with the 

other. 

 

Gambling is only one of the reasons why Saskatchewan people 

travel south across the U.S. border.  They also travel south for 

cheaper liquor, cheaper cigarettes, and cheaper gasoline.  While 

taxes were not increased on liquor, you have increased the 

price of draft beer which is sold only in hotels.  So while hotels 

may get customers who are interested in gambling, you are 

helping to drive away the customers who would like a glass of 

draft now and then. 

 

You are also forcing more people across the border by 

increasing the taxes on tobacco and gasoline, and an increase in 

the sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent.  When people go across the 

border they don't just pick up a case of beer, they also fill their 

cars with cheaper gasoline, which in some cases is produced 

and refined in Saskatchewan. 

 

So while you are helping a little bit along the border, in the 

overall scheme of things, you have increased the rate at which 

Saskatchewan people head south for cheaper goods -- cheaper 

goods to avoid paying provincial taxes, the net result of which 

is that even less money for provincial coffers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that the minister reconsider the imposition 

of increased tobacco and gasoline taxes along the border.  I 

also ask that he take a look at the amount of liquor tax charged 

at the border. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to raise the taxes collected at customs will do 

little to solve the problem.  All that increasing taxation at ports 

of entry will do is encourage more smuggling or encourage 

Saskatchewan residents to use ports of entry in Manitoba or 

Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of coming up with an economic agenda to 

create wealth and create jobs, the NDP have left it solely in the 

hands of the business sector.  They claim to have created 2,000 

jobs in Saskatchewan with this budget.  Yet, Mr. Speaker, they 

will not say where.  I assume that these jobs are probably all of 

their patronage appointments in the civil service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government hollered wolf many times 

while in opposition.  They hollered that the government was 

creating an unsupportable deficit, but that they were also 

underfunding all programs.  What did we get in this budget?  

We got a $517 million deficit -- $517 million more onto the 

debt.  But the government also increased the operating side of 

government by a hundred million dollars.  Since they are 

increasing funding, why are they cutting important programs? 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the government justify funding abortions 

while no longer providing support for diabetics?  The Charter 

of Rights calls for medical procedures to be available and 

accessible.  It doesn't say who pays. 

 

What is in this budget, Mr. Speaker?  Nothing good.  Only 

broken promises, broken dreams, and the NDP's 

specialty, broken contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will prove to be disastrous for the 

people of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it is my sincere hope 

that enough people stay in this province to ensure that this NDP 

government is defeated in four years time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak in the budget 

debate.  As the representative of Redberry constituency, I 

would just like to compliment the Minister of Finance and the 

cabinet for a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Well done, considering the mess that was left by 

the Tories.  The budget of last week was of course the main 

point of discussion in the legislature as well as on coffee row 

this week. 

 

Our government is undertaking a horrendous task, and that task 

is to deal with a provincial debt of some 14 billion.  On 

occasion we hear the comment that we should refrain from 

criticizing the former government for what they did to this 

province over the last 10 years. 

 

Well I for one would like nothing better than to forget all about 

the devastation.  However, we have over $2 million a day each 

and every day, 365 days of the year, of interest before we can 

put $1 into the programs for the people.  It is a tough budget. 

Just let's not forget who put us in this position. 

 

Who was really tough on the people of this province?  I 

received some calls of concern on the budget.  I would just like 

to thank those people for their understanding because in most 

cases people would say, we know you were left a mess and it 

has to be dealt with. 

 

Just as a point of interest, the increased sales tax and the surtax 

on income tax combined will create $125 million in revenue.  

The harmonized PST would have grabbed 440 million from 

Saskatchewan, nearly three and a half times as much of a drain 

on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The recent rains have stimulated new optimism in the farming 

community.  Saskatchewan is once again coming to life, not 

only cultivated land being worked and pastures greening up, 

but alive with a sense of community, a sense of community that 

has awakened with the new government. 

 

Saskatchewan has in its history three times had a government 

faced with a massive debt to control.  Twice it has managed to 

pull things together.  The first time was when the T.C. Douglas 

and his government took over in 1944.  The second time 

Saskatchewan was rescued in 1971 by Allan Blakeney.  Now 

for the third time, Roy Romanow and his government have 

been asked . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member should be referring to 

another member by his constituency and not by his 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

name. 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Now for the third time, the minister from 

Riversdale and his government have been asked to clean up the 

mess.  It will take some time, but with responsible government 

to provide proper management decisions, once again 

Saskatchewan will become a good place to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- This week I also heard from an ambitious group of 

individuals in the Meota area that are interested in a 

community-based business.  Dozens of new, small, specialized 

businesses are showing an interest in starting up in the 

improved climate for small business in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the main reasons for optimism is the return to 

responsible government.  Responsible government in today's 

situation means short-term pain for long-term gain.  That's why 

some taxes increases and some cuts in programs are necessary, 

if hard to take. 

 

Some of the changes that I believe are good for Saskatchewan 

and its people are: 40 government boards and commissions that 

have been eliminated, corporation capital tax levied on 

financial institution rises to three and a quarter from 3 per cent 

and the capital surcharge on large resource companies, up to 3 

per cent from 2 per cent.  Saskatchewan saving bonds will be 

on sale in June.  Video lotteries will be set up in bars and 

lounges. 

 

Child hunger program funding is up 35 per cent; child tax 

reduction increase by 25 per cent.  Child care centre grant are 

up 21 per cent.  Home care funding is up 20 per cent to $38 

million.  This is a very important step in the wellness program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Four million dollars will go to northern 

communities.  Northern food allowances have doubled to $50 

per month.  How much more we could do, or to quote the 

former government: how much more we could be if we didn't 

have to pay that $760 million in deficit interest each and every 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to address the sad financial state 

that the Tories left the Crown Investments Corporation in.  As 

the members of this House are well aware, the CIC is the 

holding company for Saskatchewan Crown corporations.  Its 

purpose is to give direction and overall guidance to our 

Crowns. 

 

But nine and a half years of PC waste, mismanagement, and 

senseless privatization has left our Crown corporations sector 

in devastation.  As a result, the CIC has been left with an 

accumulated deficit of $584 million.  Blind ideology and utter 

incompetence have driven our once proud public sector into the 

ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the origins of the CIC's accumulated deficit can 

be traced back to privatization initiatives such as the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan and Cameco.  Blame can also be 

placed on accumulated operating 

losses in poor investments such as NewGrade Energy Inc. and 

GigaText. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we must not forget how the Tories 

worked to undermine the profitability of our Crowns.  Utility 

rates charged by Saskatchewan Power were frozen when there 

was a great need for an increase.  The plans of Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance for expansion into life insurance were 

stopped.  SaskTel's monopoly on the ownership of telephones 

was abolished.  And before the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan was privatized, the Tories forced the corporation 

to stay in the stifling market organization Canpotex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the privatization, investment decisions, and the 

mismanagement of Saskatchewan's Crowns pursued by the PC 

Party either demonstrate an ineptitude thus far not seen or a 

malicious attempt to cripple the province's public sector for the 

sake of Conservative ideology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former PC government milked the CIC in 

order to make its deficits look worse than they actually were, if 

you can believe that.  The payment of these dividends have 

stripped the corporation of its retained earnings, in effect 

leaving no cushion for the CIC to absorb the impact of future 

losses, never mind the possibility of future dividend payments. 

 

Privatization of profitable Crowns have done much to eliminate 

the transfers of dividends to the CIC.  This, the poor investment 

decisions and the mismanagement of the public sector, have 

left the people of Saskatchewan a debt-financed asset portfolio 

that currently generates little or no income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CIC lost over 600 million in 1991 alone.  This 

was partly due to the $160 million loss on Cameco shares, a 

$64 million write down on the Bi-Provincial upgrader, and a 

$50 million grant to the Meadow Lake pulp mill. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we identified 875 million in 

non-recoverable debt.  This debt can be attributed to the PCs' 

privatization loss, dividends paid to the province, SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) losses, 

STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) losses, 

GigaText losses, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will restore the financial health of the 

CIC.  We will cancel the 584 million of equity and advances 

currently owed by the CIC, the Consolidated Fund, in order to 

allow the corporation to restore its ability to provide future 

dividends to the province. 

 

We will convert the $875 million of non-recoverable debt into 

equity advances.  These necessary measures will add 93 

million to the '92-93 deficit.  Mr. Speaker, the Consolidated 

Fund will provide the CIC with an annual net subsidy to offset 

the CIC's interest costs and losses from investment and Crown 

corporations in excess of dividends received from the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we will implement 

recommendations from the Gass Commission -- 

recommendations to provide a high level of public 

accountability.  Audited financial statements of the CIC 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

will be presented to the Assembly for scrutiny each and every 

year.  We will design and implement long-term strategy and 

capital plans for the Crown corporation sector.  Mr. Speaker, 

rest assured that this New Democratic government will restore 

the province's public sector to its previous proud stature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have dealt mainly with the CIC, a very 

important issue.  I could say much, much more on this subject.  

However, with this I close my remarks.  Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to rise and support the budget 

today.  This budget is fiscally responsible, accountable, fair, 

and yes, Mr. Speaker, compassionate.  Because things could 

have been a great deal worse than it is because the budget 

genuinely reflects on people's ability to pay. 

 

I believe that we have taken a rattlesnake, Mr. Speaker, by the 

tail and we've managed to start a long way down the road of 

taming it.  It's not going to be easy, and we never thought it 

would be.  But we have faced reality and we've got on with 

doing what has to be done.  And that's more than I can say for 

the Tories who got us into this mess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, I also believe we still have a lot of ground to 

cover.  A lot of issues need to be addressed and a lot of 

explanation has to be offered to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Oh we need not worry about the explanation we have to offer 

to the people of Saskatchewan about what we are doing, 

because I feel that we are doing the very best that we can, faced 

with the troublesome odds, the odds left to us by the terrible 

Tories -- the Tory destroyers. 

 

We have explanations to make to the people of Saskatchewan 

to let them know loudly and clearly why we are in the financial 

mess we are in, and why we are facing some of the desperate 

times that we are facing.  We have a massive deficit, health 

care concerns, social service concerns.  And that's the truth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1645) 

 

And that also reminds me of a quote from the well-known 

Emily Dickinson.  And I quote, Mr. Speaker: Truth is a rare 

thing, and it is delightful to tell it.  I would almost agree with 

her, Mr. Speaker. Truth is indeed a rare thing, and in most 

cases it is delightful to tell it.  But in others, such as with the 

deficit facing us, the truth is painful.  But it is the unadulterated 

truth -- the former government's mismanagement, fabrications, 

and bad deals.  And the list goes on, and I want to make that 

point over and over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are in the mess we are in because the members sitting over 

there in opposition, where they belong, Mr. Speaker.  And it's 

only a great pity that they weren't sent to opposition sooner 

than October 21.  The Tories tried to scuttle the ship of 

Saskatchewan, and they nearly succeeded. 

Ideally, if the Tories had any sense at all, they would have 

taken a page out of the book of the ancient philosopher Zeno 

who said: We have two ears but only one mouth so that we 

may listen more and talk less.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the Tories 

indeed have two ears to hear, but the trouble is they had too 

many mouths, and all of them were speaking at once and 

speaking more and listening less to the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that we have the answers, and 

those answers lie in the people of this fine province.  I'm going 

to largely focus my remarks on the agriculture area, Mr. 

Speaker, because at heart, Ron Harper, farmer from Pelly, 

farming is my blood and is in my heart and my soul.  I believe 

in what we, our farmers, have to offer this province.  I believe 

that we have faced tough times and we'll face tough times in 

the future, but I also believe that together, collectively, we can 

make a difference. 

 

We will turn the farm crisis around, Mr. Speaker.  We make 

living by what we get, Mr. Speaker, but we make life by what 

we give.  We make life of others by what we give as well.  We 

need to remember this, Mr. Speaker, when we are forming 

programs that are designed for our farm communities.  I 

believe that way because I know from personal experience that 

farmers are doers. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, farmers are the backbone of our 

economy.  They know that they have the answers to what is 

facing them.  After all, who better knows a problem than those 

who face it daily?  They know what they need to make it in this 

day and age, in the '90s. 

 

So make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, the '90s are challenging.  

The '90s have meant changes far beyond proportion than we 

have faced before.  The '90s signify sudden fluctuations in 

markets we once thought we could count on.  The '90s mean 

uncertain future when we go out to make decisions about 

farming the land.  These decisions are critical to the well-being 

of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- They are critical to the well-being of our 

farmers, of their families, about to head into another crop year.  

As I stand here, Mr. Speaker, seeding has started in my 

constituency and many parts of the province.  Soil is being 

turned over, prospects are being assessed, decisions about farm 

gate management is being made for another year. 

 

But I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that there is a light 

at the end of the tunnel.  There is hope, and the hope lies in 

several directions.  Hope lies in the fact that there are several 

important incentives being undertaken in agriculture to 

stimulate the economic growth -- new jobs, new wealth 

through the development and application of new technology, 

new markets, new products, and increased value added activity. 

 

Our incentives include $14.8 million for research and 

development and new industrial opportunities including 

strategic research programs at the University of Saskatchewan 

and Crop Development Centre at the university.  Support for 

other research organizations such 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

as Ag-West Biotech, and funding for individual research 

development and demonstration projects; 1.6 million in 

continued support for ethanol development at Lanigan and 

Kerrobert; $848,000 in support of the Prairie Agricultural 

Machinery Institute at Humboldt; $1.795 million in continued 

funding for livestock, dairy, horticulture, crop development 

activity that will create new jobs and new job opportunities and 

other spin-offs for our farmers and our rural communities; 

$320,000 in continued funding for the federal government farm 

management incentives. 

 

And there is more good news in this budget, Mr. Speaker, that 

perhaps would go unnoticed if we didn't make an effort to 

speak out on what we have achieved that is positive. 

 

Our good news includes maintenance of the laboratory 

services; no reduction to support of veterinarian and dairy 

laboratories in Regina and the Veterinary College in 

Saskatoon; $56,000 in the establishment of a departmental 

plant diagnostic laboratory in Regina as a year-round 

operation; $1.578 million in the maintenance of brand 

licensing, registration, livestock manifest, livestock protection, 

and livestock inspection programs; $292,000 in continued 

support for the 4-H; $250,000 in increased funding for the 

Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation. These 

contributions will be matched by the council and matched 

again by the CIDA (Canadian International Development 

Agency).  And that means a quarter of a million dollars 

contribution by the province will generate $1 million of 

international agricultural aid. 

 

Hope lies too with the real-life, full-time farmer who is out 

there in the field right now cursing at the unpredicted elements, 

praying for moisture and begging the powers to be to do 

something about the prices of grain and oilseed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard the people.  We have heard their 

calls for fairness.  We have brought in a budget that will 

address their concerns both in the short- and the long-term.  We 

have heard the people.  We have heard their dismay over the 

deficit the Tories saddled us with, have heard their demands to 

do something, have heard and have listened because after all 

that is what this legislature is all about -- the people -- people 

like you and I who farm the land and people like you and I who 

work making a living the best way we know how. 

 

This legislature, Mr. Speaker, is the heart of this province 

where the voice of the people is heard, where the voice of the 

people -- farmers, teachers, Indians, children, our pioneers -- 

are listened to, are counted on because they lived in the 

day-to-day world dealing with the hard realities. 

 

Dealing with life's hard realities also means facing diversity 

and adversity, blending them together to create a partnership.  

For that is what we want, Mr. Speaker.  We want a partnership 

with the people of this province -- a partnership with the NDP 

government and the people working together to right the 

financial mess left to us by the Tories; an NDP government and 

the people working together to make sense out of the deceptive 

numbers the Tories threw at us in the dying days of their 

regime.  The 

people have the Tories' number, and that's quite obvious that 

their number is insignificant judging by the size of the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the point, Mr. Speaker, is the people didn't truly have a 

partnership arrangement with the previous government.  That's 

what we are here for.  We are here to begin to forge . . . or no, 

Mr. Speaker, to revive the spirit of co-operation that once 

flourished here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We are here to begin to forge new bonds with people, bonds 

that will allow us to work together as a team.  After all, that's 

what a partnership is really all about, Mr. Speaker, a team of 

each of its members helping the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are here to rebuild Saskatchewan, and do it 

together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I know right now, Mr. Speaker, that things 

look rather grim.  GRIP is a problem, and I wouldn't say 

otherwise.  The 1991 GRIP program, Mr. Speaker, was a bad 

program.  And now that we've been able to implement some 

changes within that program, the 1992 GRIP program is a lot 

better bad program. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the GRIP program never was and never 

should be considered as the answer.  And many of our farmers 

and many of the farmers that I've talked to in my constituency 

can remember very well ago, just a little better than a year ago 

now, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Mazankowski, our then federal 

minister of Agriculture, went to the media and told our farmers: 

Mr. Farmer, if you don't join the GRIP program and do 

something to protect yourself, you won't qualify for a third line 

of defence. 

 

Well over a year has gone by, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers in 

Pelly constituency well remember that promise made by 

Mazankowski, our then federal minister of Agriculture, and 

that promise hasn't been kept.  The federal government hasn't 

kept their commitment to the third line of defence.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, we here in this province demand that they do keep 

that commitment. 

 

And while GRIP may represent some of the most significant 

agricultural program legislation that's been brought forth in the 

last 50 years, the design of the 1991 GRIP program 

unmistakably was a bad program, thanks to the Tories.  It had 

the potential of creating market distortions and major negative 

impacts on our economic efficiency.  Even the department of 

agriculture and economics at the University of Saskatchewan 

recognized that. 

 

In March we changed GRIP to address some of these problem 

concerns.  The program is now market responsive.  There has 

been other enhancements since March, including added 

coverage protection for drought prone areas, and the extension 

of the GRIP deadline until May 15, 1992. 
 

I do know that we've gone the extra mile to make the program 

as workable as we could.  But to be blunt, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government didn't give us a lot of manoeuvring room.  

In fact they've done nothing but 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

shuck and jibe us ever since this whole thing started. 

 

The federal government doesn't give two hoots about 

Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker.  If they did, they wouldn't 

have spent the last few months creating such anxiety and 

confusion that our farmers don't know if they can put this seed 

in the ground this year or not.  The federal government doesn't 

give two hoots about Saskatchewan farmers.  If they did, they 

would do something to live up to their commitment of a third 

line of defence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, does care about 

our farmers.  We are demanding the federal government live up 

to its promises and demanding that they do what is right.  But 

you know, Mr. Speaker, I wonder sometimes how much of 

what we and the people of Saskatchewan and Canada are 

saying to the Tories, provincially and federally, is really heard.  

I know they listen over there in opposition, Mr. Speaker, but I 

wonder . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, I do leave this 

chair until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


