




















































Hansard: May 08, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 249 

 May 8, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 

again my very great privilege to introduce to you and to the rest 

of the people assembled here today a group of students from 

McLurg High School in Wilkie. They number 18, Mr. Speaker. 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Lane Petterson; 

chaperons, Eve Hawkins and Darlene Jensen, and the bus 

driver, Joyce Swidrovich. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not too often I get the chance to welcome 

students from the far side of the province, so it's really a 

pleasure to welcome you here. They're in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask all the members assembled to help 

me give them a real good, warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly 28 grade 

4 students that are located in your gallery. They are here this 

morning from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in Regina 

Wascana Plains. With them also is their teacher, Betty-Ann 

Faber and chaperon, Gwen Sperlie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with them for pictures at 11 

o'clock on the steps and then to talk with them and answer any 

questions they may have in the members' dining room. I would 

ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in a warm 

welcome for the members of St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce a group of students to you and through you to this 

Assembly. These students are from St. Joseph's School in Swift 

Current. There are 26 of them here this morning. And I'd like to 

welcome them here together with their teachers. Their teachers 

are Terri Dobrowolski and Kelly Hammond, and their chaperon 

is Mr. Perez. 

 

And I'd like to have the Assembly join me in welcoming these 

students from St. Joseph's School in Swift Current. I will be 

meeting with them at 10:30 for pictures and I will be talking 

with them after that. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern, I want to introduce to 

the Assembly, 41 students from grade 8 and grade 9 from 

Osler, Saskatchewan. And I want to welcome them to the 

Assembly. Their teachers are Glen Osmond and Elaine Borden, 

and their chaperon is Peter Braun. 

 

I want to extend to them a very warm welcome and have 

the Assembly provide that welcome together with me. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to all members of the 

Assembly here today an out-of-province visitor. Miss Deborah 

Milville is a laboratory technologist from Edmonton, Alberta. 

She's seated in the west gallery. Deborah, as I know, is deeply 

involved with international development and environmental 

issues and she's seated today with her fiancé Brian Gibbon. 

Brian is a researcher here in Regina at the legislature for our 

caucus. 

 

And I'd ask them to stand and ask all members to give Deborah 

a warm welcome today, and to congratulate them on their 

betrothal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like 

to add my warm good wishes to those from Swift Current 

today. 

 

As most of you know, my brother did represent the Swift 

Current constituency as a member of this Legislative Assembly 

in the 1970s, and I do believe that this was one of the finest 

cities that anyone in the country could have grown up in. I'm 

very, very pleased to see them here today. 

 

And not only was I born and raised there, but Diana 

Melinkovic was born and raised there, Sandra Mitchell spent 

her high school years there, and some extraordinary people, 

some of the finest people in the nation, poets and others. So it's 

just great to be able to have them in our Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Effect of Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning my question is to the Minister of Finance. Mr. 

Minister, one of the first things that you did upon becoming 

Minister of Finance was force your officials to come up with a 

study that said harmonization would have cost 7,000 jobs to 

this province and lost millions of dollars in revenue to the 

provincial government even though you knew that the 

downturn in the Canadian economy on consumer spending was 

7 per cent, the same as it was in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, seeing as you saw fit to use the government for 

such political purposes, have you also seen fit to study the 

effects of the massive tax grab that you perpetuated upon 

Saskatchewan people yesterday, and what you are imposing on 

the people? Would you now, sir, agree that that was a massive 

tax grab yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the biggest concern that faces Saskatchewan people 

today is the huge amount of debt accumulated in the last 10 

years which is going to strangle this economy. If the 

government ran the deficit, which was the deficit that the 

former government would have had to run with their policies 

and their tax regime, we would have had a deficit of $1.2 

billion. Mr. Speaker, with a deficit of $1.2 billion there would 

have been no economy because we would have not been able to 

finance that kind of a deficit. 

 

The tax measures in the budget that was presented here 

yesterday are progressive tax measures. They are by and large 

based on the ability to pay. Mr. Speaker, a family of four with a 

combined income of $40,000 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I will not accept the 

interruptions that are going on at this particular time. I ask 

members -- I don't think there was any interruptions when the 

member asked his question -- and I ask the members not to 

interrupt when a minister is answering or when someone is 

asking a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the 

tax measures that were introduced in this budget, the deficit 

reduction tax measures needed to deal with the deficit created 

by the members opposite, are based on ability to pay. A family 

of four with a combined income of $40,000 will have a 

monthly deduction of $18 a month. When all things are 

considered that is not a very significant impact. 

 

But those were necessary, Mr. Speaker, because we're here to 

manage. We're here to rebuild . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Mr. Minister, you were very quick off the mark 

to try and cover your political tracks with your study on 

harmonization. Sir, you must have known the negative impact 

that this tax grab would have on Saskatchewan people. 

 

The question I place to you is, table that study in the legislature 

of Saskatchewan so that the people of Saskatchewan can know 

that you are simply not covering up your political tracks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

business community has told this government that deficits, as 

members opposite know, are nothing more than deferred taxes. 

What we have done by bringing this deficit under control and 

starting to reduce the deficit each and every year from here on 

in, is restore confidence in the investor community and the 

business community because we have got that under control, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What the members opposite, 

including the former premier, never told the public of 

Saskatchewan is that the harmonized PST (provincial sales tax) 

with the GST (goods and services tax) would have taken $440 

million out of the consumers' pocket but only would have 

provided a net revenue of $180 million to the treasury. That 

would have been damaging to the economy because that was 

not progressive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

same minister. Mr. Minister, you told the people of 

Saskatchewan that 7 cents on a hamburger would cost 7,000 

jobs and reduce government revenue. Mr. Speaker, if the 

minister has been telling the truth to Saskatchewan people, then 

it's clear that 8 per cent on everything else is going to cost 10 

times as much and do 10 times as much damage. 

 

Mr. Minister, to follow the logic that you've put before this 

Assembly -- and I ask the question to you, sir -- if your earlier 

study was right, then why not eliminate the 8 per cent tax on 

everything else, create hundreds of thousands of jobs and 

balance the budget? Why don't you follow your own advice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, that kind of logic and 

mathematics is exactly the reason why we have a $15 billion 

debt from the Tories on that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not very difficult to figure out what 

the members opposite did when they were in the government to 

bring us to that situation. Mr. Minister, the tax that you had 

proposed, which was the harmonized PST, was a regressive 

tax. It was destroying the restaurant industry. It was destroying 

the service industry. It was destroying people involved in the 

selling of books. It was destroying jobs. The tax measures 

which we have in this budget are a 1 per cent reduction in the 

income corporate tax for small business. There is a phasing out 

of the E&H (education and health) tax on consumables and 

manufacturing and processing. That will guarantee jobs in 

Saskatchewan. We'll make those industries competitive with 

our neighbours around us and in fact create jobs for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the same minister. Mr. Minister, it seems you will say to people 

whatever seems to satisfy your political whimsy. The member 

from Riversdale, the Premier of this province, and many 

members in your caucus solemnly promised people six months 

ago there would be no new taxes for at least four years under a 

New Democratic Party government. We're now the most taxed 

province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that you can produce studies that you 

could table in this legislature that will show the harm that these 

taxes are doing to Saskatchewan people. Mr. Minister, a 10 per 

cent tax grab on personal income tax takes away the ability of 

anybody in this province to buy 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

books or hamburgers or clothing or anything else. Sir, table 

those studies for this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that in 

view of what the members opposite did to this province in the 

last 10 years and in view of how they misled the public with 

the information that they provided about the deficit -- $265 

million, ended to be $960 million -- in view of all that, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has been faced with a situation where 

we've had to take some very serious measures to begin to get 

that under control. 

 

If we didn't do what we're doing today, or if the members 

opposite had been re-elected, in the next four years we would 

have interest payments each and every year of $1 billion a year, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is unrealistic and the member from 

Thunder Creek knows that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the same minister. Mr. Minister, if you didn't do a study, if you 

didn't do your job as Finance minister, Mr. Minister, then you 

have been misleading the Saskatchewan people on the 

differences in taxes. Show us this open government that you 

talk about all the time. Show us the tables, the comparisons that 

show us how many jobs will be lost. You said yourself last 

night there would be jobs lost. How many small businesses will 

go bankrupt? How many families will leave this province and 

not spend their money here? 

 

Mr. Minister, if you cannot do that, then it's simply a litany of 

broken promises from a short six months ago. Mr. Minister, 

will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, during the last 

election campaign we said to the people of Saskatchewan, and 

we put it in print and distributed it to every household in this 

province, a commitment. The commitment we made was that 

we would make things first things first, a common sense 

financial management; we would get the financial affairs of 

this province under control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We would open the books. We 

would bring about the kind of accounting practices that would 

make government accountable for every single cent that 

government spent of taxpayers' dollars. All of this is being 

accomplished, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Estevan talks about balanced budgets that 

the former government would have brought about. What a joke 

-- what a joke. That is the member who was the premier, Mr. 

Speaker, who took this province from a debt accumulation of 

$3.5 billion, all self-liquidating, and left our children and our 

grandchildren with a burden of $15 billion of debt which we 

now have to accommodate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, your Minister of Finance has shown 

his ineptitude in designing this budget this morning. On top of 

that, Mr. Premier, yesterday in the budget a quick calculation 

says that on a pack of cigarettes in the cafeteria in this 

Legislative Building there is 82 cents in tax. Mr. Premier, if the 

official opposition had knowledge of that last week, which they 

did, how many other people in this province also had 

knowledge of that? 

 

Your Premier has been inept in designing this budget, he has 

been inept in that he has leaked the results of it, and I say, Mr. 

Premier, that people have taken advantage of that. Mr. Premier, 

you have a duty to the legislature in Saskatchewan today and 

ask for that minister's resignation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me make 

something to the members opposite very clear. We're not here 

to play political games. We're here, Mr. Speaker -- and the 

expectations of the people who elected us are that we are here 

-- to manage. We are here to rebuild this province. We are here 

to guarantee a future for our children. We don't have the right 

to burden them and their children with the kind of financial 

mess which those members created and we inherited because of 

what they did. 

 

We will attempt to deliver on that commitment, Mr. Speaker, 

because the role of governments is not only to look after today, 

but to guarantee a future for future generations, and that's what 

we intend to do, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancellation of Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- My question is to the Minister of Community 

Services, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, last December, on 

December 9, 1991, you said in this House: the pension plan 

will remain in Kindersley. Yesterday I spoke to all of the 

employees at the pension plan who had just gotten their pink 

slips from the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 

These people, Madam Minister, were the same people you 

assured just five short months ago that their future was secure. 

Considering yesterday you scrapped the entire program, don't 

you think these previous remarks are utter hypocrisy, Madam 

Minister? How can you turn your backs and tell these people 

you didn't mean what you said? How can you tell them they no 

longer have their jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, this province has been left a 

legacy of debt that's going to take a long time for everybody in 

Saskatchewan to work through. There is no doubt that 

scrapping the pension plan will have an impact on many 

people, especially the workers in the pension plan. 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Order. Will members please not interrupt. 

Well if you wanted question period, fine, but I'm not going to 

allow the continuous interrupting. That applies to both sides. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- When we began the budget preparations 

for this new budget we looked at every program, and we 

realized that some things were going to have to go. There is an 

$80 million liability attached to the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan. It doesn't make any sense if we're going to scrap the plan 

to leave the workers in Kindersley. 

 

Had we been able to keep that plan, of course we would have 

left that corporation with its headquarters in Kindersley, but 

unfortunately like many things we've had to make tough 

decisions, and this is one of the tough decisions that we have to 

make today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- When we speak about underfunded pensions, 

does that mean, Mr. Premier, today, that you will cut your own, 

your own personal pension, which is also underfunded to the 

tune of $1 million. Is that what that means today, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite would look at the budget speech and the budget 

documents, they will find that this government has made a 

commitment to establish a commission to review the unfunded 

liability and the governance of pensions in this province which 

is going to recommend to the government how we deal with 

that problem. 

 

That does not in any way excuse the fact that those members 

opposite developed in haste a pension plan which was poorly 

targeted, poorly funded, and would have added within the next 

three years another $80 million to the unfunded liability of the 

pension plans. Under the fiscal circumstances the province 

faces today, the people of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan cannot afford it. And as difficult as it was, we 

have had to eliminate that program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier sits there 

with a $1 million unfunded pension of his own -- his own 

personal pension -- and he talks about people that shouldn't 

have pensions. I find that unbelievable. 

 

The pension plan -- the Saskatchewan Pension Plan -- was 

targeted to home-makers, farmers, low income people, and 

self-employed people who didn't have a pension in this 

province. Those are the people that that program was directed 

to, Mr. Premier. 

 

I ask you today, will you cut your own personal pension, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite needs to do a little more work in his research. He will 

find, if he did that, that the people who most need pensions 

were not able to afford even that pension plan because of the 

way it was targeted. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- By and large, people who are in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, because of the way the members 

designed it opposite -- opposite members designed it when they 

were on this side of the House -- was targeted for people who 

were generally well off and could afford to make the 

contribution. And those people who did not have pensions were 

not able to have it. 
 

But putting that aside, Mr. Speaker, this province under the 

fiscal circumstances we face cannot afford another $80 million 

liability. The decision has to be made. 
 

The members can't have it both ways. They can't say, don't 

increase taxes, don't cut programs, and balance the deficit, 

which is the approach that they used. And that's why we have a 

$15 billion debt. 
 

Gass Commission Recommendations on Taxation 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker. My question is 

directed to the Premier. I'm very supportive of the work done 

by the . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order. I will decide who is going to be asking 

the questions in this House and I've had about enough from 

some of those members on this side. 
 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Greystone . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . One more remark from you, sir, and 

I'll ask for an apology. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

supportive of the work that's been done by the Gass 

Commission, Mr. Premier, and your government has indeed 

expressed its satisfaction with the Gass Commission report as 

well. 
 

And I'd like to bring to your attention the warning issued in that 

report, which cautions your government that, and I quote, 

Saskatchewan's "ability to raise . . . revenues through additional 

taxation is negligible." 
 

I ask the Premier why his cabinet would consider increasing 

taxes when you were warned that it would generate little 

revenue and actually hurt our economy. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member opposite I want to say this: that the measures that were 

taken in this budget on the expenditure side, which were 

significant, $344 million, the measures that were taken on the 

revenue side, Mr. Speaker -- all of that was done in a balanced 

way so that the impact on individual people could be 

minimized. Everybody shares -- individuals share, families 

share, the corporations share, business shares. It is equitably 

distributed as any progressive tax system has to be. It is there to 

solve the problem. Surely the member from Greystone would 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

not suggest that continuing the deficits that we have had in the 

past was going to be good for the economy. If that's what the 

member suggests, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to her that she'd better 

rethink the position that she is taking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can assure the 

member that I do not agree with running a deficit in this 

province. And given your obvious disregard for the advice of 

the Gass Commission and given your government's total 

disregard for the recommendations of the Billinton panel and 

given your government's unwillingness to even consult with 

health care professionals before de-insuring various health care 

services, what assurances are you going to offer the people of 

this province -- the taxpayers of this province, who pay for all 

of these reports of all of these commissions -- that their 

recommendations are even going to be followed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I can give full 

assurance to the member from Greystone that the 

recommendations of the commissions which this government 

has put together are being followed. The member is quite 

welcome to look at the commitments and the implementation 

that's already taken place on the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission, the details of which will soon be announced by 

the Associate Minister of Finance. And we are acting on 

practically all of the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission, and they will be implemented. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite keeps talking about 

the need to get the deficit under control. I say to the member 

opposite: tell this House and tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

which programs would you have cut if you had been on this 

side of the House and had to bring the expenditures under 

control? Which programs would you have cut to save $344 

million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

for the Premier. Since it seems like the only advice that you 

take . . . and I'd be more than willing to meet with you any 

time, any place, anywhere, in order to be able to talk about 

economic strategies in this province. 

 

I want you to tell the people of this province what the NDP 

plan is for any economic strategy to create jobs and economic 

investment in this province, since it seems the only people you 

ever listen to are members of the New Democratic Party. 

There's absolutely no evidence in this budget that you have 

economic plans for this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, unlike the approach 

taken by the former government, this government is involving 

the whole Saskatchewan community in economic development 

and the development of the strategy for economic development. 

We are involving labour, we're involving the business 

community, we're involving every sector of the Saskatchewan 

society in that planning. 

 

We have had meetings with the business community. The 

result of that meeting is some initiatives which we're taking in 

this budget. The reduction of the small-business corporate 

income tax by 1 per cent -- small business creates 70 per cent 

of the jobs in this province, and we hope that this will be of 

some incentive to create even more. 

 

The elimination of the education and health tax on processing 

and manufacturing will help make those sectors of our industry 

competitive with our neighbours on the east and on the west 

and on the south. Those are very significant measures in 

economic development, I say to the member opposite, and will 

make a contribution to the creation of jobs and economic 

development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister 

of Finance. Sir, a decrease of 1 per cent to the business 

community will add up to absolutely zip when you consider the 

off-loading that your government has done to municipal 

governments, which are going to increase property taxes and 

taxes to businesses. 

 

And I am going to remind the Premier and yourself of 

December 23, '91, when the Premier is quoted as stating: I am 

committed to the idea that taxpayers do not want to pay more 

taxes. He went on to say, and I quote: the big challenge will be 

whether we have the imagination and the talent pool to come 

up with newer ways of doing things. 

 

In this budget . . . is this budget, this tax attack on the people of 

Saskatchewan, an admission that you simply don't have the 

imagination or the talent to come up with any alternatives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Greystone, who seems to have all of the answers on economic 

development, seems to have conveniently forgotten one, very 

fundamental fact about the economy: that as you increase the 

deficit of the province of Saskatchewan, it reduces the 

confidence of investors and business in investing in 

Saskatchewan. That is the number one rule. 

 

We're dealing with that problem in this budget. We have 

reduced the deficit from what it might have been of $1.2 billion 

to $517 million -- a very major reduction. That will help restore 

confidence in investment and the business community and 

create economic development. 

 

I go back to the member opposite. Be honest with your 

constituents and be honest with Saskatchewan. Tell us where 

you would cut $344 million in health care or in education or 

whatever program you have in mind. Tell us where you would 

cut. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tax and Utility Rate Increases 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, we heard this morning . . . and I'm sure 

that you've talked to constituents, and we have all 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

across the province of Saskatchewan. And they quoted you 

time and time again, Mr. Premier, and you said 4.5 billion is 

enough, no new taxes; the province should spend more on 

health, education, poverty, and farmers, unquote. 

 

Do you know what they're saying, Mr. Premier? They're saying 

you didn't tell the truth. You betrayed them. It's been 

misleading. Because yesterday it was all new taxes -- new taxes 

on income, taxes on sales, taxes for farmers, utilities up 30 per 

cent. Mr. Premier, the people across the province of 

Saskatchewan have said that you have betrayed the trust at 

election time, and you betrayed it yesterday. 

 

Mr. Premier, the question to you is simply this: given the fact 

that people are saying you betrayed, you misled, your 

government is a fraud, will you now admit, Mr. Premier, that 

you had no idea and you have no idea how to govern the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it took all that the 

member could muster to keep a straight face in asking that 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- After nine and one-half years, talking 

about fiscal frauds; after going to New York city and saying in 

1983, quote: Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you 

can afford to mismanage it and still break even. Well, even that 

promise he couldn't manage to keep. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- After totally misportraying what we 

campaigned on. There it is, Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan 

Way. "First Things First -- Common Sense Financial 

Management. (We said) Open the books . . . comprehensive 

review of all PC privatizations . . . (And we said this, first 

things first) A balanced budget in our first term of office (is 

what we said)." 

 

And the member conveniently ignores all of that. Look, Mr. 

Member, I close: people in this province know precisely who's 

to fault for this problem. That is your government for nine 

years. They know we're in a jam, and they're supporting us to 

working this thing out; not necessarily for us, although we'll do 

it for us, but for our children and for their children. Come on, 

join the building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to ask for leave for introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to introduce 

some guests from the Cowessess Indian Reserve, the 

Cowessess Community Educational Centre. They are seated 

over at the west gallery with their teacher, Mr. Cliff 

Prokopchuk, and there are seven grade 12 students. I'll be 

seeing them later on, Mr. Speaker, for pictures and also for 

drinks at the dining room. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay due respects to the students 

from Cowessess Indian Reserve, while recognizing that their 

grandparents are of the tradition of both Cree and Saulteaux, 

and would like to say a few words in Cree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to pick up my remarks from yesterday on budget 

day. And I think I'll start a little bit differently this morning 

than where the Minister of Finance was yesterday. I will leave 

the rebuttal of his partisan nonsense for the moment and deal 

instead with what is not in this budget, what should have been 

in this budget, and what could have been in the budget of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been saying all along that there 

are three ways to deal with a deficit reduction; you can raise 

revenue, you can cut spending, or you can expand the 

economy. The government has made some very modest cuts in 

spending and has dramatically raised revenue. What it did not 

do in any shape or form, Mr. Speaker, is expand the economy 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I know the Premier of this province was out in the 

rotunda yesterday saying: there was no other way, our hands 

were tied, we simply didn't have the tools available to expand 

the economy of Saskatchewan, and that he wouldn't return to 

the ways of the previous government. There's only two things I 

can do as Premier of this province, that is tax the people into 

the ground and cut a bit of spending, and as I'm cutting a little 

bit of the spending, I'll back fill with some nice little patronage 

appointments for some of my friends. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's good enough. I don't 

think that's the kind of leadership that people expect from a 

new government. I think they expected a Premier and a 

government that would set aside some of their partisan rhetoric, 

not the document that we saw delivered in this legislature. And 

I have to say again, the member from Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, 

has been in this Assembly for a quarter of a  



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

century -- a quarter of a century -- and I challenge him to show 

me a budget speech that was as full of vitriolic, political 

garbage, as that one was yesterday. 

 

The traditions of this House have been long-standing. And I 

know in the seven budgets that I heard delivered in this 

legislature by the former government, I never once saw a 

document that was so full of politics. And I guess before I get 

on with the rest of my remarks, I say once again, shame on the 

New Democratic Party government. Your members should be 

paying for that budget document not the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are no low-cost or no-cost alternatives to a 

government when expanding the economy. But I'm going to 

present to the members opposite some ways that I think are 

fairly low-cost ideas that could have been incorporated into a 

budget in a province such as Saskatchewan, that is heavily 

dependent on agriculture and raw resources, to stimulate some 

economic development projects and jobs for our province. 

 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, I released a draft Bill that would 

mandate the use of grain alcohol in gasoline sold in 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I will not stand here and 

assert that that plan was absolutely perfect. In fact, we've had 

representation from organizations around the province that are 

involved in the production of ethanol alcohol saying that the 

Bill mandates too quick a move in that direction; that the 

resources are not available to private companies at present to 

meet the mandate, which was 1996, to have 10 per cent of all 

Saskatchewan gasoline have an ethanol alcohol content. 

 

But the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that there are tremendous 

possibilities in a move such as this. That if there is a plan, if it 

is well-structured, if it is laid out well into the future, then, Mr. 

Speaker, gasoline in Saskatchewan can have 10 per cent 

alcohol. It can do two things: use fully 20 per cent of the grain 

produced in this province in the production of that alcohol, and 

secondly, environmentally it puts our province on a very sound 

footing in meeting the green plan of the federal Government of 

Canada in the next decade. 

 

And it does that in a number of ways. It reduces emissions that 

go into the atmosphere. I heard on the radio today that using 

that much alcohol in our gasoline would reduce emissions in 

the province in all types of engines by 17 per cent. And that's 

pretty significant, Mr. Speaker, when you realize that scientists 

in our country and North American are telling us that right 

above our heads this spring, we had the potential to have a hole 

in the ozone layer. 

 

The other thing that it does, Mr. Speaker, is our feeding 

industry which took a tremendous slap in the face yesterday in 

the budget . . . I've had one hog farmer in my riding tell me that 

he will lose $50,000 because of the budget delivered yesterday 

in this Assembly. Fifty thousand dollars to the average hog 

farmer in this province, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, will 

mean economic devastations. 

 

By going to the ethanol content in our gasoline, we will 

produce tremendous amounts of feedstock. The 

by-product of ethanol production will be the mash in the dried 

product that comes out afterwards. That product is high in 

nutrition for both hogs and cattle and the feather industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the government: if you had done 

some long-range planning in this budget, if you had thought 

about our agricultural sector, about our job sector, and about 

our environment, you don't have to spend a lot of money 

immediately to achieve this end, but you can lay out a sound 

plan, a sound framework, that would allow all these different 

sectors of our society to plan for the future. 

 

Expanding the economy, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, is not 

easy. It simply means being creative, and it means that you 

have to lay aside some of the political rhetoric which we have 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that I think the government was very 

remiss in and could have included in the budget -- it's a very 

low-cost item if one does planning and is selective -- and that is 

the whole area of loan guarantees. Now I know, Mr. Speaker, 

in this House in the past we've had some pretty serious 

discussion about some of the loan guarantees that have been 

given by government in the past. But I think it's pretty 

incredible, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Minister of Finance, the 

Minister of Economic Development, when they're out on the 

streets of Regina trumpeting the fact that Crown Life is coming 

to the city of Regina, and at the same time in this very 

legislature hear our Premier condemn loan guarantees. 

 

And I remind members of this Assembly, members of the 

media and the public watching today, that the stories of the 

turn-around in Regina, the increased housing starts, the 

optimism that's coming out of REDA (Regina Economic 

Development Authority), the optimism that the chamber of 

commerce talks about, if they're mentioning political parties . . 

. and I think in all fairness, Mr. Speaker, they have to talk about 

the former government of Saskatchewan and the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) Party of Saskatchewan because 

they are the people that were directly responsible for bringing 

those two organizations to our province. 

 

(1045) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are so quick to lay blame at the 

feet of the former government for things that they see in this 

province, then, Mr. Speaker, I expect a clap from members 

opposite when we talk about Crown Life and FCC (Farm 

Credit Corporation). Any time that those two things are 

mentioned in this Assembly, then the members opposite had 

better give credit where credit is due. 

 

It's also very bizarre, Mr. Speaker, when we're talking about 

loan guarantees to have the members opposite, and particularly 

the member of Finance, go on and on about Saskferco and the 

fact that it's not a good thing for the Saskatchewan economy. 

Saskferco as you know, Mr. Speaker, involves a large loan 

guarantee and a small amount of cash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Minister of Finance's own economic 

assessment of the province back in December, he says in 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

there -- and I think it was mostly for people outside the 

province's boundaries rather than for people inside the 

province, but he says in the statement, that financial statement 

-- that the only things keeping this province going in 1992 are 

Saskferco, Millar Western, an upgrader, other projects where 

the Government of Saskatchewan has had significant loan 

guarantees put in place; that without these things there would 

be a large downturn in the job market; that without these 

projects Saskatchewan taxpayers would be faced with a very 

bleak situation because there is nothing coming along behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I contend that if this government in this budget 

had seriously looked at loan guarantees in a well-thought-out 

plan, then they would have realized that they are a very 

legitimate tool of economic development; that when the 

financial squeeze is on, and it is, when the financial squeeze is 

on taxpayers in this province and you can't outlay cash to make 

your economy grow, then you have to look at guarantees. 

Because they don't cost the taxpayer a dime unless the 

guarantee has to be realized on. 

 

The guarantee doesn't become a contingent liability in the case 

of Saskferco unless Cargill goes broke. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't think there's anyone, even in the NDP government of our 

province, that's going to say that one of the largest agricultural 

corporations in the world is going to go broke in the next 

couple of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it only is sensible then that if you can create jobs 

immediately, construction jobs, that if you have the ability to 

take natural resources in this province, like Saskferco does with 

natural gas, and you can significantly expand your economy 

because of the taxes and the royalties that are being paid, then 

you have to give loan guarantees their due. Because the 

taxpayer doesn't have to outlay the money, but in a fairly short 

time you see benefits back to the economy. And that is why, 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget the Minister of Finance should not 

have, out of hand, written off this tool. 

 

What about the relationship between taxes and economic 

growth? I think this government doesn't realize, Mr. Speaker, 

that they have done tremendous harm to the revenue potential 

in this province by squeezing the economic life out of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. It simply refuses to recognize the 

fact, and I think it's very short-sighted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's a plain truth, and the Minister of Finance knows it, that the 

harmonization of the federal sales tax and the provincial E&H 

base would have injected $400 million into the economy of this 

province. Because it would have given business -- the 

businesses of this province who must employ people if our 

economy is to grow -- it would have given businesses $400 

million in investment tax credits. Besides that, it would have 

generated $180 million in revenue for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, I know when you're assessing taxes, 

that fairness is always a criteria that you must look at. And the 

Minister of Finance says that income tax is the most 

progressive way to go. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you are already one of the highest 

taxed jurisdictions in our country, when you take that further 

10 per cent off the top end, when you hit the utility base in a 

major way, you absolutely destroy the ability of people to enter 

into the economy and spend money on consumer items, spend 

money on manufacturing and processing, and indeed invest in 

their own economy, because you have taken that money off of 

the top. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fairness in the taxation system means, yes, that 

those in the higher end of the scale must pay so that those at the 

lower end of the scale don't have to pay as much because their 

ability to pay is very limited. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I think it was terribly 

short-sighted for the Minister of Finance to do yesterday. 

Because obviously those with more income in our province, if 

you went on the basis of harmonization, will spend that money 

on disposable items. And those at the bottom end of the scale 

who don't have as much disposable income will not. Therefore 

the rich pay and the lower end do not. 

 

What we saw yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that the 

middle class in our province will be absolutely gutted. The 

people that are the basic engine of growth in this province will 

not have that extra disposable income to spread around our 

economy. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we ask the Minister of 

Finance today to table those results and figures in this 

Assembly. Because obviously the budget didn't clearly lay out 

the alternatives. 

 

I will congratulate the Minister of Finance on one small part of 

his budget address yesterday as far as creating wealth in our 

province. I don't know how much long-range planning they did, 

because by a partial harmonization -- in other words, removing 

the E&H base from a small area of manufacturing and 

processing -- the Minister of Finance has realized that 

manufacturing and processing and business in this province 

need some help if they are to maintain the job base that we 

have before us. It means that somebody like IPSCO will be 

marginally better off than they were before. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance has studies 

that show that this small movement on the E&H base is good 

for business in this province, if it's good at maintaining jobs, 

than he knows full well that full harmonization will be 

requested by those businesses and manufacturing and 

processing in very short order. Because the benefits will be 

obvious and the benefits will be obvious to the employees. And 

that I'm glad to see that the Minister of Finance has left a small, 

thin edge of the wedge into his budget process, in that if they 

actually do some long-term planning on economic development 

in this province they will let that process go through to fruition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance and the Premier know full 

well that when you snatch another 10 per cent from the 

taxpayers' pockets of this province that people have no choice, 

no control over how they contribute to government. They know 

that it comes off the pay cheque every month. They know that 

every April 30 that tax will be remitted to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

Mr. Speaker, I say again, taxpayers have a choice whether they 

purchase hamburgers, whether they purchase certain items of 

clothing, what they indeed do for their recreational needs. But 

they do not have to remit on their pay cheque when they make 

those choices. 

 

I say that the income tax increase will shrink our economy, 

jobs will be lost, and you will see a further depopulation, 

because people that have the spunk and the get up and go to 

generate wealth to this province simply will not stay here. They 

will look at opportunities to the West, where the average family 

of four in the same tax ranges here is paying over $1,200 less. 

They will look to our sister province to the East where the 

benefits are several hundred dollars, or, Mr. Speaker, they may 

look to sunny B.C. (British Columbia) where not only is the 

weather better, but certainly the tax regime is better. 

 

And it amazes me, Mr. Speaker, how an NDP government in 

B.C. can be so much more in tune with the needs of western 

Canadian people than one here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I said in question period, Mr. Speaker, it's simply nonsense 

what the Minister of Finance trots out as his economic analysis. 

He said that 7,000 jobs would have been lost in the province of 

Saskatchewan with harmonization. He says that millions of 

dollars would have been lost to provincial revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the logic simply doesn't follow through. If he was 

going to totally stimulate the economy using that kind of logic 

then he would have eliminated the E&H tax totally, and he 

would have created 70,000 jobs, and we would have eliminated 

the deficit almost overnight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's simply not good enough. This isn't long-range 

planning. This isn't a long-term look at economic development 

in this process. It's simply politics, and I think yesterday people 

in this province got their bellyful of politics. And they're saying 

to this government, you make choices; make them fairly. Show 

some leadership, and let's get on with more of a non-partisan 

look at how we build our economy in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition will be bringing forward other 

Bills such as the one on ethanol production, other Bills in this 

legislature by private members that I think will show the 

government how to form a partnership, because they like to 

talk about partnerships and building our economy. How the 

government can form a partnership with people, for instance, 

like IBM to start fighting illiteracy in our province. How they 

can develop partnerships that will allow Saskatchewan people 

to be more successful in the job market. How we can enter into 

relationships that would make our educational system stronger. 

 

And when they do those types of things, Mr. Speaker, they 

expand our economy. It's going to mean that members opposite 

have to give up on some of the ideological, hide-bound things 

that they seem stuck on. It means, Mr. Speaker, that for very 

few dollars, for very few dollars the Government of 

Saskatchewan can enter into a relationship like the one that was 

offered with AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) -- a long-term, 10-year look at 

how energy in this province is consumed, how it's produced, 

and the side benefits of that production can occur. 

 

It means, Mr. Speaker, that you simply don't dismiss the 

economic possibilities tied to SaskEnergy. It means, Mr. 

Speaker, that if the province of Saskatchewan is going to 

continue being a major producer of natural gas that you can 

enter into relationships that involve the private sector, that 

involve Saskatchewan investors, and that 2 to $300 million 

worth of pipe that has to be laid in the province over the next 

two or three years can be built at IPSCO; that you can have 

Saskatchewan taxpayers as shareholders, that you can have 

private companies involved with SaskEnergy in building our 

economy. 

 

(1100) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the government doesn't take a longer-term 

approach in designing their budgets, if they don't put some of 

this ideological nonsense aside, then we will not in this 

province be able to take those natural resources that have been 

a blessing to us and build on them for the future. 

 

It means that nuclear energy will not do one single thing 

beyond what it's doing today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

It means that eventually, as the deposits of uranium are mined 

out, that the jobs will be lost and people in northern 

Saskatchewan particularly will not have opportunities that 

should go on for decade after decade after decade. 

 

And it's sad to say, Mr. Speaker, that when the Minister of 

Finance made the choices he did yesterday that he wasn't 

willing to put aside some of this ideological nonsense. And 

most people in this province say it's that, Mr. Speaker. It's 

nonsense. And say that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

planning in the nuclear industry to take the next 10 years step 

by step to the place where that industry can provide thousands 

of jobs for this province, that we don't have to spend vast 

amounts of money on a yearly basis, that because if we do our 

planning, that with some wise investments, with some wise 

loan guarantees, with some wise educational looks at things, 

we can provide a future for tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 

people because we have the raw resource to build upon. 

 

There are so many alternatives, Mr. Speaker, to what we saw 

yesterday, so many ways that this government could have said 

to the people of Saskatchewan, we aren't simply going to milk 

the taxpayer. We aren't simply going to make a cash cow out of 

the middle class, but we accept our responsibility that we put 

some of these things aside and that we give credit where credit 

is due. We don't simply try and destroy everything that the 

previous government did or thought about, that we are truly 

ready to grapple with the problems that face us and provide the 

leadership that is absolutely necessary to get through the 1990s 

and be prepared for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take your income tax plus your flat tax 

and add 10 per cent on top, that is much more than people 

expected to pay. When you take 3 cents a litre or 14 cents a 

gallon on gasoline, Mr. Speaker, that is simply 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

much more than anyone expected to pay. If you need medicine, 

then you'll pay almost $400 a year for it now, Mr. Speaker. 

That is simply more than anyone expected to pay. 

 

If you use a chiropractor, you're going to pay. If you need the 

services of an optometrist, now you're going to pay. Mr. 

Speaker, if you believe in wellness, you don't take away the 

low-cost items that allow people to keep good health and stay 

in their home, you attack some of the larger problems in the 

health care system. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if you're old, you're now going to pay 

more because your heritage grant has been cut and all of those 

services, those utilities that you use, are now going to cost you 

a lot more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, senior citizens are becoming an increasingly large 

proportion of the Saskatchewan matrix. It's predicted that our 

senior citizens' population will double in the next 10 to 15 

years. Seniors by and large, Mr. Speaker, are on fixed incomes. 

They don't have the ability like other taxpayers to change the 

way that they earn their income or indeed they aren't as mobile 

in changing their location of residence. 

 

If you look at what this budget did yesterday to Saskatchewan 

seniors, I think seniors in this province will say, I see no 

long-term planning and I certainly don't see any taxing 

alternatives that would have been more fair to my 

circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors simply can't have that extra 1 or $2,000 

for a couple, that I believe, when you add everything up, they 

are going to be faced with. Because when you take away the 

heritage grant program for many seniors, when you take away 

hundreds of dollars in phone and power and gas and insurance, 

these people simply will become a greater burden on our 

society, and a burden seniors don't want to be. The 

grandparents of this province do not like to be looked upon as a 

burden and yet that is exactly what our government was doing 

to them yesterday. They were saying to the seniors of our 

province, the people who built this province, because we're 

going at it in this way, you will become a burden on our 

society. Because seniors simply don't have choices to react in 

any other way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's simply not acceptable when you say that 

to seniors, to try and blame it on everyone else in our society, 

because I heard yesterday this government, this government 

that promised so much to Saskatchewan people, all through the 

budget speech say it's Ottawa's fault. It's Ottawa's fault that 

agriculture is in the state that it is, that we didn't do anything to 

make that situation worse by changing the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program. It's Ottawa's fault that there's no 

economic development in this province because Ottawa and 

AECL were too tough with us. It's Ottawa's fault that we have 

shortfalls in health, education, social services, and policing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people elect governments to show direction, to 

show responsibility and to keep their campaign promises. Mr. 

Speaker, the federal government has a very large role to play in 

the lives of Saskatchewan 

people. But if we were to take the budget speech at its word 

yesterday, then we would simply dissolve the provincial 

boundaries of this province. We would abrogate our 

responsibility to the citizens who live here. We would give up 

our provincial powers over resources and taxation, and we 

would simply throw ourselves at the feet of the federal 

government and say, live up to your responsibilities, federal 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that simply isn't acceptable. That simply 

won't wash with Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people 

have known ever since 1905 that their government has the 

ability to enter into our economy and provide protection, to 

provide direction and to provide the stability that not 

necessarily can come from a federal government as we go 

through times of crisis in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, NDP members in this legislature are often fond of 

talking about their past as a political party. They're often fond 

about talking about people in the old CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) party that built significantly in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I don't think at any point in 

time that those people that they talk about in this Assembly day 

after day after day would have simply said, I can't do anything 

about it; I'm going to throw myself at the knees of the 

provincial . . . or of the federal government, and beg for mercy. 

 

When Tommy Douglas decided to electrify the farms and 

villages of this province, he didn't throw himself at the mercy 

of the federal government and say, please help me. He got 

Saskatchewan people to get up on their back legs and run the 

power lines to the farms and villages of this province and do it 

in an equitable way. 

 

People in this province, Mr. Speaker, have never thrown 

themselves, have never thrown themselves, at the feet of the 

federal government. They fought in 1930 to have the resources 

of this province transferred to provincial jurisdiction. 

 

And yet if I listened to that speech yesterday, it clearly looks 

like this government is saying that the only alternatives 

available to Saskatchewan people are to be taxed into the 

ground and beg for mercy in Ottawa. And, Mr. Speaker, I don't 

believe that's acceptable to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that were the case, if that were the case, then 

the Government of Saskatchewan would not have brought 

forward an idea of the past administration. And I think it's a 

good idea. And I saw members yesterday nodding their heads 

when it was introduced -- the idea of a Saskatchewan savings 

plan, a Saskatchewan savings bond. The previous government 

brought in bonds for our Crown corporations because 

Saskatchewan people said, why pay the interest in New York; 

pay it to me. 

 

If the analysis of the government is correct -- and I believe it is 

-- that Saskatchewan people will invest in their province, then 

the other premise that I saw in the budget speech is incorrect. 

And that is, we have Canada savings bonds available to us; if 

all we're going to do is beg for mercy from the federal 

government, there's no need to have a Saskatchewan savings 

bond. 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

So on one end, the Government of Saskatchewan tries to make 

excuses for abrogating their responsibility. And on the other 

hand, Mr. Speaker, they say Saskatchewan people are prepared 

to face the challenges that are before us. Well I think the 

second premise is the correct one. And I think the 

Saskatchewan savings bond will be successful, and I commend 

the Minister of Finance for following up on the ideas of the 

previous administration in that regard. 

 

And I believe the first one is entirely false. And that if this 

government continues to talk in that fashion to Saskatchewan 

people, that we simply go begging on hand and knee to the 

federal government for everything that we need, then we as a 

province will get nothing out of the Confederation of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Wednesday's Star-Phoenix there was an article, 

and I'll quote the headline. It says, "Not $1 more, eh?" 

 

 On his way to becoming premier (of Saskatchewan, the 

member from Riversdale) . . . made an excellent point. 

 

He said that $4.5 billion was enough to govern this province 

on. It says: 

 

 Today's provincial budget need do only one thing: (only one 

thing is needed to do in this day's provincial budget) Keep the 

election promise of "not one dollar more." 

 

(1115) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the part that is the biggest betrayal, to 

the people of this province, about the whole exercise that we're 

going through over the next few days. We had a Premier and 

political party in this province promise the taxpayers not one 

dollar more in taxes. They said, axe the tax, axe the tax and we 

will live within our means and we will not take more money 

out of your pocket, Mr. Taxpayer; that we believe -- 

misguidedly -- we believe that harmonization is wrong because 

it takes money out of taxpayers' pockets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday everybody in this province got a 

very rude awakening. Because it wasn't axe the tax, it was 

add-the-tax day in Saskatchewan. It was add the tax onto every 

last segment of our society. It was chop jobs, government 

services, put purple gas back in the tanks of Saskatchewan 

farmers. Mr. Speaker, if there was anything that was more 

hated in rural Saskatchewan than purple gas, I don't know what 

it is. I don't know what it is. 

 

If you gave people a choice between even the changes to the 

GRIP contract, which we've seen, Mr. Speaker, which we've 

seen thousands of them demonstrate against on the very steps 

of this legislature . . . it's probably purple gas. And when a 

Finance minister has to resort to that we know that he's in 

trouble. Because purple gas, Mr. Speaker, as you well know 

growing up in rural Saskatchewan, was one of the most used 

and abused of the things that was ever done in rural 

Saskatchewan. And today we've gone back to it. And I can 

think of so many things from the '60s that if I had to go back as 

a foundation 

of my budget that I could have picked rather than purple gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has been outlined in this legislature on many 

occasions, this government and this political party knew where 

the finances of this province were. Their own documents have 

proved it over and over again. And I just say one more time to 

Saskatchewan people, the Gass Commission said anyone who 

cared to look would know exactly where the finances of this 

province were. 

 

Their own prospectus filed in Washington, D.C. (District of 

Columbia) that allows the Government of Saskatchewan to 

borrow a billion dollars clearly states that it doesn't make any 

difference if you use accrual accounting or cash in, the debt of 

the province is the same. The only difference is that the 

unfunded pension liabilities of the 1970s are entered into it in a 

different column. The numbers haven't been fudged. 

 

An independent analysis by the labour movement in this 

province says, Mr. Speaker, that this government has padded 

their deficit by half a billion dollars. They have taken 

write-downs; that they have accrued interest charges that did 

not need to occur all in one budget year; and that the only 

reason, Mr. Speaker, the only reason that those things have 

been done is because this government is trying to cover its 

political tracks with the voters of this province. 

 

So not only do we tax them into the ground yesterday, that we 

still maintain the facade, the facade and the deception, Mr. 

Speaker, that when they went out and promised the earth to 

Saskatchewan people, as six months ago, to achieve that 

so-coveted political power, they thought nothing about what 

they would do to Saskatchewan people a six short months 

down the road. 

 

The evidence is overwhelming, Mr. Speaker. One only has to 

compare what this budget did yesterday for child hunger in this 

province. And you add up Jack Messer's $27,000 sound-proof 

bathroom and Jack Messer's Lexus car that he got caught with 

and Jack Messer's oral contract, and I would suggest the sum of 

them all, Mr. Speaker, covers the increase that child hunger got 

in yesterday's budget. 

 

Because you see, Mr. Speaker, just to achieve political power 

to put your friends in high places, which this government said 

they wouldn't do and have done, is not good enough, is not 

good enough, Mr. Speaker, as the reason to simply achieve 

political power in this province. 

 

Appointing 850 of your friends to boards and commissions in 

this province and bragging about it in the throne speech is 

simply not good enough, Mr. Speaker. And firing 500 public 

servants yesterday because you didn't have the courage or the 

leadership to put aside some of your ideological idiosyncrasies 

-- and the member from Athabasca knows well what one of 

those is -- that probably we could have done some things for 

very little money in this province, Mr. Speaker, and created a 

lot of jobs if we didn't have those idiosyncrasies; that the 

direction of our province could have been different yesterday. 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that members in this Assembly, 

government members, are going to want to stand on their feet 

over this budget debate and tell us about the economic analysis 

that their Finance minister did when he imposed a 10 per cent 

increase, personal income tax increase, on Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 
 

I'm sure that they're going to want to stand on their feet and tell 

the people of Saskatchewan about the analysis done by the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade that'll show how 

this budget is going to draw those 700 companies that they so 

fondly talk about into our province and how they're going to 

create jobs. 
 

I'm sure they're going to want to stand on their feet and give us 

the analysis, Mr. Speaker, of how child hunger and poverty are 

going to be eliminated with this budget that was brought in 

yesterday. 
 

I'm sure they are going to want to stand on their feet and give 

us the analysis that will show how our senior citizens are not 

going to be driven into poverty by the budget that was brought 

in yesterday. 
 

I'm sure they are going to want to show us the analysis how the 

farmers of this province are going to weather the economic and 

debt storms that they live in, and the dirt that has been blowing 

for the last two weeks in south-west Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

I want them to show us the analysis that shows that '92 GRIP is 

better than '91; show us the analysis how having to pay fuel tax 

up front is going to get your farming done, and show us the 

analysis how purple gas is going to change the way in which 

rural Saskatchewan does its business. 
 

Mr. Speaker, none of the fundamental areas of our economy 

yesterday had any analysis put on them at all. They simply had 

a short-sighted political document delivered on their heads, 

which says the Government of Saskatchewan will take, take, 

take; the Government of Saskatchewan will not protect, and 

that the only reasons we're doing this is because we didn't have 

the courage, the political courage to put aside to admit their 

mistakes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what we had yesterday was a neutron budget. It 

nuked all the people in Saskatchewan and it was designed to 

leave the NDP government standing -- a neutron budget, Mr. 

Speaker, a bomb that destroys the people and leaves the 

institution standing. And they did their best yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to introduce 

guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this 

Assembly, I would like to introduce to you Mr. and Mrs. Don 

Ross from Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan. Don is the president of 

the chamber of commerce in Hudson 

 Bay, and also a town alderman. And I'd like you to welcome 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I'd like to ask leave for the introduction of 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through 

you I'd like to introduce to the Assembly two gentlemen from 

my constituency, Mr. Harry Shukin and Mr. Peter Fofonoff. 

These gentlemen are down here as a part of a delegation of the 

Verigin Doukhobor Heritage Society, and they've taken some 

time out of their day here in Regina today to take in the 

proceedings of the Assembly, and I'd like to ask all members to 

give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

extend a welcome to the guests that are in the Assembly today. 

Certainly the gentlemen from the town of Hudson Bay will 

know what it's like to have a tough economy, given the state of 

the forestry industry in north-east Saskatchewan these days. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition and 

the people of this province will be waiting for members of the 

government to stand on their feet and give people the analysis 

that says yesterday's budget was fair, that it was reasonable, 

and that it looked at all of the alternatives that were available. 

And it simply dismissed some of those alternatives because 

they were politically unpalatable to the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people expect more than the New Democratic 

Party of Saskatchewan dictating the wishes and wants to our 

taxpayers. And if yesterday's budget wasn't a neutron budget, 

wasn't designed to destroy the people and leave the New 

Democratic Party standing, then I invite members to stand on 

their feet and tell us why it isn't that way. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought, Mr. 

Speaker, only the Conservatives could embarrass me in this 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House Leader from the Conservative Party 

challenges us to stand and give an analysis, and I wanted you to 

know, here I am. 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- I want to put forward today the analysis of the 

New Democratic Party and our government as to why this is 

the budget that's the right budget for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The same member who has just spoken in this Assembly 

caused some excitement among our back-benchers yesterday, I 

want you to know, Mr. Speaker, when he called on so many 

resignations from the cabinet. It excited quite a few of us in the 

back bench that our potential of rising in the ranks of this 

government is being enhanced all the time. 

 

You would think, Mr. Speaker, over the last few days, that the 

members of the Conservative Party had hearts of wood. But we 

know that that's not so because as they rose to speak their noses 

didn't grow, and you know the case about Pinocchio. The 

analysis certainly put forward by the members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party is inaccurate to say the least. 

 

When we said, Mr. Speaker, prior to the election that $4.5 

billion is enough to run the province of Saskatchewan, $4.5 

billion is enough to run the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- In the budget documents placed before this 

Assembly yesterday we find that there will be revenue raised in 

the amount of $4.4915 billion. That's less than $4.5 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, and if we had no Conservative debt in Saskatchewan, 

this budget brought forward by the Minister of Finance would 

leave us with a budget surplus of $243 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But will we have a surplus of $243 million this year, Mr. 

Speaker? Will we? No we won't. Why won't we? Because the 

Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, the previous 

government in Saskatchewan, left a debt that is so horrendous 

that we this year have to pay out of the budget $760 million in 

interest on the debt alone. I say shame on those members 

opposite, and that's part of the analysis as to why this budget 

has come forward. 

 

We don't want any more of their phoney indignation in this 

House. They know the analysis as well as we do. They misstate 

the facts. The hypocrisy of the statements that we have heard in 

this House by the members of the Conservative Party over the 

last two days just make me sick, Mr. Speaker. I cannot believe 

what they have done to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore this afternoon . . . or this morning, the analysis has to 

start with the record of the Conservative administration in the 

province of Saskatchewan. In fact, it can go back quite some 

time to the last Conservative government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, between September 5 of 1905, the first 

government in the province of Saskatchewan, which was 

a Liberal government, we had Liberal governments up until 

September 9, 1929. And at that time the Hon. James Thomas 

Milton Anderson was sworn into office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that government devastated the province of 

Saskatchewan as well. In fact when they left office finally, 

when a new premier was sworn in on July 19, 1934, the 

Conservatives hadn't re-elected one single seat to this 

Legislative Assembly. And that's what should have happened 

to them this time, Mr. Speaker, in the last election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- The analysis goes on, Mr. Speaker, the 

analysis goes on to a point where I want to use a quote from the 

previous premier, the current member from Estevan, the leader 

of the small opposition over there -- small in more ways than 

one. You recall the former premier saying it's just like oatmeal 

because it's the right thing to do. Well, they were eating 

porridge, Mr. Speaker. Their friends ate porridge; lots of 

people were at the porridge trough. But they forgot to turn the 

stove off, Mr. Speaker, and now we have to clean burnt 

porridge out of the pot. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, is the right thing to do in 

Saskatchewan. This is the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. Their 

campaign theme was "the courage and the will." They were of 

little courage, Mr. Speaker, and they had no will to do the right 

thing in the province of Saskatchewan -- to stop the wasteful 

spending of their administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Well we've had to stop that wasteful spending 

of their administration because I refuse to put on the backs of 

my children a debt and a devastating situation that was created 

by that government. I refuse to do that. I don't even want to 

accept the responsibility today. I wish there was some way we 

could tax the former members of the cabinet to make them pay 

the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- They're lucky, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan don't hold court over them, that there is a justice 

system in Saskatchewan because they'd all be charged, and 

charged very harshly, as they were in the provincial election on 

October 21, Mr. Speaker. They should be lucky that the people 

in Saskatchewan don't hold court over them. 

 

In fact I think that the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

should be courting some of the people who are new to the 

Conservative caucus. 

 

The member from Kindersley, and the member from 

Souris-Cannington, and the member from Maple Creek -- I 

think they should leave that leaderless ship over there and 

move over to the member from Saskatoon Greystone so she 

can obtain official party status in the legislature, and get that 

extra money she keeps asking for because she represents 24 per 

cent of the people. Now there's the solution. 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

They're so consumed over there with their leaderless operation 

that you see the competition going on on a daily basis between 

the member from Thunder Creek and the member from 

Rosthern, and I'm not sure about the member from Moosomin. 

And the member from Morse, he's caught up in that as well, the 

member from Morse is running for leadership. But the one who 

knows what's going on over there . . . No, I'm sorry, I do not 

believe that the member from Wilkie is running for leadership 

with the Conservative Party. And I don't want to expose that 

here today, but I will. 

 

But the one who really knows what's going on over there is the 

member from Arm River. The member from Arm River is the 

dean of that operation over there, and he's watched the political 

insides of the Conservative Party for a good number of years. 

In fact I wouldn't be surprised if he would encourage the new 

members that have joined that leaderless ship to go over to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone so she can attain her 

official party status in this Assembly. 

 

So I want to also add to the analysis, Mr. Speaker, the situation 

of the previous government and the last budget that they 

brought into the Assembly. Everyone knows that follows 

government that the end of the fiscal year is March 31. Well 

the Conservative government at that time brought in a budget, 

and there were debates about a number of things, but there 

weren't any debates about the budget. It went on with Bills, it 

went on with flimflam and deception on the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, but they never brought in any 

budget discussions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Thunder Creek says that 

flimflam was the petitions. That shows how much the 

Conservative Party listens to the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when you have at least two petitions with over a 

hundred thousand signatures, and they call it flimflam. Do they 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan? No. No they don't. 

 

Well the Conservative Party was experiencing a lot of 

problems in presenting their budget. They could tell that 

because they had to pay some attention to a hundred thousand 

signatures on a petition that said their government was not 

doing the right thing. It wasn't like oatmeal. It was not the right 

thing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The House Leader quit on them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Well, that's a very interesting point. Our 

House Leader says, their House leader quit on them, and that's 

correct. I recall that day very well. Myself and the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale were out meeting with the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council that particular day. And we were listening 

to the news, and we were surprised that the government House 

Leader was so disgruntled -- Mr. Hodgins, member from 

Melfort at that time -- was so disgusted and disgruntled with 

the government that he stood in the Assembly on June 17, 1991 

and resigned. 

 

I don't want to read the entire statement -- it would take too 

much of the House's time here today -- but I would give you a 

little background to it. Number one, he was so disgusted he did 

not even inform the member from 

Estevan, who was the premier at that time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Or the member from Wilkie. 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Or the member from Wilkie or any other 

member. He stood in his place and he resigned. And he 

concluded by saying: 

 

 I would respectfully request, Mr. Speaker, that my chair be 

moved to the opposite side as an independent member. 

 

That's what the former member from Melfort said. 

 

And do you know what happened the next day? Still without 

ever having discussed the budget in this Assembly, not having 

discussed or called forward one estimate, they prorogued the 

legislature. And they went from June 18, 1991 until the time of 

the election without ever having a budget. That was a first in 

the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is that courage and will? That's not courage and will. That's 

deceit and deception. And it's not the right thing to do. So I'd 

encourage the member from Kindersley and the member from 

Souris-Cannington and the member from Maple Creek, get 

behind the member from Arm River and join the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone because that will be your only salvation. 

You'll be like the Anderson government in the '30s and never 

resurface again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . you might make cabinet if you stood. 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Well, the member from Kindersley says I'm 

doing well; it might improve my chances of making cabinet. I'll 

tell him, my chances of making cabinet are a lot better than his 

are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- What else has the member from Thunder 

Creek been saying in his speech? He talks about us at the feet 

of the federal government and somehow the federal 

government is the problem. It's not a federal government 

problem -- all their off-loading. If the federal government 

weren't off-loading the way they are, we could maybe even 

balance the budget with the horrendous deficit that they had 

run up during their nine and a half years of administration. 

 

But are they hypocrites? I think so, Mr. Speaker. I look here at 

the throne speech from March 19, 1990 when their government 

said: 

 

 My government is committed to working co-operatively with 

the Government of Canada, other provinces and municipal 

governments in areas of shared responsibility. We must 

ensure the needs of all Saskatchewan people are addressed 

and that our people receive their fair share of benefits and 

support. 

 

Now hear this. I quote: 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

My government is concerned about the transfer of more 

and more federal funding responsibility to our province. It 

is straining our capacity for health care, education, justice 

and social service programs. 

 

I would think that they were blaming the federal government 

back during their term of office, and now has something 

changed? No, the only thing that's changed is we now have a 

government that will stand up to Ottawa and get what is 

rightfully deserved by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- And if the Conservative opposition has the 

courage and the will, they'll join us by asking their federal 

cousins not to unload on an already devastated economy in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That's what they would do. 

 

I still encourage them to move over, at least the new ones, and 

go with the other person to join us in Ottawa. Because the 

government that's in Ottawa now won't be there after the next 

election either, Mr. Speaker. They're going to be gone for what 

they've done to the people of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there'll be naysayers about what our 

government has done in our budget. But I don't think I want to 

part of a government that takes the road most travelled. I want 

to be part of a government that does the right thing for the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. And I will not 

participate in a system that would bankrupt this province on the 

back of future generations when we are no longer in this place 

or maybe no longer around period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the things that the opposition 

has criticized in the budget. I think that people in Saskatchewan 

support the budget that was placed yesterday before this 

Assembly. They are somber, they are concerned, but they are 

also supportive because they realize the seriousness of the 

situation faced by not only the government but all people in the 

province. 

 

(1145) 

 

I think of times when we'd had to make tough decisions before. 

I remember listening to a man I respect very much by the name 

of Alvin Hewitt. Alvin Hewitt was with the former premier, 

Woodrow Lloyd, during the days of the Keep Our Doctors 

crisis, the KOD committees. 

 

Woodrow Lloyd had to walk into a packed hall of medical 

people that were there, mostly people that were on the KOD 

committees. And as Woodrow Lloyd and Alvin Hewitt walked 

to the front of the hall to address the unruly crowd and 

potentially riotous crowd that was there, someone jumped to 

the front of Woodrow Lloyd and spit in his face. 

 

And Woodrow Lloyd didn't raise his hand to his face to wipe 

the spit away. He walked to the front of the hall, addressed the 

unruly crowd, and walked away with never 

wiping the spit from his face from the member of the KOD 

committee who had spat upon him at that time. 

 

That takes integrity. That takes courage and will, to put 

forward your position even if it's a tough position to put 

forward, because that's the right thing to do. It's not eating 

more oatmeal; it's actually feeding the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- In our budget we will not be giving 

preferential treatment to people. In our budget we are fair. We 

will not see the less fortunate violated and starved. We will not 

see the more wealthy in our society get off scot-free. We will 

be fair. We will be fair in our budget and we will be fair also in 

the administration of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How about the former government? I'd like to go back to that 

for a minute so I can help fill in the rest of the analysis for the 

member from Thunder Creek who spoke just previously to me. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has done a special report. It was tabled 

in the Public Accounts Committee on April 22 of this year, Mr. 

Speaker. The Provincial Auditor points out many things in his 

special report, but I think the two most damning on this 

government have to do with people who were paid but didn't 

work for the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at the report and I find in here that there 

were many people that were paid by one department but 

worked for another department. It's not secondment. 

Secondments are okay; they have a place in government; they 

have a function. But these people were paid with the full 

knowledge that there was never any benefit back to the 

department or agency that was paying them. 

 

The worst part, Mr. Speaker, is, and I quote from the report: 

 

 The following organizations reported that they made 

payments of $603,416 to 19 employees not working for their 

organizations. The organizations were unable to determine 

who received the services of these employees. 

 

Were they ghosts? No, I don't think they were ghosts. There 

were 19 people that the former administration forced 

government departments to pay, and those government 

departments were so afraid to say no because of the rule of 

intimidation by the Conservatives, that they paid these 19 

people. And when the auditor comes along to do his special 

audit, they don't even know where these people work. Is that 

the courage and the will? 

 

The next part I'd like to point out about this report is a section 

called: "Payments to advertising agencies for goods/services 

not received." Some members say, could this happen? Yes, it 

could happen. And the Provincial Auditor, not our employee 

from government but an officer of this Assembly, went out and 

he found that advertising agencies like Dome Media Buying 

Services, Dome Advertising, Roberts & Poole, Dome 

Advertising, Roberts & Poole, Dome Advertising, 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

Roberts & Poole . . . I'm not being repetitive; I'm just repeating 

the companies that received the benefits. 

 

How could this happen? Because when someone requisitions a 

payment within government they have to sign a request for 

payment that goes to the Provincial Comptroller, and the 

Provincial Comptroller authorizes the Department of Finance 

to issue the cheque. Did someone defraud the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the taxpayers by signing a requisition for 

payment where no service or no good was received? I think 

that's a distinct possibility. 

 

In the Public Accounts Committee on the day that this report 

was tabled there was a question to the Provincial Comptroller: 

why did you make the payment? The Provincial Comptroller 

says: we can't check every voucher that comes along; there are 

thousands of them. This voucher for these services was duly 

authorized, not only by the person in the department making 

the payment, but also signed by the director of communications 

in the office of the Executive Council. 

 

Well people in Executive Council are political appointees. Do 

you think there could be a possibility there was a political 

appointee in the department as well, and there was 

collaboration between two or more employees of the 

government who were political employees to defraud the 

taxpayers out of funds? And I say, shame on this government. 

 

That's a further part of the analysis as to why this budget is 

before us today. It makes me angry that you've deprived this 

generation and future generations of the rights that they should 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. That's more the analysis, 

Mr. Speaker, as to why this budget comes forward today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we can expect many people to ask 

questions and be concerned about the budget. And they have 

the right to ask those questions, and they have the right to 

receive answers, and they will receive answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can't say that everybody has to agree with 

everything that's in the budget, that would be an impossible 

task. But we have listened and we have responded and there 

will be further consultation with the affected parties by the 

budget -- those on the revenue side and those on the 

expenditure side. We will not turn a deaf ear to Saskatchewan 

people as the previous government did, and we will not make 

apologies for our government or the budget presented 

yesterday in this legislature. We will not apologize for what we 

have to do. 

 

We will let the people in the province of Saskatchewan judge 

this government come next election time, Mr. Speaker. And I 

say it will be a good judgement because we will do the right 

thing in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Honesty is important, Mr. Speaker. Honesty is 

an important thing; a person to have integrity. 

But it's equally as important to be honest as a government. I 

can't expect the opposition that's over there today to be honest 

because they weren't honest in government, so why would they 

be honest in opposition. 

 

Just days before the election the current Premier wrote a letter 

to the ex-premier, asking if the deficit projected of $265 

million was accurate. That ex-premier referred it to the 

ex-minister of Finance, Lorne Hepworth. And Lorne Hepworth 

wrote back to the now Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan and documented that: yes, the deficit was going 

to be $265 million. 

 

But you know what it was? When the, not NDP, not MLAs, did 

up the Public Accounts, but the professional employees of this 

Assembly and of the Government of Saskatchewan, you know 

what they found? The deficit was $960 million. 

 

I ask the member from Kindersley: is that honesty? Oops, did 

you make a mistake of that magnitude? Did you make a 

mistake of $635 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

they did do the same thing in '86, but the member from 

Kindersley wasn't here in '86. And he wasn't here until the last 

election either, so I don't know what he'd know other than what 

the members who were here from the Conservative Party had 

told him. 

 

Why don't those new members in the Conservative ranks read 

the facts? And when you read the facts, I don't want you 

joining us. I don't want you. But I am sure the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone wants you. So mosey on over there. Save 

yourself while you can. Your last opportunity is drawing fairly 

near. I would move while the moving is possible. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we're left with a $14 billion deficit that costs 

us in excess of $700 million a year in interest. Four point five 

billion dollars is enough to run this province, but it's not 

enough to take care of the Tory legacy of mismanagement and 

waste and a debt that they ran up to the point of $14 billion. 

 

Does anybody in this room, in this Assembly, know what $14 

billion is? I can't imagine $14 billion. One of the members says 

it reminds him of a Tory. Well I hardly ever heard of billions 

till the Tory governments came along. Used to say, hoof, what's 

a million? Now the Tories say, hoof, what's a billion? 

 

They expected us to run this province even further into debt so 

that future generations would never get out of the stranglehold 

of the bankers and the bond dealers of the world. Was that the 

right thing to do? Well I guess their oatmeal analysis would 

mean it's the right thing to do. But we don't think it's the right 

thing to do. We are going to be a fiscally responsible 

government responsive to the needs of not only this generation 

but to the needs of future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I've likely taken far more time 

than I should have, but I want to conclude by talking a bit 

about health care. We are criticized from some circles on the 

health care measures in the budget. But I  



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

want to assure you that I and other members of the government 

will see that no one is denied full access to quality health care 

because of an inability to pay. We will not allow that to 

happen. 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I followed with interest the 

discussions in the United States about how bad Canada's health 

care system is. But you know, Mr. Speaker, that the health care 

system in Canada spends less per capita than what the 

American system does on health care. And the American health 

care system leaves more than 35 million Americans without 

any health care insurance at all. 

 

That's where the previous government was taking us because 

we would have been at a point if we continued their road -- that 

slippery slope that they were on -- that we would have not had 

the ability to borrow money to run the health care system in 

Saskatchewan. Shame on them for deceiving people in this 

province. 

 

In this article out of an American magazine it says, and I quote: 

 

 Canadian medical costs are about nine per cent of the G.N.P., 

compared with about twelve per cent in the States. More 

important, we end up spending about twenty per cent less per 

capita on health care than you do, and (they're) still ahead in 

the two most crucial public-health indicators -- life 

expectancy and infant mortality. 

 

(1200) 

 

Well, that's a system. What do we want to do with the health 

care system? We want to go beyond that. We want to go to the 

next generation of medicare for Saskatchewan people on the 

wellness model so that people aren't geared to going when they 

get sick, to provide a cure. We want people not to become sick. 

And it's a different sickness than they were provided by the 

Conservative administration of government, I'll assure you of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm also very happy. I see today that a concern of 

the optometrist in Saskatchewan has been taken care of. There 

was some concern about the de-insuring of children over 18. I 

guess they aren't children at that point any more, but the age 

group over 18 years of age. 

 

Optometrists were concerned that ophthalmologists would be 

treated differently, that people would still go to an 

ophthalmologist and receive the same service but have the 

medicare system paid for. That is not so in a publication made 

today by the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 

be able to state here that the de-insured services of optometrics 

will be the same for optometrists as it is for ophthalmologists, 

Mr. Speaker. And I'm very happy to hear that because I was 

concerned at one point that the optometrists would be placed at 

a great disadvantage. 

 

And I think this is a very good example of how our government 

listens to the concerns of all parties in Saskatchewan and 

responds in fairness when we find if something is brought to 

our attention that may have an 

imbalance to it. So I think this is an early indication that we 

provide fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would want to close by saying that every great 

journey starts with a single step. And I think the first step of 

our journey was on October 21 in the general election, and the 

second step was yesterday on May 7 when the budget was 

brought in by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And I think that budget is a critical point budget. It turns the 

corner so that we can rise again in Saskatchewan with the 

co-operation of all people, to be all that we can possibly be 

together as a community and a great society in this great 

province of ours. 

 

As I said, every great journey starts with a single step. And I 

believe that the people of this great province, Mr. Speaker will 

join us on that great journey and join with us to show that what 

we are doing today in Saskatchewan may not be totally 

pleasant, but we make no apologies for it, and the people of the 

province accept what we're doing. 

 

And I'm sure they join with us on the great journey to taking 

Saskatchewan back to the place that it should be and the place 

that rightfully belongs to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and not some government that would run 

roughshod over the economy and the people and the sense of 

community. 

 

Thank you for your time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to lend my support to the budget for the 1992-93 fiscal year. 

I'm pleased to do so because of what it stands for -- a first step 

towards restoring confidence in how this province conducts its 

affairs. It's a first step towards restoring sanity to government 

spending. It's a first step towards putting the needs of ordinary 

men and women at the top of the government's agenda where 

they rightfully belong, a first step towards restoring confidence 

in government as an ally of all people working on everyone's 

behalf rather than that of their friends and their cronies. 

 

Restoring order to Saskatchewan's financial affairs is long 

overdue. For each of the last 10 years the growth in spending 

has exceeded the growth in revenue by more than 2 per cent. 

You can't run a farm that way. You can't run a private business 

that way, whether you're a corner grocery or a major 

corporation. You can't run a government that way either, not 

indefinitely. 

 

The philosopher Voltaire once said that common sense is not 

so common. It has certainly not been much in evidence for the 

last 10 years. I support this budget because for the first time in 

10 years it reintroduces common sense to government finances. 

It respects a very basic principle of economics, that there 

should be some relationship between how much we take in and 

how much we spend. 

 

This is hardly radical thinking. It is certainly novel in 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

comparison to what this province has grown accustomed to. If 

we've learned anything from the past 10 years it's that you can't 

solve problems simply by throwing money at them. More to the 

point, our debt burden has reached the point that this approach 

is simply no longer possible. 

 

We were given an overwhelming mandate for change last year, 

and change there will be. However, restoring common sense to 

government's fiscal affairs will exact a price. The legacy of 

debt that we inherited will constrain what we can do for the 

people of Saskatchewan for many years to come. However this 

does not mean that we will ignore our other responsibilities. 

Instead it requires us to be much more creative in effectively 

addressing the problems of the day. 

 

This is particularly the case in an area such as education and 

training. I say this because what we do at all levels of our 

education system has a large bearing on how the province as a 

whole performs. Our education system can reshape 

Saskatchewan's future to a degree unmatched by any other 

institution save that of government itself. 

 

It prepares our students of all ages for productive, rewarding 

careers. It gives them the knowledge they need to play 

constructive roles within their individual communities. Lastly it 

gives them the ability to enjoy so much more of what life has to 

offer in terms of leisure and recreational pursuits. The value of 

this window on the world cannot be measured in dollars and 

cents. 

 

The performance of our education system gives us a barometer 

of the kind of future we as a province can expect. When our 

schools succeed, we all succeed. 

 

Our financial crunch does not mean that we ignore people's 

needs. These must always come first on any government's 

agenda. This is reflected in the allocation for education and 

training in 1992-93, the manner in which we propose to meet 

the needs of our 300,000 students of all ages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget for Saskatchewan Education will 

increase by .5 per cent over last year to $920 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- This represents an increase of just 

over 4 million from the '91-92 fiscal year. How this will be 

spent is just as significant as the amount. We haven't simply 

picked percentages out of the air and added them on to what 

was spent last year. We know that doesn't work. More to the 

point, we know it's no longer possible. 

 

Our debt burden has exacted its price on all levels of the 

education system. The rise in spending is due mainly to a major 

increase in funding for teachers' pensions and related benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to understand the reasons for this 

substantial increase. In recent years government has met the 

funding requirements for teacher pensions partly from the 

Consolidated Fund and partly from surpluses in the teachers' 

superannuation fund itself. 

 

The previous administration drew down on the teachers' own 

pension fund. These surpluses were monies in the fund over 

and above the legally required minimum. The surplus money is 

now substantially gone. In any case, it would be inappropriate 

to continue drawing down on surpluses in the fund from 

previous years when the unfunded liability of the pension plan 

is already 1.6 billion. 

 

This year we are budgeting for teacher pensions in a more 

appropriate way. Doing so requires an overall 108 per cent 

increase in funds for teacher pensions and benefits in 1992-93. 

 

Another measure of government competence is ensuring the 

needs of those it serves remain ahead of its own. This is 

particularly so in times of scarce resources such as those we 

now face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that the cost of 

departmental administration, the cost of running the 

Department of Education, has been lowered by 11 per cent 

from the previous fiscal year. That's in keeping with the 

message that we tried to relay to the third parties when we 

announced the funding for school boards, universities, and 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology). We asked them to look in their administrations in 

shared facilities everywhere except at the teacher and the 

class-room, which is the only place where education happens. 

 

Those administrative costs will account for just over 4 per cent 

of total education spending in '92-93. In other words, 96 cents 

out of every education tax dollar is used to meet the needs of 

our students and their instructors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Only 4 cents is used to meet 

administrative and internal needs. Seventy cents out of every 

education tax dollar has gone to our major education partners 

in the form of third-party grants. This includes our kindergarten 

to grade 12 schools, the universities, SIAST, and the regional 

colleges. 

 

The remaining 26 cents of the taxpayers' dollar goes to shared 

cost training programs, contributions to pension funds, and 

financial assistance for post-secondary students. Forty-five 

million dollars will be made available this year for provincial 

student aid. 

 

We are making every effort to ensure that the education tax 

dollar is used for its intended purpose -- teaching and learning. 

We will not allow it to be diverted penny by penny to internal 

administrative costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now more than ever, learning is a lifelong 

process. Not that long ago a high school diploma, university 

degree, or a technical certificate meant that one had finished 

school, had finished learning. These days are gone for ever. 

What we know of the world now doubles roughly every 12 

years. This means that almost two-thirds of all jobs created 

between now and the year 2000 will require post-secondary 

education of some kind. Moreover 75 per cent of the current 

work-force will need to return to school for retraining or 

upgrading of some kind over the course of their careers. 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

Within this context, our current high school drop-out rate of 

roughly 30 per cent should send cold shivers down the back of 

every thinking citizen. The rate of participation in formal 

education by 17-year-olds is 94 per cent in Japan, 89 per cent 

in Germany, and only 72 per cent here in Canada. That does 

not augur well for our future. 

 

We are committed to working with all of our educational 

partners in capping this problem, but we will do so in a 

co-ordinated fashion. By this I mean that we cannot face the 

future with confidence simply by addressing individual 

problems in isolation. There are many other challenges 

confronting our schools, and a shotgun approach will not work. 

Before we can meet people's needs we need to clearly define 

what those needs are, not only now but into the future in the 

years ahead. 

 

Consider the following. Our population is undergoing some 

very major shifts. The demographic make-up of the people we 

serve is changing, which means their needs change as well. Our 

population is ageing. Senior citizens now make up just over 13 

per cent of our population, and this is expected to rise to 15 per 

cent within the next 20 years. 

 

We have the highest proportion of seniors of any province in 

Canada. In small towns of under 2,000, 30 to 40 per cent of the 

residents are 65 and over. As might be expected, the percentage 

of young people, those under 20 years of age, is declining. In 

fact this peaked in 1957 and has been declining ever since. 

 

(1215) 

 

In 1941 the average family size in Saskatchewan was 4.1. By 

1988 this had declined to 3.2. This has obvious implications for 

our school population at the kindergarten to grade 12 level. 

Elementary and secondary enrolment peaked at just over 

250,000 in 1970, and has since declined steadily to the current 

200,000. Enrolment seems to have levelled off at or around that 

number. 

 

Saskatchewan residents are also on the move. In 1931 more 

than 500,000 people lived on Saskatchewan farms. This has 

since declined by more than two-thirds. Again there are direct 

implications for the school population. In 1931, 90 per cent of 

total school enrolment was in rural areas. It is now under 44 per 

cent. 

 

Our Indian and Metis population currently accounts for an 

estimated 12 per cent of the provincial total. This is expected to 

rise to 18 per cent within the next 15 years. 

 

More to the point, an estimated 18 per cent of Saskatchewan 

children aged five to 17 are now of Indian and Metis ancestry. 

This too is expected to show a major increase in the future. So 

our kindergarten to grade 12 enrolment is currently stable in 

terms of numbers, but very much in flux in terms of where they 

go to school. 

 

Moreover, the faces a future Saskatchewan teacher sees in the 

class-room will reflect a different ethnic mosaic than is now the 

case. While K to 12 enrolment has flattened out, 

post-secondary enrolment continues to grow. A greater 

percentage of our population is now in 

the post-secondary age bracket. A greater percentage of our 

population, I believe, has come to realize the importance of 

additional education and training beyond the secondary level. 

 

The kindergarten to grade 12 school day and the school year, 

on the other hand, have not changed to any great extent for 

decades. They are now largely out of sync with the working 

day and modern family structures. Our school year continues to 

reflect the premise that kids have to be home early to milk 

cows and must take months off in the summer to tend crops. 

 

Women now make up nearly half of Canada's work-force. In 

nearly two out of three families with two spouses, both partners 

work. Two-income families are the rule rather than the 

exception. Only 16 per cent of all families in Canada now fit 

the model that the school day was designed for, husband at 

work and wife at home to look after the kids. 

 

We have allowed a huge mismatch to develop between the 

school calendar and the realities of modern family life. The end 

result is children who go home to empty houses, children who 

hang out in the summer or after school with nothing to do, 

school buildings that sit idle for months in the summer, rural 

schools that beg for students while urban schools overflow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government was given a mandate for change. 

We were given this mandate in part because of growing 

realization that the old ways were no longer working. Putting 

people first means looking beyond their immediate 

requirements to their future needs. It means assessing our 

existing education system in terms of its ability to meet those 

needs. The time is right to step back and take an objective look 

at all levels of our education system. Is it doing the job it was 

intended to do? Can it address our future needs? Can it cope 

with changing enrolments and changing demands by students? 

 

We have already taken the first steps towards finding answers 

to these questions. A review of SIAST is now in progress. A 

review of the regional colleges is scheduled for later this 

summer along with the role of the private vocational schools. 

In addition we will be establishing a panel to assess our current 

university structure and taking a look at the overall linkages 

between our various post-secondary institutions and 

partnerships with business and industry in technical education. 

 

On the K to 12 side, we will continue to evaluate the new core 

curriculum now being developed and introduced in our schools. 

The purpose of the review is to determine if it is accomplishing 

what we hoped it would and also to establish a more 

reasonable, affordable pace of implementation. 

 

We will work with all involved to improve the current system. 

At some point our school system must be restructured to more 

accurately reflect the demographic facts of life in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A new Saskatchewan Education Council is being established to 

help this process along. It will consist of parents and educators, 

along with representatives from 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

the business community, labour, and community groups. The 

appropriate government agencies at the provincial and federal 

level will also be represented. This process of review is not an 

academic exercise or the standard political ploy of stalling for 

time. A competent government is one that acts on sound advice 

and one that does as well as plans. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I can guarantee you that the various 

reviews will not just gather dust on the shelf. We cannot afford 

to leave things as they are or simply allow what has gone on in 

the past to continue. We no longer have the funds. We can no 

longer be sure that what is now in place meets our students' 

present and future needs. Saskatchewan's first graduating class 

of the 21st century is already half-way through primary school. 

Time is of the essence here and the various reviews will be 

conducted accordingly. 

 

Although our focus is on planning for the future, there are 

some things that can be done immediately. For example, 

distance education can play a key role in addressing the needs 

of our rural student population. Modern technological tools are 

tailor-made for serving relatively small groups of students 

spread over wide areas. Accordingly, funding for distance 

education programs has been largely maintained at previous 

levels. The regional colleges will receive one and a half million 

dollars through the education outreach fund to support distance 

education programs. 

 

Funding for the extension of university library services that 

support off-campus programming has been maintained. 

Funding to subsidize adults enrolled in correspondence school 

courses has been increased in this budget by 95 per cent, from 

$190,000 the previous year to $390,000 in '92-93. 

 

Another area where we can move fairly quickly is that of 

Indian and Metis education. I will be releasing a report on this 

in the near future. It was prepared by my department's Indian 

and Metis education advisory committee and examined how 

the needs of our Indian and Metis students could best be met 

through the '90s and beyond. 

 

Another immediate step taken with this budget is the 

elimination of grants to educational institutions for reading 

materials. It's not very often that a politician stands up and 

proudly announces the end of a grant. However, in this case I 

am more than pleased to do so. This particular grant program 

was hastily thrown together by the previous administration to 

offset the impact of the PST on school books -- the tax on 

learning. This was yet another case of government digging 

holes and filling them up behind themselves. It was a 

cumbersome process that simply reinforced all the worst 

stereotypes about government incompetence. 

 

This program has been eliminated because it is no longer 

necessary and it is no longer necessary because the harmonized 

PST, another legacy of the previous administration, no longer 

exists. Part of the process of restoring competence to public 

affairs is eliminating situations where government gives with 

the right hand 

and takes away with the left. The PST on reading materials was 

one such instance that has now been corrected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I announced a freeze on all 

capital funding for schools. This was done so that we could 

review existing procedures and see if they were now consistent 

with our goals and objectives. This review has shown that 

current practices for capital funding are very much in need of 

change. Further details on capital spending will be made 

known on May 15 of this year. 

 

Our schools are places of learning and, to a lesser extent, 

community centres. They are not political footballs. They will 

not be under this administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one in this province was expecting a 

good-news budget. People know the shape we're in financially 

and they understand that something had to be done. Much of 

my time over the past few months has been spent discussing 

our financial plight with representatives of the education 

system. I want to thank all of them for their many useful 

suggestions. More importantly, I want to thank all of them for 

their understanding and their recognition that the public purse 

is not bottomless and that we must therefore begin to live 

within our means. 

 

Virtually all of our learning institutions have had to make 

sacrifices of one kind or another. However, I want to 

re-emphasize that grants to third parties and other agencies still 

account for 96 per cent of our total budget. I want to 

re-emphasize that what we spend on ourselves on running the 

Department of Education accounts for only 4 per cent. 

 

I would like to turn for a moment to the announcement that was 

made yesterday with respect to the Family Foundation. Some 

of the functions which were housed in the Family Foundation, 

the portion which will not move to Community Services, will 

be retained within the Department of Education as a signal to 

the Department of Education's commitment to children and 

families. 

 

We will continue to assist Saskatchewan communities to 

address the needs of hungry children. We have increased 

funding for child hunger services from 740,000 to 1 million, an 

increase of 35 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- This program will be administered by 

the Department of Social Services. Staff will continue to work 

with schools, churches, service clubs, volunteers, agencies, 

businesses, and governments at all levels to share in the 

responsibility for feeding hungry children and to address the 

long-term developmental needs of children and their families. 

 

Education plays a critical role in supporting children, families, 

and communities. I am pleased to say that innovative and 

creative public education programs such as the forums about 

families program and the community education program will 

continue within the Department of Education. Forums about 

families sponsors community organized workshops and 

seminars that explore issues of concern to families and teach 

family-living skills. Forums 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

provide an opportunity for communities to plan family 

education programs that recognize local needs and use local 

resources. 

 

The community education program helps people develop skills 

such as budgeting and managing family finances through a 

network of trained volunteers who facilitate groups in 

communities across the province. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association's recent 

symposium on the role of the school, with representatives from 

Social Service, Education, and local government sectors, 

witnessed overwhelming consensus on the importance of 

placing top priority on the needs of children and families. 

These needs are often complex, demanding flexible, varied, 

and co-operative responses. 

 

We need to consider how all of us -- the school, the 

community, government, and non-government organizations -- 

can work as partners to provide integrated and comprehensive 

service focused on the child and the family. This is particularly 

important at a time when resources are in short supply and new 

money is just not available. 

 

I will be working with my colleagues and our community 

partners to integrate services for children and families in 

communities across the province with a school-based focus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the recent throne speech stated that my 

government is committed to use Crown corporations to help 

stimulate economic development in the province. I'm pleased to 

report to you today that SaskTel is playing a significant part in 

helping this province meet its economic development and 

public policy goals. 

 

SaskTel generates considerable economic activity and 

employment within the province, and provides Saskatchewan 

residents and businesses with access to the most advanced and 

efficient telecommunication services available anywhere in the 

world today. Some 83 years after its inception, SaskTel 

continues to carry out its mandate of being the leader in 

bringing the benefits of the information age to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1230) 

 

No longer just a telephone company, SaskTel provides local 

and long-distance voice, data, image, and text services to more 

than 445,000 residential, small business, and big-business 

customers. SaskTel International, SaskTel's international 

marketing arm, is capitalizing on the corporation's technical 

expertise and management strengths. 

 

In 1992, work continues on a $41 million project to install and 

integrate a rural telecommunications network in 10 provinces 

of the Philippines. This is the largest project to date for SaskTel 

International, and it will provide approximately 250 rural 

communities throughout the Philippines with basic telephone 

services. 

 

SaskTel International is also involved in numerous other 

telecommunications projects in Canada, the United States, 

England, Puerto Rico, and Tanzania. 

As SaskTel continues to work to provide its customers with the 

latest information aid services, there are a number of 

significant contributions being made by this Crown corporation 

to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

One of these contributions is jobs. The corporation employs 

almost 3,900 people in permanent positions. The majority of 

those people are in Saskatoon and Regina; however there are 

also employees in more than 60 other communities throughout 

the province. Besides helping to economically stimulate the 

communities in which they live, many SaskTel employees 

donate their time and talent to making these communities better 

places to live and work. 

 

SaskTel has a long history of support for community activities 

in all parts of the province, from the volunteer assistance of its 

employees to its corporate contribution program that provides 

financial support to hundreds of worthwhile non-profit and 

charitable organizations within the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's the knowledge and commitment of SaskTel 

employees that make the application of SaskTel's new 

technologies more valuable to their customers. Because along 

with knowing the business of telecommunications, the SaskTel 

people know the business and the background of the customers 

they serve. 

 

Another SaskTel contribution involves technology. SaskTel's 

10-year, $500 million digital switching program scheduled to 

be completed by 1995 will make the company one of the first 

in Canada to offer its customers the benefit of fully 

computerized switching. What that means is that no matter 

where customers live or work, that they will have equal access 

to an ever increasing number of advanced telecommunications 

products and services. 

 

Technology provides the edge that Saskatchewan-based 

businesses need to operate successfully in a global 

market-place and to lessen the impact of the current recession. 

It's no secret that many Saskatchewan businesses and industries 

are developing a reputation for excellence and for business 

capability. Many businesses have acknowledged that the 

strategic use of telecommunications is one of their keys to 

financial success. They're using new telecommunications 

technologies to improve productivity, to cut costs, and to 

compete more effectively in the national and international 

market-place. 

 

It's also true that an increasing number of businesses are 

looking at Saskatchewan as a potential spot to relocate or 

establish new business. I know that many different things are 

attracting them here -- more affordable operating costs, a better 

quality of life for employees, availability of raw materials, just 

to name a few. 

 

However in many cases, especially for companies relying on 

the gathering, processing, or distribution of data or for 

industries where distance and location are no longer relevant to 

their business, the availability of world class communications 

capability has a lot to do with those businesses' decision to 

locate here in Saskatchewan. 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, another way SaskTel is helping Saskatchewan 

businesses remain competitive in the market-place of the 21st 

century is through new products and services. 

Telecommunications is becoming an integral part of doing 

business, providing many more ways of reducing operating 

costs, freeing up money for research and development. 

 

SaskTel's investment in new technologies has also contributed 

to lower operating and maintenance costs. These savings have 

been passed on to customers in a series of long-distance rate 

reductions over the last few years. The cumulative impact of 

these reductions is significant. The cost of out-of-province 

long-distance calls has decreased by an average 30 per cent. 

 

SaskTel is one of the province's largest Crown corporations. 

Under its 1992 capital budget program, it will spend 

approximately $112 million on telecommunications equipment 

to meet consumer demands. Many of these dollars will remain 

right here in Saskatchewan as SaskTel buys goods and services 

from local businesses throughout the province and creating 

jobs in the construction industry. Over 78 per cent of SaskTel's 

total purchases are Saskatchewan made. 

 

SaskTel has a supplier development program in place. One of 

its functions is to put provincial suppliers in touch with 

company personnel who might not be aware of the local 

capabilities available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has an ongoing commitment to research 

and development within the province. SaskTel spends more 

than $6 million per year on telecommunications research and 

development. Some current projects include sponsorship of the 

Saskatoon branch of the TRL, the Telecommunications 

Research Laboratory. SaskTel R&D (research and 

development) is currently testing automatic meter reading to 

residential customers. There are 39 homes in Saskatoon 

participating in this trial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, SaskTel has been developing 

into an acknowledged leader in the telecommunications 

industry. As citizens of Saskatchewan, we can be proud of the 

fact that SaskTel has been providing us with access to 

affordable, high quality service while maintaining rates for 

basic telephone service that are still among the lowest in North 

America. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, this is about to change if the federal 

government has its way. In August 1989, a decision by the 

Supreme Court of Canada gave the federal government the 

basis to regulate telecommunications nationally. Now the 

federal government intends to take the control of 

telecommunications regulation across the country. 

Consequently SaskTel would be regulated by the CRTC 

(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission). 

 

We expect that if this happens, it will have an adverse effect on 

SaskTel's ability to respond quickly to customer and market 

demands and on their ability to continue their 

role as an instrument of provincial public policy. Federal 

regulation of SaskTel will also mean the imposition of added 

costs and bureaucratic red tape. 

 

SaskTel estimates the additional expense will be $6 million per 

year. Virtually every major action by SaskTel -- including all 

rates and prices, new products, corporate initiatives, rates of 

return, and new construction -- will require under CRTC 

regulation prior approval, severely limiting the company's 

flexibility and ability to respond promptly to changing industry 

conditions and business requirements. 

 

Another threat to SaskTel's financial well-being is the potential 

of competition in long-distance that was advocated by Unitel 

and BC Rail/Lightel in hearings before the CRTC during the 

summer of 1991. 

 

We're opposed to this kind of competition because SaskTel's 

basic rates would have to rise to offset lost long-distance 

revenues through bypass and Unitel-style competition. In 

Saskatchewan that revenue loss is estimated at between 35 and 

$70 million per year. Some of the shortfall would have to be 

made up in the form of higher rates for basic and other money 

losing services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will directly affect SaskTel's customers, the 

taxpayers of this province. A recent exhaustive study into 

Canadian long-distance competition predicted that 90 per cent 

of telephone customers would experience higher telephone 

rates if Unitel-style long-distance competition is permitted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my government opposes both federal government 

regulation of SaskTel and unfair competition in the 

long-distance market-place. However, Mr. Speaker, my 

government is committed to ensuring that SaskTel is dedicated 

to improving the quality of life and the environment in our 

province through jobs, leading-edge technology, 

state-of-the-art products and services, quality customer service, 

competitive rates, and research and development investment. 

All of these are part of my government's plan to enhance 

economic opportunities in this province. We have the ability to 

attract businesses and industries to Saskatchewan, to stay in 

Saskatchewan, and to succeed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that we clearly have 

a long way to go in restructuring Saskatchewan for the 21st 

century. We have a long way to go in terms of getting 

Saskatchewan back on a solid financial footing, but we've 

taken the first step with the budget for this fiscal year -- a first 

step towards deficit control, honest government, and a capable, 

common sense approach to the conduct of our affairs. We're 

moved to halt the slippery slope down the slide of pork-barrel 

public administration and carefree spending. 

 

As Winston Churchill once said: 

 

 . . . this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. 

But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me to enter into the debate on the budget and to 

express my support for it. 

 

I would like to offer my congratulations to the Minister of 

Finance on his budget. I believe the budget that we have before 

us, given the realities that we face in the province, is the best 

balance that can be found. On the one hand, we have a need to 

move towards a balanced budget; and on the other hand, we 

must be careful that we don't do things that we don't want to do 

to people that . . . when we try to move too fast towards a 

balanced budget. 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, it's no surprise to you that I rise to 

support the budget speech and the direction that it starts us in. 

It's a new direction and a changed direction. 

 

The budget has renewed my hope for our province. It has 

renewed my confidence that after nine and a half years of waste 

and destruction under a government which chose to squander 

the resources of our province and to give away our resources 

that, at last, now things are going to change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- And change they must because we are faced 

with the highest per-capita debt of any province in the nation of 

Canada. And this cannot go on. 

 

It's spring, Mr. Speaker, and I'm a farmer. And this is the first 

spring in my life -- because my father was a farmer -- and it's 

the first spring in my life that I've had no calves to look after 

and no farming to do, and quite frankly I miss it. And 

sometimes I wonder why I'm here. What am I doing here? 

 

But here it is. This is the reason that we're here. This is the 

reason that I ran and the reason that I'm here today, is to try to 

restore something to this province that has been lacking, and to 

stop the crime that was going on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, the first major heading in the 

speech could be called, putting our financial house in order. 

And I remember the election promise card -- first things first: 

putting our financial house in order. And here it is. We simply 

cannot afford to continue the practices of the former 

government. Saskatchewan cannot afford it. We must restore 

something to this province that has been missing for nine and a 

half years, and that's financial responsibility. The management 

of the public purse has been lacking. We as a government have 

to learn to live within our means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the third time that a New Democratic 

government or a CCF government has had to come into this 

province and restore fiscal responsibility to this province and 

clean up the mess that was left after a government of one of the 

old-line parties. And they claim to be business-like. 

But after looking at the Gass Commission report I can honestly 

say, and anyone that reads it will say, this province has not 

been governed in a business-like fashion for nine and a half 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- I say the third time, and I meant it. The first 

time was in 1944 when Tommy Douglas came into a bankrupt 

province and began to restore the province by balancing the 

budgets and developing and planning programs that have been 

the envy of other provinces and copied by other provinces and 

other countries all over the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- The next time, Mr. Speaker, was in 1971 

when Allan Blakeney's government came in to restore the 

damage during the Thatcher years. And people should 

remember this. At that time the standing joke in the province 

was: will the last one to leave the province please remember to 

turn out the lights. I remember that. Mr. Speaker, here we go 

again, another mess -- the third one -- and I can honestly say 

this is the smelliest one to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope we remember how we got 

into the mess we're in today, teetering on the edge of 

bankruptcy as we are. I hope people remember, and I believe 

they will, Mr. Speaker. Although the members opposite try to 

divert attention away from the facts, I believe the people will 

remember under what leader we got into the problems we're in 

today. And God help us if we don't remember, because those 

who do not remember the mistakes of the past have a tendency 

to repeat them later on. God forbid that that should happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I farm in the north-east part of the province, a part of the 

province that has a very pretty countryside. And we have a lot 

of tourists there, especially in the warmer time of the year, the 

summertime. And the lady from Nova Scotia told me a story 

that perhaps will explain why I believe this province and the 

people of this province will remember. 

 

It seems that when she grew up in Nova Scotia she had to walk 

to school, as a lot of us had to when we were growing up. And 

on the way home from school in the springtime the water was 

running and the snow was melting, and the children would stop 

and play in the mud and water. And we know how it is as 

parents, our kids come home with mud on their clothes and 

their boots full of water. And this is what was happening. 

 

And she got instructions from her mother -- don't do this. Don't 

play in the mud. But she came home from school and played in 

the mud and dallied along the way. And she came home wet 

and dirty and late. 

 

And her mother asked her at the door and asked her to explain 

herself, to explain the mess. Well, Mr. Speaker, she tried to 

explain herself. She said I fell down, others 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1992 

pushed me. She said my boots are wet because I sweat a lot. 

She said, my boots are wet from the day before. She had all 

kinds of excuses -- good words; she thought they were reasons 

at the door. 

 

Mr. Speaker, her mother just picked that little girl up and sat 

her . . . stood her on the kitchen stool where the mother usually 

sat as she worked. And that little girl looked out the kitchen 

window, and all at once she noticed something that her mother 

wanted her to notice -- that her mother had a perfect view, 

perfect vision all the way to the schoolhouse and all the way 

home. And she had been sitting there watching her daughter 

come from school. 

 

And all the words and all the excuses, no matter how eloquent 

they were, weren't going to convince her mother because she 

had been watching. And she realized that no matter how much 

she complained and how much she tried to deflect the criticism 

of her mother, it was going to fall on deaf ears. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all these eloquent speeches that are made by the 

members opposite will not change what the taxpayers of this 

province have seen with their eyes. And they've experienced it 

with their families and their neighbours, and they have seen the 

deterioration in this province. And they have seen it and 

experienced it, and they will remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- But, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the mess we're in 

in the finances of our province, there is some reasons for hope 

in the budget. Local businesses are today, as they always have 

been, the best way of employment and opportunities. The days 

of the large megaprojects where the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

have to put up the capital and take all the risk are over. And I 

say, good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a combined effort to ensure our future power 

supplies and create economic activity and job creation, we are 

looking at nine different proposals of co-generation power 

projects. These projects are all in rural communities and have 

economic importance for development in the potential they 

have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, co-generation is the way of the future. It involves 

taking waste heat from industry and heating plants, turning it 

into electricity, and then incorporating it into the power grid. 

It's new, it's economical, and it's cheaper; and it's totally 

different than the projects like the Rafferty-Alameda scandal. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, I'm on the environment and 

resources caucus committee. And what a disaster this project 

has been for our province. Millions of dollars in cost overruns, 

no water, lawsuits, more lawsuits, still no water. And no one 

knows if it ever will work. No one knows if it ever will work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, turning to another matter, I was glad to see 

in the budget speech that independent accounting principles are 

being adopted, making government spending more 

accountable. Among the important 

changes in this area, we're also going to have a code of ethical 

conduct for members of the Assembly, that will have high 

standards of behaviour. A new Conflict of Interests Act will be 

introduced to provide guidelines for all elected representatives 

in the performance of their public duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the public wants individual elected 

representatives to have a stronger voice in government and the 

daily decisions. All-party committees are going to be 

revitalized to give a better role for individual members. And 

after the examples of the last nine and a half years, people are 

asking for a more accountable government. They're asking for 

a more open government, and they're asking for a more honest 

government. And our government intends to respond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer, and my 

constituency is made up of farmers and agriculture based 

industry, and in the budget speech it recognizes that we need 

long-term stability for our farms and our farm families. 

 

The gross revenue insurance plan, the net income stabilization 

plan were a beginning, but they're not enough. We would like 

to put the gross revenue insurance plan on a cost-of-living 

formula . . . a cost-of-production formula rather, I should say, a 

realistic one. We would like to increase Ottawa's share of the 

premiums and reduce the producer premiums because, Mr. 

Speaker, because the major problem in grain prices today is the 

fact that other countries are subsidizing their farmers with 

federal tax dollars. And a province the size of Saskatchewan 

cannot afford to compete with federal governments. 

 

Ottawa should live up to its responsibilities towards 

agriculture. Other countries are doing it and our federal 

government has to respond. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 

federal government owes us as farmers in western Canada over 

$500 million. It was the so-called third line of defence that 

never came about. It was promised but it never happened and 

we haven't forgot that promise yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan made the right 

choice on October 21. They examined the record of the 

previous government and they examined the record of our 

governments in the past. And I believe they found, as I'm sure 

anyone would find, that we put people first. Even though they 

know that we must get our spending under control, they trust us 

that we won't do it on the backs of the poor and 

underprivileged. They expect us to be fair and to remember 

compassion. And we will. 

 

Local programs that deal with hunger and nutrition for children 

will be enhanced. The funding will rise by 35 per cent in this 

area. That's compassion. That's fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, breaking the poverty cycle means creating new 

employment opportunities and training as you work. 

 

We already have moved in this area, and there's more to come. 

Mr. Speaker, we are planning to achieve a gender balance on 

all government agencies, boards, and 



May 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

commissions, and we're going to increase aboriginal 

representation, recognizing that they now are 12 per cent of the 

province's population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two reserves in my constituency, and 

they are pleased to see the start we have made in correcting 

mistakes of the past. They have been very patient until now. 

And they look to us, to our new government, for co-operation 

that they can participate in this province -- participate with 

respect and be proud of their culture, proud of their customs 

and their traditions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, the budget speech is part of our 

new plan and new direction to rebuild Saskatchewan together. 

We have not been afraid to tackle the challenges ahead of us. 

We've started taking this province in a new direction. This is 

what the people elected us for and this is what we're doing. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province are up 

to the task. I believe the new government is up to the task. And 

we will show the rest of Canada again, in fact we will show the 

world that just as in days past, the people of this province do 

have what it takes for the job. And we will do it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- There is, Mr. Speaker, just one more thing I 

would like to comment on before I take my place. I'm surprised 

by the comments of the members opposite, the comments as, 

we had our priorities right -- oh? -- everything was in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the facts, it seems almost unbelievable 

to me that anybody would say these things -- to take our 

province in less than 10 years from a province that owed very, 

very little and add over $10 billion. That's more than a billion 

dollars a year -- added dollars, new dollars. That's $40,000-plus 

for a family like mine, a family of four, added taxes owing. 

Don't tell me that everything was in order. Don't tell me that's 

all right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- It now being 1 o'clock this House 

stands adjourned until Monday at 2 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


