




















































Hansard: June 30, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1131 

 June 30, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today marks the 30th 

anniversary of medicare here in Saskatchewan.  On October 13, 

1961, in this Chamber, the late Premier T.C. Douglas 

concluded the debate on the introduction of The Saskatchewan 

Medical Care Insurance Act.  In concluding his speech he said: 

I believe that if this medical care insurance program is 

successful it will prove to be the forerunner of a national 

medical care insurance plan. 

 

I want to say that when the history of our time is written, it may 

well be recorded that the Saskatchewan legislature and the 

Saskatchewan people have pioneered in this field and took the 

first step towards ultimately establishing the system of 

medicare insurance for all people of Canada. 

 

We believe that health care is too important to be left to chance 

that the average family will have the necessary money to buy 

health services.  I am convinced that both the people and 

doctors will be so completely satisfied with the plan that no 

government will dare to take it away. 

 

Tommy's own words are the plan's best memorial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, On July 1, as Canadians celebrate 

our 125th anniversary as a nation, here in Saskatchewan we 

celebrate the 30th anniversary of Saskatchewan's most 

beautiful gift to the people of Canada -- medicare.  For several 

years medicare in Saskatchewan was completely funded by the 

people of Saskatchewan, thus proving that sacrifice combined 

with great vision truly can produce great things. 

 

Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and many, many others 

were people of vision and action -- hospitalization in 1947, 

medicare in 1962, and the dream of an effective 

illness-prevention health system to which we find ourselves 

committed to today. 

 

In their spirit we are again prepared to make sacrifices and 

changes in the interest of universally accessible, publicly 

funded and administered, quality health care for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker on this day, on behalf of my constituents and my 

family, to the pioneers of medicare for their vision, 

determination, compassion and action, I can say only a sincere 

and simple thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, on the anniversary of medicare, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be well to review the past decade to see how 

far we have come.  Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, our health care 

system has been enhanced to provide better protection and 

better coverage for all 

 Saskatchewan people. 

 

The previous government introduced the breast cancer 

screening program which is vital to Saskatchewan women, and 

I commend the government for the continuation and the 

furtherance of this program. 

 

In those 10 years as well, entire new systems of health care 

were introduced for our people, including a province-wide 

chiropody program, community physiotherapy, community 

living programs, CAT (computerized axial tomography) 

scanners, new cancer clinics, vastly expanded drug and alcohol 

treatment, tuberculosis prevention, particularly in the North, 

and many others that cannot be fit into 90 seconds. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we in this province are proud of our 

medicare system and certainly want to give thanks to the many 

individuals over the years, such as the Hon. John George 

Diefenbaker, for their commitment to medicare across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In all the comments 

today and tomorrow about this very significant 30th 

anniversary of medicare, we would be remiss if we did not pay 

tribute to the brave and visionary men and women who brought 

medicare into the world.  We have praised Tommy Douglas of 

course, as we should, because it was his life-long determination 

to bring about medical equality that lit the flame. 

 

But there were others equally dedicated, equally unswerving, 

equally tenacious in their determination that the Liberals, 

Tories, and other naysayers of the day would not prevent the 

birth of this new program.  I think, Mr. Speaker, of W.G. (Bill) 

Davies -- minister of Health in 1962 who got an immediate 

baptism by fire -- Eiling Kramer, Allan Blakeney and the other 

members of the government who stood their ground during 

those tense days before July 1, 1962. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, we should remember Premier 

Woodrow Lloyd who led the way.  The phrase "grace under 

pressure" was created to define him and his actions during that 

time.  Vilified, threatened, harassed, berated on all sides, he 

stood his ground because he knew his cause, the people's cause, 

was just.  He stood his ground and he never raised his voice.  

He was a gentleman to the end, and the greatness of the 

program he ushered in is only matched by the profound 

integrity of the character he showed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we will 

all be in our constituency tomorrow, and I think it's important 

for us to mark this very important birthday of our nation. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we are a nation 125 years young.  

And for a nation, 125 years, Mr. Speaker, indeed is very young. 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

And I'm so proud of this country and of our people, Mr. 

Speaker, that sometimes it overwhelms me.  The great majesty 

of every corner of our land is inspiring -- a gift from God that 

each of us cherish from moment to moment in our lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this country, this Canada, is too precious to be 

characterized or properly honoured in 90 seconds.  Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, to give every member time to discuss our country 

on this important day, I ask leave of the Assembly to move this 

following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly congratulate the Canadian people on the 

occasion of the 125th anniversary of Canada, and that the 

proceedings on this motion be bound and sent by Mr. 

Speaker to the Governor General of Canada on behalf of the 

people of Canada. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Members, just give me a minute to . . . I think 

the member should be aware that on . . . You can only move 

motions on orders of the day and not in routine proceedings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, last week I had the privilege to represent the Minister 

of Health at a provincial mental health conference.  And the 

conference was attended by over 100 delegates, consisting of 

individuals who are mentally challenged, their families, and 

representatives from many government organizations and 

community services. 

 

A primary focus was on how to ensure that individuals who are 

mentally challenged do not fall between the cracks of the 

mental health programs and into the criminal justice system.  

There was significant support in the minister's wellness 

approach and in the five initial steps undertaken by the 

government, including an overall increase of 3 per cent in the 

mental health budget. 

 

There were many benefits from this conference, Mr. Speaker, 

which will be outlined in the next issue of the Transition 

magazine.  Clearly we've got a long way to go in rebuilding a 

sound mental health service in the province, to once again 

assume our leadership role in this field. 

 

I commend the important organizations that have joined 

together with the individuals and families to address these 

shared concerns and to work towards the well-being of all 

Saskatchewan residents.  On this 30th anniversary of medicare 

we all recognize the importance of promoting good mental 

health and this must be a priority area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wish this coalition well and know that all members will 

support their efforts and pledge our co-operation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Canada has been a 

world leader in developing a universal, publicly funded health 

care system.  Our medicare is the envy and model for countries 

around the globe. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we should especially be proud of it 

because it was here that the whole concept of medicare came 

into being.  Many people have talked about the need for 

medicare, but it was our own people, right here in this 

province, that actually had the courage and determination to 

turn the dream into a reality in spite of harsh and unreasonable 

criticism. 

 

It is appropriate now, 30 years later, the party that introduced 

health care to the world is also embarking on reform to our 

health care system.  The principle of medicare does not say that 

everything will be done exactly in the same way for ever.  The 

principle of medicare says that those who need health care shall 

receive it.  There are many changes and improvements that can 

and should be made to our system.  This government is not 

afraid of change. 

 

With the principles of medicare as strongly entrenched in our 

party today as they were 30 years ago, I am confident that 

reformed health care will mean that working together in a 

community-based system, we will embark on the next 

generation of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal-Provincial Funding for GRIP 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, given the concern that all of us 

have with respect to drought and given the concern this 

legislature has had with respect to offering adequate crop 

insurance and protection to farmers, I have a question to the 

minister of Crop Insurance. 

 

The federal Minister of Agriculture has offered to pick up the 

tab for 1991 crop insurance, the federal government's share of 

it which is pretty significant.  And I wonder if the minister has 

given any thought and consideration to the fact that the federal 

offer was until June 30, and this is June 30. 

 

And if that's the case, if the minister might want to tell the 

farmers and tell this Legislative Assembly if in fact that he'll 

take the offer or if he would allow the farmers to choose '91 or 

'92, particularly given the drought situation, given the offer, 

and given the considerable amount of money that's on the table.  

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I just ask if he's been in 

negotiation with the minister to talk about this kind of money 

coming into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear on 

one thing.  In the first place, the federal Minister of Agriculture 

hasn't offered this government anything in writing.  He's 

offered it to the press, and it's very difficult to tell from a press 

report exactly what has been offered. 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

I think the other confusion that I would like to clear up is that 

'91 GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), unless the 

members opposite have a time machine that they can take us 

back to '91, is not and never will be an option.  The only option 

would be a program that complies with the '91 formula which, 

as you know, will be very different than the program that was 

in place last year. 

 

And I think that's part of what farmers have been misled into 

believing: that we can go back and have exactly the same 

program that we had last year, with the bells and whistles that 

were added on to the program last year by the federal 

government and with the . . . without the adjustments to crop 

insurance rates and so on that were coming, whether we have 

the old program or the new program.  So that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- An additional question to the minister.  Mr. 

Minister, are you saying that you have not discussed and that 

you have not had any negotiations with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture who's offered to pay obviously a great deal of 

money to the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, and you haven't talked to him about that offer?  

And today is June 30 and he said he would pay it up until July 

1.  Are you admitting to the farmers of this province that you 

haven't even discussed that option of getting probably several 

hundred million dollars from the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, just for the information of 

the members opposite, a number of ministers have been in 

contact with the federal minister or his office.  It is clear from 

those discussions that the federal government has never offered 

anything other than the regular cost-sharing arrangements that 

we have found to be inadequate in terms of offering the 

program in the old form and continue to find it inadequate for 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will go back to the minister of 

Crop Insurance, and the Minister of Agriculture can perhaps 

answer if he likes.  I asked the minister of Crop Insurance if 

he's been in negotiations with the federal minister on providing 

money to farmers and he refused to answer.  Then the Minister 

of Agriculture comes out and says, well there's been lots of 

talk. 

 

Can he table any specific negotiations on the kinds of program 

and the kinds of money that he has talked to the federal 

government about up until June 30, so that in fact the 

substantial increase in payments coming from the federal 

government could be available to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan?  Could you table any of that information? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the discussions . . . On June 

16 we received a letter from the federal minister saying that 

there was no additional money available from the federal 

government.  On June 19 the press Donnybrook began with the 

members opposite participating, with all kinds of numbers 

flying around. 

And in checking with the federal minister's office, it was very 

clear that the letter of June 16 continued to be true, that no 

provision other than the regular funding arrangements for 

GRIP as it had always been constructed were available for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, either one of the ministers could 

answer, and I will perhaps even encourage the Minister of 

Finance to participate as a result of the information that 

perhaps he failed to provide last night. 

 

To the Minister of Agriculture, you have said that the federal 

government would participate in this '91 program, it could cost 

Saskatchewan an extra 40 to $60 million.  Last night the 

Minister of Finance said that the Crop Insurance minister told 

him that it would cost Saskatchewan up to $300 million more. 

 

Now would you help clear this up?  If in fact it's going to cost 

30 or 40 or $50 million more to get more money coming from 

Ottawa, that's one amount of money.  But if in fact it might cost 

up to $300 million, you can imagine what that would lever 

from Ottawa.  Would you be able to clear up the accurate 

figure on what 1991 would mean to farmers, and what . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped that one 

of those who had participated in the designing this awful piece 

of policy might understand the answer without asking it.  The 

cost sharing on the GRIP program as it's been designed 

seriously debilitates provinces who are being devastated by the 

circumstances that the program is supposed to address.  The 

Prime Minister of Canada recognizes that, and I wish the 

members opposite would. 

 

There is the one issue of the up-front costs, that Saskatchewan 

simply does not have the additional 40 or $50 million in 

premiums that are required to participate in the program at the 

level under which it was created because of the state of our 

economy here.  On the other hand, the arrangement which was 

negotiated by the member opposite in constructing this 

program was that the province would be responsible for 35 per 

cent of the shortfall in the event of a deficit in the pool. 

 

My information from the department is that Saskatchewan's 

share of last year's shortfall, when we had a bumper crop, was 

about $76 million, and that the real risk the province is under in 

the way the program is designed is that if we should have a 

short crop, we could be looking at between 2 and $300 million 

in unanticipated liability to the province to cover that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I want to thank the minister.  Now he's thrown 

out three different numbers this morning.  And I wonder if he 

could check those numbers with the minister of Crop Insurance 

and then provide the right set of numbers to the Minister of 

Finance because in the budget, or in the Estimates last night for 

interim supply, 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

the number's $108 million.  Now you said, if we did 1991 

GRIP it would cost 50 to 60 million more, then you said it 

would cost 73, and then you said . . . Crop Insurance people 

said, well it could be up to $300 million more. 

 

Now the Minister of Finance said he got that number from the 

Crop Insurance people.  Are you telling this Assembly that the 

$108 million is not accurate?  Are you telling the Assembly 

that you can't lever extra money from the federal government 

because it would cost $300 million more to the taxpayers in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Is that to the Crop Insurance 

Corporation?  Is that to the taxpayers here?  Could you please 

clear that up for the public in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's becoming clearer and 

clearer why Saskatchewan is in such an awful economic state 

after 10 years of the number mangling the member opposite 

has done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If we want to get into the detailed 

discussion that the member opposite is suggesting, we can do 

that in Estimates at a time when we can fully explain each of 

the little pieces to his satisfaction.  The fact is that the cost of 

the income insurance programs have been created that put the 

Saskatchewan economy at risk, that were approved of by the 

member opposite, have two significant pieces of cost.  One is 

the up-front cost of premiums and the other is the cost of 

covering the deficit which goes into a pool and which has to 

eventually be paid off by the province and the producers.  And 

that deficit, potential deficit in the event of a short crop, is an 

amount of money that simply is unfathomable for an economy 

already devastated by the mismanagement of the previous 

administration. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, perhaps I could ask the minister 

of Crop Insurance if he would help the Minister of Agriculture 

who is trying to help the Minister of Finance with these 

numbers. 

 

Isn't it true, Mr. Minister of Crop Insurance, that when you 

look at an insurance company, that you can have a deficit from 

year to year if you have crop failures?  On the other hand you 

can have surpluses if you have a good crop, and that 15 or 20 

year ongoing operation, which is actuarially sound, is 

completely separate from the current taxpayers' responsibility 

on this year or any particular year? 

 

Would you care to comment on the fact that you have said, and 

provided information to the Minister of Finance, that it would 

cost $300 million more to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan if, in 

fact, you had to participate in 1991 GRIP?  Would you explain 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It's interesting that an animal scientist 

should have to try to explain to an economist his own program 

-- maybe because there's enough of something floating around 

in the air that it doesn't have much to do with fact. 

 

The member opposite presided over a government that, 

first of all, voluntarily took on a responsibility for a $100 

million for a drought assistance program in 1988.  In exchange 

for which privilege, he then also said, well why don't we while 

we're at it take on half of the federal cost of crop insurance.  

You poor brothers in Ottawa, we'll take it for you. 

 

Now let's look at the crop insurance program for a minute.  As 

a result of the way that program is set up there's about a half a 

billion dollar liability to the province and the producers of the 

province with respect to crop insurance, accumulated also 

through your years of administration.  You can say that will be 

paid off in premiums; it certainly will. 

 

It will be paid off in premiums that are increased which is one 

of the reasons why farmers are suffering increased premiums 

this year, is because that deficit is accumulated and you have 

taken on an additional responsibility for the province.  And you 

are equally familiar with the amount of off-loading that you 

have voluntarily accepted on behalf of the province.  For what 

purpose, I do not know.  But would you accept . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Clearly, Mr. Speaker, you and the media and 

the Legislative Assembly knows that the minister of Crop 

Insurance is not allowed to address these questions.  And the 

last so-called answer didn't address the question at all.  I'm 

trying to clear it up so that . . . You just don't have to get 

partisan about it.  Just please talk about it.  Please talk about it 

in a specific sense. 

 

There is a serious concern that there may be drought this year.  

Mr. Minister, there's a serious concern about drought in parts of 

Saskatchewan this year.  Farmers are coming into the 

legislature saying that they're worried about drought in 

Kelsey-Tisdale, Meadow Lake, south-east, south-west, various 

parts of the province. 

 

Do you have any contingency plans, Mr. Minister, or the 

minister of Crop Insurance, or the Minister or Finance, to help 

farmers in the event that there would be a 25 per cent below 

normal crop?  Do you have any plans at all that would help 

those farmers through what they already know is a crisis?  And 

they've had higher premiums and they're worried about their 

income.  Do you have any plans at all for them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the caution of 

the member opposite that we should not become partisan.  I 

think that's a delightful caution and one we should all observe.  

The reality is that farmers are worried about drought.  Rain 

would be very welcome in all parts of the province right now. 

 

The fact is as well that the Saskatchewan government is 

committed to the extent that it can possibly be committed with 

respect to these kinds of program payments.  And we have 

designed a program that is both a sound program from a 

policies perspective for farmers and also does 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

provide reasonable coverage in an ordinary situation 

considering that there is inadequate federal money now in farm 

support.  With the amount of federal money available we are 

doing all that we can. 

 

Now we have engaged in two debates in this legislature, one of 

which you chose to oppose -- the resolution on federal 

assistance and the one on drought assistance, which you chose 

to speak to the end of and I think you never voted on in the end 

-- in order to try to get the federal government on side, 

recognizing that they did draw Saskatchewan farmers into a 

crop stabilization program based on third line of defence 

coverage in an emergency situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you're getting to the point that all 

the provinces signed a crop insurance and a GRIP program, and 

to participate they would get a third line of defence and federal 

co-operation.  The federal minister has said to other provinces, 

as you know, in Alberta, Manitoba, and other jurisdictions, we 

have the money there to help you.  He said to you, Mr. 

Minister, and to Saskatchewan people, the money is there and I 

will even provide 1991 equivalent money if I can get the 

co-operation from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now to a lot of people that means not only crop insurance and 

the GRIP payments but an active participation in the possibility 

of third line of defence.  And you have broken the spirit of that.  

You said no, I don't want to participate.  It would cost us too 

much.  The farmers don't . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I ask the minister, if there's an offer today, June 

30, to come up with the kind of money that was there in the 

1991 program, won't you negotiate with the federal 

government?  Won't you do something on behalf of farmers so 

that they can look forward to added protection? Because you 

know under 1992 the protection just isn't there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

aware that farmers participated in 1991 GRIP because they 

expected a third line of defence support.  We have asked for a 

definition and a triggering of that support, and we have run into 

a brick wall and we . . . If you are really concerned about this, I 

would ask that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  There wasn't very 

much interference when the Leader of the Opposition asked his 

question.  I wish to give the same to the minister.  And while 

I'm on my feet I would like to ask the Associate Minister of 

Finance to maybe just tone down his comments a bit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Farmers 

believed they were going to get federal assistance in third line 

of defence.  We have suggested a number of 

alternatives.  At the outset we said the federal government 

should spend the $150 million that it would be spending in 

Saskatchewan, and should we have a different program 

designed on that third line of defence triggered to our disaster 

areas.  We have asked for that and we asked for your support in 

asking the federal government that commitment. 

 

We have asked the federal government to look at their third 

line committee's recommendations on delivering third line of 

defence which says that when the incomes fall . . . 

Saskatchewan's incomes have just plummeted relative to the 

previous averages.  And yet the federal government does not 

respond to their own committee which has suggested that in 

order to bring those incomes up to a reasonable level to 

compensate for about a billion dollar shortfall over the last two 

years, there needs to be more money. 

 

We ask for your support in dealing with the federal government 

on attracting that money which is a commitment they've 

already made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I've got to go back to the 

ministers, all three ministers, and ask them, if we're sitting . . . 

situation in Saskatchewan where we have a farm crisis, and you 

know that and it's serious, and then you have no grain and you 

have no income, and you have a minister . . . ministers of 

Agriculture, ministers of Crop Insurance, or ministers of 

Finance who say, but we can't help you because we don't have 

enough funds to do that and the Crop Insurance Corporation 

might be vulnerable if we had to help you. 

 

What do you tell those people when you look at the federal 

government coming along and say, we gave you $800 million 

third line of defence last year; we'd look at more this year if we 

could get co-operation from the provincial government?  What 

do you tell those people?  That they should go to Ottawa or 

they should go to the United States?  You are the ministers of 

Agriculture, Finance, and Crop Insurance.  They look to you 

for some guidance.  Do you have any contingency plans to help 

them get through this serious, serious crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the provincial government 

has been left in a financial situation where even if we wanted to 

do the kinds of things because . . . Let's leave the 

mismanagement issues aside for a minute, Mr. Speaker.  Let's 

just look at the off-loading question where the members 

opposite, in response to these kinds of crises in the past, said to 

the federal government, we will put the provincial taxpayer at 

risk and the provincial farmers at risk -- because it hurts us all 

when we're broke -- in order to attract these kinds of monies. 

 

The fact is Saskatchewan . . . The federal government now has 

a $150 million that they are saving because we have designed a 

program that is more appropriate.  What we need is the disaster 

relief part.  What we need is the disaster relief that addresses 

the income shortfall when people have a crop shortage through 

no fault of their own. 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

And we need you to start fighting with us against the federal 

government to get that money, and not sitting there sniping 

against Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you say you've designed a better 

program.  Now the people that were involved in designing it 

gave you many, many cautions.  And SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) people gave you cautions.  

Professor Furtan gave you cautions.  Professor Furtan said to 

you and he said to me and he said to members of the 

Legislative Assembly, if in fact there's a drought, there is a 

serious deficiency in the Saskatchewan program.  All right 

now, let's call him non-partisan.  Let's call the SARM 

non-partisan.  Other people are non-partisan. 

 

There's a serious deficiency in the coverage for Saskatchewan 

people.  That's why there's a court case.  That's why farmers are 

frightened, on top of the fact that there's a crisis in income. 

 

Don't you have any additional contingency plans?  When 

you've got a federal offer to come out with hundreds of 

millions of dollars, don't you have any other plans that could 

help farmers through a serious situation, given the fact that the 

chairman of the advisory committee who designed your 

program says, in case of a drought, there is a serious lack of 

coverage in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, just for the information of 

the member opposite, all of the discussions that took place in 

the design of the program were discussions that were held 

before the committee report was submitted to the minister.  

They were in the end . . . when the discussions were all 

complete, everybody signed the report, and the report was 

submitted as a recommendation to the government. 

 

The fact is that everyone, other than the member opposite, 

recognizes that Saskatchewan does not have, under our present 

circumstances, the fiscal capacity to deal with the crisis when 

so much of our economy is grain dependent.  The Prime 

Minister of Canada recognizes it.  The Prime Minister of 

Canada, in two communiqués with first ministers, has said that 

provinces in this situation . . . we need to re-examine the cost 

of funding these kinds of programs. 

 

Saskatchewan simply cannot subject itself to the prospect of a 

surprise 200 or $250 million deficit that it has to cover after the 

fact.  The fact is we have to design programs that have stability 

for provinces across Canada.  When we're doing well, we'll 

help the rest of Canada.  And when the rest of Canada's doing 

well, they ought to help us.  And that's the way programs ought 

to be designed.  The Prime Minister said that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, only Saskatchewan is left out of 

this protection, only the Saskatchewan farmers. 

We've got about half the farm land in Canada.  We're the major 

producers of grains and oilseeds.  We've got a multibillion 

dollar insurance company in Crop Insurance, and you're 

worried about Crop Insurance liability in a crisis at the farm 

level.  And you keep talking about, as your Minister of Finance 

says, we'd have to raise taxes to back up Crop Insurance. 

 

Crop Insurance Corporation is an independent financial 

insurance company, and farmers know that.  And it will have 

good years and bad years as SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) does, or the Co-operators, and others.  It's an 

insurance company that can afford to defend . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Would you tell . . . would you please give the 

farmers an accurate estimate of how much more money they 

could get in their pockets if they had 1991 GRIP over 1992.  

Could you do that so we'd know exactly the kind of money that 

they're being denied by your potential legislation and by the 

fact that you changed the program.  Could you tell us that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan produces 

about 50 or 50-plus per cent of Canada's export grains.  

Saskatchewan's economy is ravaged by the international grain 

situation as well as by other circumstances that are here locally. 

 

In every country with whom we compete, that is dealt with by 

the national governments.  But under your administration you 

took enough of that responsibility onto the province that it's 

crippling the province and it disables us from participating. 

 

But even through the agreements that we have with the federal 

government, it was their agreement to provide disaster relief as 

third line of defence.  And when we've asked them for it, 

you've denied the support that we need to put more pressure on 

them to pay the funds they've committed to help.  You know 

that there is $150 million sitting there that the federal 

government has that belongs to Saskatchewan farmers, and 

because of the state of our economy we cannot afford to cost 

share in order to get.  That's bad national policy and we need to 

fix it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly I 

would like to make a statement of condolence in memory of 

William Smith, commissioner of the Canadian Wheat Board, 

who recently passed away in the People's Republic of China. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness that I 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

announce to this Assembly the passing of Bill Smith who died 

unexpectedly on Tuesday, June 9 in a remote region of the 

People's Republic of China. 

 

Mr. Smith was in China on Wheat Board business at the time 

of his death. 

 

Mr. Smith was the commissioner responsible for the Chinese 

market and had been so for a number of years. 

 

Bill Smith's work on behalf of the farmers of western Canada 

spanned three decades.  He proudly fought for a strong, 

co-operative marketing system that was responsive to our 

changing times and the changing needs of our farmers. 

 

He was born and raised on a farm at Inland, Alberta, just east 

of Edmonton.  He graduated from the Vermilion School of 

Agriculture in 1955.  In 1957 he was hired by the Alberta 

Wheat Pool and worked as an elevator manager at Azure, 

Irricana, and Trochu before his appointment in 1971 as pool 

representative at Medicine Hat.  He was transferred to the 

Pool's Winnipeg office on special assignment in 1974, 

returning to the Calgary head office later that same year to 

become assistant grain sales manager. 

 

Mr. Smith was named Winnipeg manager in 1976.  He returned 

to Calgary in 1979 upon being promoted to the position of 

grain sales manager for the Alberta Wheat Pool.  In May 1983, 

Mr. Smith was appointed a commissioner of the Wheat Board 

following a distinguished career with the Alberta Wheat Pool. 

 

Besides his many friends and colleagues in the Canadian and 

international grain industry which he loved so well, Bill Smith 

leaves his wife, Kathy, five grown children and one grandchild. 

 

On behalf of this Assembly, I wish to extend my sincere 

condolences to Mr. Smith's family and thank him for his 

contribution and devotion to prairie farmers and the grain 

industry. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with 

the Minister of Agriculture in extending our condolences to the 

Smith family.  Bill Smith, who died in a very freak accident in 

China, was a distinguished agricultural representative, not only 

for the Canadian Wheat Board, but for agriculture people 

across Alberta, across western Canada, and indeed across 

Canada.  The 55-year-old commissioner suffered these injuries 

while working in China. 

 

And he had represented the Canadian Wheat Board over and 

over again as a very astute marketing agent for the Canadian 

Wheat Board.  Smith, who was responsible for the board's sales 

efforts in China, was accompanied by other members of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and members of the Chinese delegation 

at this particular time. 

 

I'd like to say that the board's chief commissioner, Lorne Hehn, 

said that Smith's death represented a huge loss, not only to the 

family and to the board, but to the grain industry.  And I quote: 

this is a sad day for prairie farmers and the entire grain 

industry.  We've lost a good friend and 

a strong ally in Bill Smith. 

 

And Mr. Charlie Mayer, who is the minister of the Wheat 

Board that appointed Bill Smith, described Bill as an 

outstanding individual who leaves behind him a distinguished 

and extensive career. 

 

I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, when individuals rise to public 

service and work hours and hours and years and years in 

international markets to stick up and defend and to market 

Canadian products, then we certainly respect them.  We on this 

side of the House and I'm sure all members of the legislature 

join the minister in extending our condolences to the Smith 

family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 58, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of money for the public service for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 1993, be read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a second and third time. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 04 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that Bill 

No. 04, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the Briercrest 

Bible College be now read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to say a 

few words about a private member's motion which I would be 

moving after my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member, I think, 

recognizes that he must have leave in order to proceed with his 

motion. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly for leave to 

proceed with my motion. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The opposition wish to know what the 

motion is.  I think that is a fairly good request. 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, it refers to the notices of private 

members' motions, June 11 to June 29.  I would move after my 

remarks, if I get leave to do so, that this Assembly recognize 

the Saskatchewan government's early initiatives in 

re-establishing a stable provincial financial climate which is 

strengthening our economy and is encouraging economic 

development, especially in the areas of tourism and housing. 

 

This was moved, Mr. Speaker . . . or I laid the motion on the 

table with the Clerk prior to the Friday sitting last. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 20 -- Sunset Clause on Government 

Programs 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Ms. Haverstock and the amendment thereto 

moved by Ms. Lorje. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

Bill No. 41 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a 

Day of Appreciation for Scottish Clans in Canada be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand in 

support of the motion put forward by the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note in Hansard that the member from 

Kindersley recognized a few of the Scots, one being the great 

explorer Mackenzie, and the other the first prime minister of 

our great nation, John A. Macdonald. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe there are two other Scots that the 

member from Kindersley forgot to mention.  One, Robbie 

Burns of course, the poet -- a man who experienced a great deal 

of poverty and injustice as a youth.  And I'm sure that this was 

what made strong his beliefs in the equality of his fellow man. 

 

The other Scot, Mr. Speaker, is Tommy Douglas.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this being the 30th anniversary of health care in this 

province, I'd be remiss if we were not to mention the battle that 

Tommy had fought to bring medicare into this province, and 

how he touched the hearts and minds of so many throughout 

this country. 

 

As my colleague stated earlier today, Tommy had quite a battle 

on his hands, and did not have the support of the parties that 

were opposite side of the House of that day.  But it was a health 

system of fairness and one which has been adopted in Canada 

and one which has proven to be fair and affordable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

These two men touched the hearts of many and they'll be 

remembered for generations to come. 

 

This Bill recognizing April 6 as Tartan Day is very appropriate 

in this year for another reason, Mr. Speaker.  This being the 

125th birthday of Canada, we recognize the important input of 

the Scottish clans. 

 

Many came here to seek a new life, Mr. Speaker.  They came 

as farmers and professionals and business people.  Their vision, 

and the vision of the two men I spoke of a moment ago, was to 

have a desire to build this nation, this great Canada, a united 

Canada.  And we recognize them for that.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I must rise in 

support of the motion from the member from Kindersley.  

Although my last name is not a Scottish name, some would say 

the better part of me is Scottish because the McLeay side is 

very prevalent in my past, being my mother's maiden name. 

 

I just want to say a few words because I think it's really 

important that we have seen so many people of Scottish origin 

come to this country in the very, very early days into Ontario.  I 

know my grandfather's family came to Ontario I think three 

generations ago and many of those families that came over to 

Canada were part of the builders of this country and they 

moved out to western Canada and were part of the foundation 

on which Saskatchewan was built on. 

 

We have seen, as my colleagues on both sides of the House 

have said, many people of Scottish origin become very 

prominent and, as my colleague said, Mr. Tommy Douglas was 

one of those very prominent people. 

 

Now the Scottish people, the people of Scottish origin, are 

noted for being very tight-fisted, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm not 

sure that that's true, although if you look at the history of the 

Douglas government when he took over this province in very 

dire straits, I think it was.  Maybe that is a little bit true that 

some of the desire to create and distribute wealth in this 

country, maybe it was a little bit of the Scottish blood in there 

that helped control some of the monies so that it could be 

distributed equally among the people of the province. 

 

So I want to just join with my colleagues in saying that I'm 

pleased that we have a day now recognizing the contributions 

of the people of Scottish origin and I think they will all be 

pleased as others will be that we have finally recognized them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to very 

briefly address this question in support of my colleague. The 

folks from the Scottish clans no doubt have done a lot to 

develop our great province in Saskatchewan as well as to 

develop different countries throughout the world.  I don't have 

a Scottish ounce of blood in my body any place that I'm aware 

of, but of course anything could happen in the past that you 

might 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

not know about. 

 

But I do want to say that in spite of that we recognize the fact 

that these are great people and certainly that is exemplified by 

the people from that origin who are represented in this 

Assembly.  And I want to support this most whole-heartedly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I want to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and support 

this motion.  Even though I am of Ukrainian descent, my 

husband was Scottish and we were fortunate enough to make a 

trip to Scotland and trace back some of the roots of the Scottish 

people that came to this country. 

 

I'm proud to say that the men and women from the Orkney 

Islands worked with the Hudson Bay Company in this country 

and they did a lot of the exploring, the mapping, the settling of 

this country.  They came from northern Scotland and they 

settled in Ontario, they settled in Saskatchewan, they settled all 

over the country. 

 

Scottish people, I believe, made a big contribution and I concur 

with the member from Humboldt.  I believe that their natural 

bent for good management is exemplified in the . . . one of our 

dear premiers, Tommy Douglas, and I'm proud as a person who 

has some connection to Scottish people to stand and support 

this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's my pleasure this morning to rise in this Assembly 

to support my colleague, the member from Kindersley and his 

proposed Bill No. 41, the Act to declare a Day of Appreciation 

for Scottish Clans in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although I'm not Scottish, I have very many 

friends who are of Scottish backgrounds and I want to stand in 

this Assembly this morning to acknowledge their contributions 

and their forefathers' and mothers' contributions to the province 

of Saskatchewan and to Canada. 

 

I recall receiving a letter from a very diligent, hard-working 

person from Ontario who asked all MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) to consider supporting such a Bill in 

their province, to acknowledge the work and the contributions 

and the sacrifices that the Scottish people have provided in 

building this country and this province.  And I at that time 

spoke with a number of people who I know to have very deep 

roots in the country of Scotland and they thought it would be a 

very good idea. 

 

So I was in the process actually of considering such a Bill 

myself, member from Kindersley and colleagues, but I had 

already made a commitment to move a private Bill with respect 

to assisting the Credit Union Central and its amendments to the 

Bill which affects their operation of incorporation.  So I want 

to thank the member from Kindersley to taking the initiative. 

 

I am very pleased to see that that is being done today and 

on behalf of the constituency of Regina North West and our 

caucus, I wish to say that I will be supporting this Bill when it 

comes to final reading.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Resolution No. 5 -- Health Care Fees 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Mr. Neudorf and the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Draper. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

(1100) 

 

Federal Opposition to Leaseback Program 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. McPherson and the amendment thereto moved 

by Mr. Martens. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 21 -- Established Programs Financing 

Freeze 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

resolution by Ms. Bradley. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Boyd and the amendment thereto moved by the 

Hon. Mr. Shillington. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 11 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I would move the motion: 
 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation: (1) the names of all 

persons currently employed by or accountable to the minister 

directly or indirectly who were employed on or after 

November 1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in (1), the 

details of employment including compensation, job 

description, qualifications including employment history, the 

name of his or her immediate superior, the authority under 

which the person was hired, and the actual date 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

that the person started work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It is our desire in these matters to answer these questions as 

fully as we can. Notwithstanding that, the motion as it was 

written by the member is too indefinite to be answered.  There 

is really, I think, no way of defining the comment indirectly. 

 

In a sense the minister is the . . . when a minister is minister of 

a department, all of the employees of a department are in a 

sense employed indirectly by him.  What we think the 

member's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the intent was -- right, 

thank you.  What we think the intent was, you want to know 

the details of those who were working in the ministers' offices 

-- not necessarily paid by Executive Council but employed in 

the ministers' offices -- and therefore we are moving an 

amendment.  And I say to . . . at the end of my comments I'll 

move the following amendment, Mr. Speaker, that the motion 

be amended: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, who were employed on or after November 1, 

1991" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

I say again, Mr. Speaker, that everyone in the department is 

accountable to the minister indirectly.  That includes everybody 

in the department.  I don't think that's what they wanted.  I 

think what they wanted to know was the details of people who 

are . . . of the minister's personal staff. 

 

We think this amendment covers it.  If it doesn't, the session is 

a long way from being over.  It will be open to the members of 

the opposition to rephrase the questions and get whatever it 

was they think our amendment does not include.  We think this 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, adequately covers the information 

which they want and which they are reasonably entitled to. 

 

The amendment, Mr. Speaker, will cover one other item as 

well.  We'll be deleting the words "including employment 

history."  The guide we have used in answering these questions 

is, if it's reasonably answerable and if it is allowed under the 

freedom of information Act, we'd try to answer it.  If it's 

excluded under the freedom of information Act, we think that's 

a useful guide and therefore we won't give it, as a general rule. 

 

Now an employee's employment history is information that is 

excluded under the freedom of information Act.  And I 

mentioned the other day, in my comments, reasons why that 

might be the case.  There may well be such things as a period 

of incarceration, there may be unemployment, there may be 

large gaps, so we are excluding that.  I frankly don't see how . . 

. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We just want the ones from November 1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Rosthern is 

actively engaged in the debate.  Presumably he'll be on his feet 

in a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fail to see how giving the employees' 

employment history tells you anything about patronage.  

Patronage goes to the motives behind which a person was 

appointed and is almost always proved by circumstantial 

evidence.  I just fail to see what employment history would add 

to their keen desire to avert any kind of patronage now that 

they're in the opposition -- a desire which was noticeably 

absent prior to October 21, '91. 

 

I will at any rate, Mr. Speaker, therefore move a motion that 

the motion be amended as follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly who were employed on or after November 1, 1991" 

be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 

Assembly that the reasons that we were asking for these items 

to be brought forward is to identify as a process the work of the 

government in eliminating positions and re-establishing 

positions that they're identifying in the Crown corporations that 

would be accountable to them, and also that it would be the 

political patronage issue in many of these cases is being 

identified. 

 

We had the Minister of Justice stand in the House and indicate 

to this Assembly that positions would not be cut and 

back-filled by partisan people.  And, Mr. Speaker, the role of 

the opposition in this is that we want to know who those people 

are. 

 

It is not difficult for you to identify them.  All you have to do, 

Mr. Speaker, is take the Public Accounts component of your 

departments and identify that same opportunity in the 

development of a Crown corporation. 

 

All we have to do is put the Public Accounts names in format 

that you have in the Public Accounts for the departments.  And 

that would provide for us a description of the time lines that 

these people have been hired and it would also describe for us 

an opportunity to know how many of them that you have 

back-filled. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we're asking for these questions 

in returns for you to understand and the public to understand 

that you are in fact hiring partisan people to back-fill those 

people that you are laying off in the Crown corporations.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're asking the question.  

We want you to identify your patronage. 
 

Now you've identified through the years the patronages that 

we've made, and you said in the election campaign that you 

weren't going to do this.  You said it over and over again.  

We're not going to be partisan.  Far be it from me to be a 

partisan politician.  And now what you're doing is you're 

preventing us from seeing those people being 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

identified. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you're ashamed, if you're ashamed of the 

employment history of the individuals and their record, they 

shouldn't be working for you.  You'd think that you'd go around 

this province lifting these people up as being honourable 

citizens in the province of Saskatchewan or this country.  And 

what you're doing, in fact saying, oh, I . . . and you have 

identified well, if he's been incarcerated before, we don't want 

to make that public. 

 

Now I want to point out to this Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we want to know the partisan patronage 

policy of the government and that's why we're asking the 

question.  And you're ducking it every time. 

 

You said you would be free and open in your hiring.  And what 

are you doing?  You're hiding behind your own ability to 

control the agenda in this House when we ask the questions on 

who was hired after November 1 and what positions did they 

fill in relation to those that you terminated people on.  And we 

want to know that. 

 

It's just a very simple point, but it's very fundamental to the 

discussion.  And that's why we asked the question in that way.  

We want to know who's in the department and we'll ask who's 

in the department.  But we also want to know who's in the 

Crown corporation that has been hired by you and you're afraid 

to admit, you're afraid to identify, and you're afraid to say what 

his work history has been.  Because what you will have to do is 

identify probably that he did work for the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party at one point in time. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we had raised these 

questions and the reasons why we're objecting to the 

amendments that are being brought forward by the minister 

from Churchill Downs -- or the minister . . . Associate Minister 

of Finance and the member from Churchill Downs. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1115) 

Return No. 12 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill is 

similar to the one we just discussed -- Return No. 11.  It deals 

again with the employment and employment histories, 

back-filling of political appointments by the government.  

We're interested in the same ideas. 

 

We went through this whole debate on June 9 with another one 

of these motions.  We had the same amendments by the 

government and the same refusal to provide that information, 

and it's hard to understand why they will not provide that 

information. 

 

This time I'd like to read the motion. 

 

 Regarding the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications: (1) The 

 names of all persons currently employed by or accountable 

to the Minister directly or indirectly, excluding only members 

of the Communication Workers Coalition who were 

employed prior to November 1, 1991. (2) For each person 

listed in (1), the (a) details of employment including 

compensation; (b) job description; (c) qualifications, 

including employment history; (d) the name of his or her 

immediate superior; (e) the authority under which the person 

was hired; and (f) the actual date that the person started work. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I won't repeat my comments another time.  Suffice it to say if 

the members wanted to know the positions which were 

back-filled, you could have asked that .  You did ask it on my 

Estimates in the Public Service Commission and my Estimates 

in the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) and we undertook to provide it. 

 

Now I recognize that does not cover the Crown corporations, 

but if you wanted to know the positions which were 

back-filled, that really is a different matter.  You've asked a 

much, much broader question here. 

 

If I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, the member from 

Rosthern says they expect an answer.  I say to the member 

from Rosthern if we were to answer this it would be a book that 

would rival the New York telephone book. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's all right.  We'll take time.  We'll read 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, the member says it's all right.  

There are other priorities in government, and I think the 

taxpayers have other priorities besides preparing useless 

information which no one's going to read.  I doubt very much 

that any one opposite would read the answer to your question 

which would be the job descriptions, salaries, and all that other 

information with respect to every employee in the department. 

 

What we thought you wanted, doing the best we could with 

imperfect language, what we thought you wanted was the 

details of people who work in the minister's office.  If you want 

to know the positions which were back-filled, you could ask 

that and there's plenty of time left in the session to ask that.  I 

point out to members opposite that unlike the practice in past 

years we are answering these at an early date, which gives you 

time to ask any supplementary questions which you want, and 

they will be dealt with in due course. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Aren't you just wonderful? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I thought so.  I therefore am 

going . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He is actually. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- These people all agree with you for 

once.  I'm therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, going to move that 

the motion be amended as follows: 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the Communication 

Workers Coalition who were employed prior to November 1, 

1991" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I can't help thinking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

can't help but respond to the Associate Minister of Finance's 

comments and the arrogance that he shows which is basically 

only paralleled by the arrogance of the House Leader and how 

this whole situation with the bell-ringing is being dealt with. 

 

Mr. Minister, how dare you get up and lecture us as to what 

kind of questions are appropriate for us to answer and perhaps 

the length of the answers that you would have to provide for us.  

Mr. Minister, I'm going to tell you that we will be asking the 

questions and we expect you to give us the answers. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the basic premise of our questions are, as 

my colleague from Morse has already outlined, you, sir, are 

riddled with patronage.  Your government is riddled with 

patronage.  And I suggest the reason why you are ducking, why 

you are ducking, is to preserve the position of the Minister of 

Justice.  I think this is a cover-up for the Minister of Justice.  

That's where you're heading.  Because he has made the 

allegation in this House and the commitment in this House that 

there has not been one patronage appointment made by this 

government.  That is what he told this legislature, not one 

patronage appointment. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, all we are doing is giving you an avenue to 

prove to the people of Saskatchewan that the Minister of 

Justice is correct, that he is accurate.  Now, Mr. Minister, you 

are going to give us those answers.  We are asking specifically 

from November 1, we want a response from you, employment 

history -- who was hired, who was fired -- since November 1.  

That is what we are really after.  And I'll tell you quite bluntly, 

that's what we are after. 

 

Because I think what we will find is a whole series, a whole 

series of political appointments.  And then the Minister of 

Justice is going to have to retract and explain to this House 

why the House was misled.  And that is what we suspect. 

 

Now if the member, the toy minister, is reassuring this House, I 

want him to put it on record and I want him to answer these 

questions that we have legitimately put forth, and not give us a 

lecture what we may and may not ask because it may be too 

long in answering.  And we will read your report, Mr. Minister, 

I assure you.  We will read it.  And I also assure you that we 

will use that information that is in there because beyond a 

shadow of a doubt, beyond a shadow of a doubt, it is riddled 

with patronage appointments, exactly what you said during the 

election you would never do. 

And so therefore, Mr. Minister, for you to get up and 

sequentially here make these amendments to every one of our 

questions, is the height of arrogance, and refusal of an open and 

honest government to really come clean with how much 

appointments that you have made based on patronage.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there is just no way that the opposition could 

go with such an amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended negatived. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I 

could address the subject?  We are amending the motion.  If the 

opposition are telling us they don't want the motions as 

amended, that's their choice.  We're not going to force upon 

them information they don't want.  We have amended the 

motion.  We are thereafter somewhat ambivalent as to whether 

or not it passes.  If you don't want it in its amended fashion, 

we'll simply defeat it and save the government the time of 

providing it. 

 

So when the members voted against it, our side was solid -- 

you heard what you heard.  But the government is not going to 

force this information upon an unwilling opposition. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm trying to follow, Mr. Speaker, why you 

had that member getting up to make a statement as he did.  I 

don't see the rules.  He had just spoken to the motion once 

already and now he had the opportunity to speak without 

raising a point of order.  And I'm raising a point of order on 

that particular issue.  And I would want a clarification as to 

why he was on his feet. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member appreciates the 

assistance of both members in this matter.  I thought I heard 

some yeas from that side.  Let me just check this again.  The 

question before the Assembly is Return No. 12 as amended.  Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion as 

amended? 

 

Motion as amended negatived. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I would request the same courtesy from the 

Chair as was given the Associate Minister of Finance to make a 

statement as well.  And my statement, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is 

this: I know that the microphones pick up the holler and the 

abuse from members of opposite.  They have heard the ridicule 

and the laughing about the parliamentary procedure . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . There will be no order called on 

this; I'm making my statement just as the associate deputy 

minister did.  And my statement is this.  We will not be party to 

making a ridicule of the legislative process.  This side has 

brought forth a motion that asks for information.  You guys, by 

that amendment, are gutting the intent of the motion whereby 

we are trying to find . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The next item of 

business before us is item no. 3. 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

Return No. 13 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe we're engaging in an 

exercise of futility here.  But, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to read 

into the record motion no. 13.  The Fisher-Price minister made 

the statement that we probably wouldn't read the answers 

anyway. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's not his choice to make, that's our 

choice.  And it's our choice if we want these answers, and it's 

our choice if we read them.  The length of the answers has no 

bearing on what we're asking for, Mr. Speaker.  If we didn't 

want the answers, we wouldn't be asking for them. 

 

And when that minister gets on his feet and decides for us 

whether we get the information and then tells us that we're not 

going to read it, Mr. Speaker, it speaks an awful lot for 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to read this motion.  And the motion 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation:  (1) The names of all persons currently 

employed by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and Energy and Chemical 

Workers unions . . . 

 

(1130) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the 

back-benchers on the government side to come to order or take 

their . . . conduct their business somewhere else and let the 

member for Wilkie have his say. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe I was at: 

 

 . . . Chemical Workers unions who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991.  (2) For each person listed in (1), the (a) 

details of employment including compensation; (b) job 

description; (c) qualifications, including employment history; 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior; (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired; and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Without making any extensive 

comments, I will endeavour to avoid inflaming the opposition 

again with my comments.  I just simply say that this session is 

a long way from over.  If this is not the information you want, 

then you can re-ask the questions.  I wasn't suggesting that we 

decide for you what you get.  I was just simply saying it 

wouldn't be very useful. 

 

What you're going to get with these questions is the names, 

occupations, compensation, etc., of everybody in the Crown 

corporation.  That's a very large amount of information and 

very costly to prepare.  If you want . . . It's everybody who's 

employed. 

 

The member from Morse suggests . . . you didn't ask for 

everyone who was hired from November 1.  That would have 

been a different question.  You asked for the names, etc., 

addresses, the names, occupations, job descriptions of 

everybody who was accountable directly or indirectly to the 

minister.  That includes everybody in the Crown corporation.  

The question . . . it isn't very useful.  This won't tell you. 

 

Because you're going to get the name of everybody in the 

Crown corporation, you're going to have no way of knowing 

which were back-filled and which weren't.  This is not going to 

give you the information which was requested by the member 

from Morse.  This is not sophistry.  I'm just simply saying, if 

we answer the question, you're not going to get the information 

you wanted.  If that's what you want, it may be a legitimate 

request.  You should put it in writing, and we will consider it 

another day. 

 

I am however, Mr. Speaker, with those comments, going to 

move that the motion be amended: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and Energy and Chemical 

Workers unions who were employed prior to November 1, 

1991" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

. . . for the reasons I've already given. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the concerns that we have are 

that the members opposite and the Crown corporations that 

they're dealing with will terminate positions, re-establish those 

positions in patronage appointments.  And, Mr. Speaker, that 

has happened over and over and over again.  Patronage in this 

Assembly has been there for ever. 

 

And I don't disagree with patronage.  But these people across 

the way, Mr. Speaker, in the last election said that they were 

not going to do it.  The Minister of Justice stood in this House 

and said, we will not do it.  We don't do it.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what we're questioning here.  And we want to know 

how extensive your patronage employment process is. 

 

Over and over again we have seen patronage appointments in 

Crown corporations, in governments, in ministers' offices.  We 

believe there has to be patronage.  How are you going to take it 

any other way? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is why we are asking 

the questions beyond the minister's office because we'll get that 

information when we ask you in your Estimates.  You told us 

that you would give it to us and we have received it. 

 

But in the Crown corporations we also want to know . . . 

because, you know what?  Prior to 1982 you and others in 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

government, in executive branch, seconded people from the 

Potash Corporation to work in your offices.  And then you have 

the freedom now to say, oh we don't hire members of the 

Crown corporations to be employed in ministers' offices.  We 

have never done that sort of thing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that we want to identify.  

We want to identify it in a very precise way. 
 

And if you're afraid to admit who your employees are that 

you've hired since November 1, then maybe you should say it 

so that the people of Saskatchewan can see what you're doing.  

If you believe that the records and the work of the people that 

you've hired are going to be detrimental to the employment of 

that individual, then why would you hire that person in the first 

place?  Is he only a political partisan appointment?  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we want to identify these 

people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we've talked here about patronage.  This 

government that we have here today said they weren't going to 

do it; they have never done it.  And, Mr. Speaker, they have 

done it in bus loads.  Mr. Speaker, they have done it prior to '82 

and they have done it after 1991.  And, Mr. Speaker, we want 

that identified. 
 

We want that identified because the member from Quill Lakes 

had his whole family working for the government at one time.  

The member from Saskatoon Broadview, her father and herself 

worked for this government.  The Minister of Health worked 

for the Government of Saskatchewan prior to 1982.  I could go 

on and on. 
 

What about the Bowerman family?  Boyles? Bucks? Faris? 

Ferns? Funks? Glovers?  And the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser worked for the government for years.  And he said, oh 

we don't have patronage, we don't have patronage.  And what 

we're trying to do, Mr. Minister, is find out how really deep this 

goes. 
 

A new one today . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: -- His name is John Gormley.  It just came 

to light. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Just came to light.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Churchill Downs, he says Mr. Gormley was a 

recipient of patronage. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, what about the president and chief 

executive officer of SaskPower?  And what about his assistant?  

Were they never, ever connected with the party of the NDP?  

Well I say, Mr. Speaker, they were. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're asking this 

Assembly to provide to us, as the opposition, the names of 

these individuals.  There's a whole bunch of them, all the way 

through -- name after name after name of people who were 

employed as patronage appointments. 
 

We never, ever said we were going to do it, that we were going 

to get rid of patronage.  You did. 
 

And what have you got?  Over and over and over again you've 

got a list of patronage that is as long as five or six, eight or nine 

pages can give us.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the reason why we're asking.  We hear it in the news -- 

patronage all over.  And now we want to know from you 

exactly who they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's why we're asking the question and that's 

why we're against this kind of clipping the amendment so that 

it doesn't identify the kinds of things that we want to have in 

there.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we'll be voting against that 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will be making an amendment to the amendment, 

seconded by the member from Kindersley.  I will read the 

amendment and then wish to speak to the motion: 

 

 That only those persons hired after November 1, 1992 who 

have criminal records or personal medical disabilities on their 

resumés be excluded from the motion for return. 

 

I think the concerns that the Associate Minister of Finance 

raised in this House about the individual rights of people in this 

country are valid in certain circumstances.  It has always been 

the practice of members of this Assembly to respect the 

personal files of people who have something in their past that 

may infringe upon their employability in the future.  Because 

you happen to be a functionary in a political party does not fit 

that category, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Criminal records and certain medical disabilities which some 

people in our society for some reason frown upon are 

legitimate reasons to exclude that from the employment history 

of an individual, and I think all members of this Assembly 

would agree that those personal, private records, as are medical 

files of each and every one of us, are treated with respect and 

dignity. 

 

But as the member from Morse pointed out, we have a newly 

elected government in this province who went out and sought 

the votes of the people of Saskatchewan a short time ago, 

spoke year after year in this Assembly on the patronage 

appointments of the former government.  The hypocrisy of that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is something that the members of the 

opposition simply cannot accept. 

 

To have this government who comes in on promises of being 

open and accountable, who go into the Public Accounts 

Committee in this legislature and make a big thing out of every 

last employee of the former government, who allege all sorts 

actions to those employees, do so in order, I say, to get media 

attention and not much else, and then stand in this Assembly 

order after order after order and say that those people that they 

hired since taking office should not be revealed to the 

Saskatchewan public. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only is it hypocritical, but I 

think it is downright shameful.  If you have the power of your 

convictions that the people that you are hiring are the best 

possible person for that job, then you should stand on a stump 

somewhere and proclaim it to the world, not use the 

machinations of the Associate Minister of Finance to try and 

hide it. 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

New Democrats in this province seem to be the only people 

that say, I am holier than thou.  The parties in the last election 

didn't run around saying that there would absolutely be no 

patronage.  It wasn't their members who stood on stumps all 

over this province and decried that there was political 

patronage.  It was the New Democratic Party and no other. 

 

And now we see, as the member from Morse points out, pages 

and pages and pages.  We have the budget document alone 

saying that we've made 560-some-odd appointments.  Well fair 

ball.  I'm sure some of those appointments are bright, 

reasonable people who will do a darn good job in their selected 

area. 

 

But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are others that may be 

hired for different reasons.  And I would think it would be 

incumbent upon this government who went out and sought the 

votes, went out and sought the votes of Saskatchewan people 

such a short time ago, to put all of that on the record. 

 

It's nothing more than a Public Accounts, if you will, expanded 

a little bit.  It means that the Crown corporations will be treated 

the same as Public Accounts. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many more motions for return to 

be brought in this legislature.  If the associate minister is true to 

his word in what he said in his previous statement where he 

said, opposition, you have worded your motion for return 

wrongly; that you are placing an unreasonable burden upon the 

taxpayer of this province, expenditures in time and money and 

paper with a job that is wasting the taxpayers' money, then I 

think it would be incumbent upon him to say that we the 

government will take the lead and we will change the motion to 

say, only those people since November 1, 1991. That we will 

be true to the words that we said in this province time after 

time over the last several years and definitely in the last 

election campaign, that we have nothing to hide; no person 

working for us had anything to hide. That we are very proud of 

the people that we will put into the public service of this 

province, and we will come forward with it. 

 

And we will place those people in front and centre for every 

person in this society to look at and pass judgement upon, 

admire, decry, whatever they should be in our society, but not 

to hide behind a motion, an amended motion for return as we're 

seeing from the Associate Minister of Finance today. 

 

The next motion for return, I hope that associate minister takes 

this opportunity to set it straight and do what is right in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I propose to amend the 

amendment: 

 

 That only those employees with criminal records or personal 

medical disabilities be excluded from the motion for return. 

 

Seconded by the member from Kindersley, I so move. 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The Chair is having some difficulty 

understanding the intent of the amendment that's been proposed 

by the member for Thunder Creek.  As the Chair reviews the 

proposed amendment to the amendment moved by the member, 

it's the Chair's understanding, if the subamendment were 

carried, that what the member's asking for, that when it comes 

to employees in the minister's office, that you don't wish to 

know those persons hired after November 1, 1992 who have 

criminal records or personal medical disabilities on their 

resumes.  So that you're excluding from . . . that you don't want 

to know about people who are hired in the minister's office 

after November 1, 1992 who have criminal records. 

 

If it's the intent of the amendment to amend the main motion to 

exclude those persons with criminal records or personal 

medical disabilities on their résumés, then the Chair can't 

accept that as an amendment to the amendment, but I could 

accept it as a distinct amendment after the first amendment that 

is now before us is dealt with.  So I ask the member what his 

intent is and then we'll take it from there. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that 

difficulty.  What I was intending was, given the comments of 

the Associate Minister of Finance previously, that this would 

be an amendment to the main motion rather than an 

amendment to the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I'll give this back to the member and 

ask him that at the appropriate time then that we deal with it. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I will move that the main motion be amended 

that only those persons . . . Point of clarification, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I'm now moving this amendment to the motion that's 

been amended.  Right?  And I think at that point it would 

negate what I was attempting to do, so I will desist from further 

conversation on this particular item. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 14 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I say this seems to 

be an exercise in futility -- so much, I guess, for open and 

honest.  They're using their majority to muzzle the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to read this into the 

record, even though the associate minister will probably gut the 

motion.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move an order to 

the Assembly for a return showing: 

 

 Regarding the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: (1) the names of all persons currently employed 

or accountable to the minister directly or indirectly, 

excluding only members of the Sask Water Employees 

Association who were employed prior to November 1, 1991. 

(2) for each person listed in (1), the details of employment 

including compensation; (b) job description; (c) 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

qualifications including employment history; (d) the name of 

his or her immediate superior; (e) the authority under which 

the person was hired; and (f) the actual date that person 

started to work. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll spare . . . I will not repeat the 

comments I made earlier.  I will simply move that the motion 

be amended as follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the the minister directly 

or indirectly, excluding only members of the Sask Water 

Employees Association who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991" be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would like to 

move the motion: 

 

 Regarding Don Ching: (1) that the details of employment, 

including compensation and job description; (2) who he 

reports to; (3) the authority under which he was hired; (4) a 

true copy of his contract, the existence of which is required 

by law as set out in The Crown Employment Contracts Act. 

 

So moved. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 15 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return showing: 

 

 Regarding the Ag Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan: (1) 

whether the government will provide a list of all legal action 

intended to realize security initiated either by notice of intent 

or actual court proceedings against farmers of Saskatchewan; 

(2) the costs incurred by the government in defence of these 

actions to the date this question is ordered; (3) whether the 

government will provide a list of lawyers representing the 

Government of Saskatchewan in each action and the 

individual fees being paid to these lawyers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I will at the end of my 

comments move the following amendment: 

That the motion be amended by deleting all of the words after 

the "Agriculture Credit Corporation" and substituting the 

following therefor: 

 

 the number of legal actions intended to realize security 

initiated either by notice of intent or actual court proceedings 

between November 1, '91, and March 31, '92; the legal costs 

incurred by the corporation in these legal actions; the law 

firms to which these legal fees were paid. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the amounts paid to individual firms, when 

finalized, will appear in due course in Public Accounts.  It is 

not now finalized.  And this is the . . . this at this point in time 

is the best we can do.  We're providing the opposition with as 

much information as we can.  The balance of the information 

they seek will be in . . . will be provided in due course. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this is exactly what the opposition has been talking 

about.  The Associate Minister of Finance knows full well that 

during the period of time of which he has changed this motion 

there was a voluntary moratorium in place amongst lenders of 

all sorts and the Government of Saskatchewan, so there was 

virtually no actions instituted during that period of time.  Those 

actions all commenced after the date that the minister has 

talked about.  There would be virtually no fees paid to any law 

firms.  There would be virtually nothing done by the minister, 

gutting that motion in that regard. 

 

I think what the members of the opposition are legitimately 

asking for is the record of the Government of Saskatchewan in 

dealing with its rural clientele.  I think it's important for people 

out there, when they're assessing as taxpayers the needs of 

Saskatchewan residents, that they know the whole picture.  

They need to know how many people the government is 

foreclosing on, what the economic situation is in the province 

of Saskatchewan, who is benefitting from doing those 

foreclosures by the government.  These are all very legitimate 

questions. 

 

How can people in our society assess the impact that several 

thousand foreclosures would have on our province without 

having the data available to them?  This is a very legitimate 

motion for return.  We want to know, and I think it would be 

incumbent upon taxpayers to know -- and they make these 

assessments as individuals -- of how many of these actions are 

proceeding, how many dollars are being spent on it, and are 

there reasonable alternatives to those actions. 

 

And what we have is a government that continually says one 

thing politically -- that there is a crisis in agriculture, that they 

once again campaigned that there were thousands of farmers 

out to rallies, made promises on moratoriums, made promises 

on cost of production, made promises that they would come up 

with a better system -- in government we see just the opposite. 

 

We see secrecy, we see the GRIP program gutted, we see no 

moratorium, we see no cost of production.  We see in 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

fact every last cost of production that rural people have going 

up -- fuel, electricity, gas, taxes -- across the piece.  And what 

we're saying to the government today in this motion for return 

is that taxpayers need to make a rational assessment of how 

severe the problem is out there -- how many people are going 

to be lost in our communities; how many people are fleeing this 

province. 

 

And the only way we can get those numbers is to have the 

government answer them in this legislature in a legitimate way.  

If it's 100, 200, a thousand, and we're spending 100, 200, 

$300,000 on legal fees to accomplish this task, then I think it's 

important for us to know so that people can make an 

assessment. 

 

Question period was taken up today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a 

fundamental question.  If you are going to expend taxpayers' 

dollars, is it better to do it through an insurance program that 

allows people to maintain self-sufficiency out there, or do you 

do it through some other avenue?  Is that other avenue 

foreclosure and getting people out of rural Saskatchewan? 

 

We have a drought on in a good part of this province.  It is 

going to take a tremendous amount of rainfall to negate that.  If 

we have had several hundred foreclosures since the end of 

March, just think of how many we're going to have in this 

province come the fall if we have a severe drought in this 

province and there is not enough back-up to keep those people 

on the land. 

 

How many more legal firms are going to take the taxpayers' 

dollar in foreclosing on people?  And I think those kind of 

questions are absolutely fundamental to this House and the 

people in this province to have answered.  And it's absolutely 

shameful for the minister to put in these amendments that he 

knows full well will come up with almost a zero for an answer.  

Absolutely zero for an answer. 

 

If you're ashamed of what you're doing out there, if you're 

ashamed of it, then why aren't you doing something in this 

House to fix it?  Instead we hear political rhetoric and hiding 

behind the rules of this Assembly.  And I just find it 

incomprehensible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why the Associate 

Minister of Finance would not want to tell the public how 

many of these actions are taking place, how much money 

they're spending, and who the legal people are that are doing 

the dirty work. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 18 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 18 showing: 

 

 Minister responsible for SaskEnergy.  Regarding rate 

increases after November 1, 1991: (1) The total revenue 

generated to date and the total revenue projected to be 

generated by those increases this fiscal year; (2) the revenue 

that is derived from (a) customers within the cities of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw; (b) 

customers from outside those cities; (c) farm customers; and 

(d) business customers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  At the 

conclusion of my comments I'm going to move an amendment 

deleting all the words after the words "this fiscal year."  In 

other words, we will not be answering parts (2) (a), (b), or (c).  

The reason for that is that I am told that the SaskEnergy cannot 

break down the revenue in that fashion.  The accounting system 

doesn't permit them to break it down in that fashion. 

 

So I will therefore move: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

the words "this fiscal year." 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 19 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I move that 

an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 19 showing: 

 

 Minister responsible for SaskPower.  Regarding rate 

increases after November 1, 1991:  (1) the total revenue 

generated to date, and the total revenue projected to be 

generated by these increases in this fiscal year; (2) the 

revenue that is derived from (a) customers within the cities of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw; (b) 

customers from outside those cities; (c) farm customers; and 

(d) business customers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As given last time, I move: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

"this fiscal year". 

 

Same comments apply.  We are not able to break down the 

revenue figures in the fashion requested. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 20 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

move: 

 

 Minister responsible for SGI. Regarding rate increases after 

November 1, 1991:  (1) the total revenue generated to date, 

and the total revenue projected to be generated by those 

increases this fiscal year; the revenue that is derived from (a) 

customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, and Moose Jaw; (b) customers from outside of those 

cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business customers. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For reasons given previously, I move: 

 

 That this motion be amended by deleting the words after the 

words "this fiscal year." 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1215) 

Return No. 21 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Might I ask the members to observe 

order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This is 

similar to the last two motions.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 

SaskTel the information is available.  It's on everyone's bill.  

The minister, if he wished to, could find out what the billings 

were for Regina and supply us with the information.  It's 

available for businesses; they have a separate billing.  If they 

wanted to, they could program the computer to pull that 

information out and supply it. 

 

The same for the rural area, Mr. Speaker -- that information is 

available for every exchange.  If the government wished to 

provide that information, they could do so.  We would 

encourage them to do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I will read the motion: 

 

 Minister responsible for SaskTel.  Regarding rate increases 

after November 1, 1991: (1) the total revenue generated to 

date, the total revenue projected to be generated by those 

increases this fiscal year; (2) the revenue that is derived from 

(a) customers within the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, and Moose Jaw; (b) customers from outside of those 

cities; (c) farm customers; and (d) business customers. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For the reasons given previously, I 

move: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

the words "this fiscal year." 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I just want to point out to the viewing and 

listening public again the decorum of the House, and the 

members applauding, the closed mouth, and the inability and 

the unwillingness of this open and forthright government to 

participate in the democratic process, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

What we are seeing here is a complete and utter denial of 

members opposite to give the information that the opposition is 

requesting. 

 

And yesterday, very sanctimoniously, for two and a half 

hours in the evening, we heard the Minister of Finance saying, 

this is not my responsibility; this is not my responsibility.  Ask 

that minister.  Ask the minister of Crop Insurance; he will give 

you the answer.  Ask the Minister of Agriculture; he will give 

you the answer.  I don't have the answer; I'm not going to give 

you the answer. 

 

And that's precisely what we've been hearing all this morning 

so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a complete denial by members 

opposite to give us the legitimate questions . . . answers to the 

questions that we are asking.  And then you just heard what 

happened -- a loud cheering by all members opposite.  A 

cheering!  A cheering by members opposite that they are 

refusing to give us the information that we are legitimately 

asking. 

 

And I think that's a downright shame.  It's just turning this 

whole legislative process into a zoo.  And it's just totally 

unacceptable to us.  It's disgusting. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, on the motion, with respect to 

the information that has been requested, I've been sitting here 

and listening to members opposite as they list complaint after 

complaint about the type of information that is given to them. 

 

And I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that there are members 

sitting in this House -- 55 members to be exact -- that are in full 

support of the minister and in the proceedings and the motions 

that are being passed.  And that these motions are not somehow 

being passed at the whim of one or two members but is being 

supported by the entire government caucus. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these questions, a lot of them pertain to 

employees that have been hired by government, and I 

personally have been endorsing the amendments because I 

think that the key criteria for any of the hirings or keeping of 

people in place is their qualifications and their competence.   

And those questions are being answered.  Anything else 

dealing with a person's history dating back to who knows when 

I think becomes material of a rather confidential and personal 

nature, and I do not support anybody in particular having a 

great big long list of a person's history.  I don't think that's a 

good way to attract a good civil service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the reason for my standing is just to explain to those who 

may be listening to the proceedings that there are members all 

around in this House that are supportive in the action of the 

minister and that I commend the minister on his work and his 

diligence to answering these questions and to the proceedings 

in this particular case.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 22 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I stand here to move a motion that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 22 showing: 

 

 Regarding the decision to reduce heritage grant 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

 coverage and to eliminate the grant outright for low income 

seniors living in subsidized housing: (1) whether the minister 

consulted with any groups or persons prior to the decision 

being taken. (2) If so, (a) the names of the individuals 

involved in the consultations; (b) the dates and locations 

where consultations occurred; (c) the content of 

representations made to the minister. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to delete the reference . . . I'll be moving a motion 

which will in substantive terms delete the reference to dates 

and locations and the content of such representations.  Doing 

that because in many cases no records were kept of dates or 

locations. 

 

And with respect to the content of representations, in most 

cases these were oral, again no written records were kept of 

them.  And in addition most of these groups who met with us 

assumed their comments . . . many of them assumed their 

comments would not be made public.  And we really don't have 

a record of who indicated their comments could be made public 

and who couldn't. 

 

So I'm therefore, Mr. Speaker, moving that the motion be 

amended as follows: 

 

 That all the words after "heritage grant coverage" be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 whether the minister consulted with any groups or individuals 

prior to the decision being taken; if so, the names of groups 

or individuals involved in the consultations. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to draw some conclusions 

from the Associate Minister of Finance making some of the 

observations that he made.  He made the observation that he 

didn't have the dates and locations because these were oral 

presentations that were made.  If he has the names of the 

individuals, surely he should have the date associated with it, 

the communications that were made with the individuals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this reminds me of a process that has 

gone on for a long, long time in governments where there's 

consultation directly involving people of the province of 

Saskatchewan in a very, very legitimate way.  Last year I took 

it upon myself to visit with at least 20,000 farmers on a very, 

very direct way on a program that was going to impact on 

them.  All together the ministers, there was seven ministers, 

went around the province and visited roughly 40 to 50,000 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan legitimately talking to 

them and asking them for their observations about what we 

were going to do with changes to the programs that we were 

involved with.  It was a consultative process that was very, 

very extensively done.  It cost the taxpayers some money but, 

Mr. Speaker, it was important that it be done. 

 

The past two weeks are an example of how this government 

consults.  And that's the reason why he doesn't want to be 

involved.  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities had six 

district meetings in Kipling, in Moose Jaw, in Swift Current, in 

North Battleford, Saskatoon, and Wadena. 

 

And were any of the members who had time off to do it, were 

any of the members opposite at any one of those meetings?  

The answer is no.  That's why they have no record of 

consultation, because there was none.  There was none, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  That's the reason why they're not involved in 

it and that's the reason why they don't have any dates; they 

don't have any locations because they didn't do it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the fundamental problem with this 

whole outfit on the other side.  And as a matter of fact, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities cannot 

remember a time when the minister who is responsible for rural 

affairs hasn't been at that meeting and hasn't been at every one 

of those meetings. 

 

Even when the House was sitting the member who was 

responsible for the municipalities in the province of 

Saskatchewan went to those meetings.  Whether he was 

publicly in favour or not in favour of some of the 

recommendations made by the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, he went.  And what did this minister do?  

He copped out.  He was not at one single one of them.  In fact 

he made the deputy minister do his political work in every one 

of them.  It was totally disgusting at every one of the meetings 

that I was at. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why they can't put the dates 

and the locations down because they never, ever did have.  And 

that's exactly the reason why you got trouble with GRIP.  

That's exactly the reason why you had trouble with the pension 

plan.  That's exactly the reason why you have trouble with 

health care, with the diabetics, the optometrists, the chiropody 

people, every one of them.  That's why you have a problem.  

You don't take the time to ask.  You don't take the time to visit 

with the people. 

 

On July 3, there's going to be a meeting with all of the 

livestock people talking about one very fundamental thing: 

why are all the cattle leaving the province of Saskatchewan?  

Are you going to be there?  Probably not.  Probably not.  News 

release issued today says that you should be there, but you're 

probably not going to be because you haven't got the jam to do 

it.  You haven't got the courage to be there and you weren't 

there at any of these consultations about the hearings that . . . or 

the heritage grant with seniors.  You know what you're going to 

be doing with level 2 and level 1 care.  You're going to be 

kicking them out of those homes in the next two years.  You're 

going to see people who are in level 3 and 4 in those level 2 

homes walking out of those homes never to return. 

 

(1230) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you what. You'd better start going 

around the province and listening to what the people are saying 

and what they're doing.  Because you're far out of touch and 

you've only been here eight months.  What are you going to be 

in another year? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why these guys 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

haven't got a date and a location, because they never did.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is totally disgusting.  That's why they haven't 

got the courage to put it on paper.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the reason why I'll be voting against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 23 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

make the point to repeat some of the points that I made earlier 

on exactly this thing, because I am anticipating that the 

Associate Minister of Finance is going to do the same thing on 

this one as he did on the other one.  And I want to tell him that 

he never consulted with anybody. 

 

In fact, if he would have taken the time on the same days that 

the Minister of Agriculture had Hartley Furtan in his office 

talking about GRIP and talking about leasebacks, if he'd taken 

the time to ask him about the study he did for the feeders 

association of the province of Saskatchewan, he'd have found 

out some more information that might have been helpful in 

relating to why cattle are moving out of this province at the rate 

that they are.  And to top it all off they're moving out because 

of the drought besides that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this government is in 

trouble.  They're in trouble because they haven't consulted with 

anyone.  They don't know what's going on out there, and if they 

do, they're ignoring it totally. 

 

Now he is going to put dates and locations down and he's going 

to take that out of there.  And the reason he is, because he 

never did consult with anybody.  That's the reason why he's in 

trouble.  And that's the reason he's in trouble with the 

agriculture community.  That's why the member from 

Shaunavon and other members who went down to Orkney 

almost ran them out of town when they were there the last time.  

And these are some of the reasons, is because they don't 

consult.  They haven't got the jam to do it. 

 

And the minister responsible for Rural Development should 

have been at the meeting in Swift Current when they took a 

strip off of his deputy because he wasn't prepared to answer 

some of the political questions that the minister of Rural 

Affairs should have been asking about crop insurance, about 

The Critical Wildlife Habitat (Protection) Act, about increase 

in cost to fees to the ranches, therefore their lease land. 

 

He should have been there doing it and he wasn't, because he 

didn't have the courage to do it.  He didn't even have the 

courage to go into his own constituency area and talk to the 

people there -- never had the courage to do it.  And the reason 

he's going . . . and the Associate Minister of Finance is going to 

take it out of here is because he never did contact anyone to 

find out what was going on.  He didn't have the courage to do 

it.  And I say that, Mr. Speaker, that's wrong. 

Therefore I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 

return showing that: 

 

 Regarding the decision to eliminate the FeedGAP program: 

(1) whether the Minister of Agriculture consulted with any 

groups or persons prior to eliminating the program. (2) If so, 

(a) the names of the individuals involved in the consultations; 

(b) the dates and locations where consultations occurred; (c) 

the content of representations made to the minister. 

 

And if he puts down on the record that they were oral, I don't 

even believe that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For the reasons given earlier, and so 

as to avoid inflaming the member from Morse, I will simply 

move the motion be amended: 

 

 That all the words after "consultation" be deleted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I view this 

as being a shameful and despicable act of brushing off the 

cattle producers of this province, and most especially in the 

south-west corner of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I believe it is important to every producer in 

this province, but it is particularly of interest to me in the 

south-west because I know the cattle industry and I know the 

people that are involved. 

 

And you are gutting the industry by the things that you have 

been doing and your disdain in not answering the question 

shows exactly what you think of primary producers in this 

province.  You don't give a darn what happens to them.  You'd 

just as soon see them all gone.  Because all the cattle are going 

and the producers are going to have to follow them.  And there 

is no other way out for this government but to say goodbye to 

everybody in this province.  You start with the cattle producers, 

you'll end up with the grain producers, and then you're going to 

end up with nobody left to shut the lights out because 

everybody's going to be gone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 24 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This motion 

deals with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and whether or not 

the government consults with any groups before making any 

decisions on the Pension Plan, the cancellation of it. 

 

Even though the minister, the House Leader, is suggesting that 

they fixed the problem, indeed the problem is not fixed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  It's far from fixed.  And that's why I suspect 

they're still getting all kinds of calls the 



June 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

same as we are getting all kinds of calls on the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan and their so-called fix.  It no more fixes the 

problem than it was fixed before. 

 

The concern about the Pension Plan still is there and still is in 

the minds of the people out there in Saskatchewan.  And that's 

why I think it's important that this question still be asked about 

the responsibility of the government to consult with people.  

They've said they're going to be open and consultative, and yet 

they haven't consulted with anyone on almost every issue. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move the following motion: 

 

 Regarding the decision to eliminate the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan: (1) whether the minister responsible consulted 

with any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken.  

(2) If so, (a) the names of the individuals involved in those 

consultations; (b) the dates and locations where the 

consultations occurred; and (c) the content of representations 

made to the minister. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I will rely upon the comments made previously and move that 

the motion be amended as follows: 

 

 That all the words after "consultations" be deleted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 25 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This 

motion is about the environmental deposits on pop bottles and 

other beverage containers.  What we're asking is, what 

consultation had taken place and who was the consultation with 

and where? 

 

We know that some consultation had taken place with the 

beverage industry, if you can use the term "consultation" when 

you have a meeting with the minister and the minister tells you 

what she's going to do -- doesn't ask you what your concerns 

might be but tells you, this is what we're going to do. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well that's decisive. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's very decisive.  It's also known as 

being dictatorial, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We would like to know if the minister has discussed not only 

with the pop . . . the beverage industry but also with SARCAN 

and with those people who are interested in the costs for the 

environment, with the consumers.  Did they discuss with any of 

the consumer groups this increase? 

 

When the minister did hold a meeting with the beverage 

industry, did the discussion also include the impact on jobs that 

this new Bill would have?  Reading in the paper a week or two 

after the minister introduced the Bill and 

raised the price for the deposits, we see that the impact that it 

did have was a 20 per cent drop in the consumption rate.  Now 

did the minister discuss that with the industry?  Did you take 

into account that kind of an impact, and just what kind of an 

impact does that have on the environmental return on those 

deposits? 

 

I'd like to read the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Regarding the decision to impose increases on the handling 

and deposit fees on soda pop and other beverages: (1) 

whether the Minister of the Environment consulted with any 

groups or persons prior to the decision being taken. (2) If so, 

(a) the names of the individuals involved in the consultations; 

(b) the dates and locations where the consultations occurred; 

(c) the content of representations made to the minister. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For the reasons stated on earlier 

returns, I will move the motion be amended: 

 

 That all the words after "consultations" be deleted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 12:47 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act to repeal The Hospitals Tax Act and 

respecting certain consequential amendments 

resulting from the repeal of that Act 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1993. 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:50 p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I move adjournment of the House, I do 

want to wish everybody a happy Canada Day and I hope we 

celebrate it well tomorrow. 

 

This House now stands adjourned until 1:30 on Thursday. 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 1992 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:51 p.m. 

 

 


