




















































Hansard: May 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 413 

 May 14, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Toth. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It 

certainly gives me a great deal of pleasure to carry on here this 

evening where I left off earlier this afternoon. 

 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, earlier this afternoon in my 

remarks I mentioned that the fact that the Tory opposition do 

have two ears and one mouth.  And, Mr. Speaker, because of 

the numbers in our House here, we the government having 55 

members and the Tory opposition having a mere 10, the 

individual members in the opposition have the opportunity to 

speak more often than we in the government side of the House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me in the fact that even though 

the Tories do have the opportunity to talk more, the unfortunate 

part of it all is that they don't say anything when they have that 

opportunity.  That, Mr. Speaker, I think is very evident, 

particularly when it comes around to agriculture, and I wonder 

if the reality of understanding the ramifications of what they 

are doing and how it looks to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I am referring, Mr. Speaker, to the motion we amended on 

Tuesday, April 28, right here in these hallowed chambers, a 

motion that was moved by the Tories and amended to make it 

more favourable for our farmers.  A motion that the Tories 

subsequently voted against -- voted against, for Heaven's sakes 

-- our farmers, Mr. Speaker.  Why on earth would they stand 

here and say out of one side of their mouth that they are 

concerned about Saskatchewan farmers getting a fair shake and 

then vote against the very motion that would help the very 

farmers they say they are worried about. 

 

I sure don't know what they're thinking, Mr. Speaker.  I'm also 

sure that the people of Saskatchewan don't know what they're 

thinking.  But you know, the reality of the matter here, Mr. 

Speaker, and what matters here is just specifically what do the 

farmers need to know to get the business of farming one more 

year. 

 

As I said earlier in my speech, Mr. Speaker, much more needs 

to be done for the 1993 crop year.  We want to put GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) into a more realistic cost of 

production formula, to increase Ottawa's share of the cost as 

they were supposed to do in the past and haven't done yet, and 

of course ideally, reduce the producers' premiums. 

 

This area, Mr. Speaker, is a volatile one and there is no easy 

solutions.  There are compromises though, and it 

could certainly help everyone, including the banks and the 

federal government, if they would recognize that and get down 

to brass tacks and design something that is meaningful and 

significant, something that actually works and works well for 

farmers. 

 

But let's not also lose sight of the other serious issue in the 

farming situation and that is the farm debt crisis.  Farm debt is 

largely responsible as a result of external factors:  the European 

Common Market; GATT (General Agreement of Tariffs and 

Trade) talks; the United States unfair subsidy program; and 

rapidly and wildly fluctuating market-place.  But just because 

there are external factors doesn't mean we can't come face to 

face with our problems and make some headway in dealing 

with them. 

 

I believe that measure of success, Mr. Speaker, is not whether 

you have a tough problem to deal with, but whether you have 

the same problem as last year.  The farm debt crisis in the 

1980s still plague us.  It doesn't take a real rocket scientist to 

figure that out.  Unfortunately that was something the Tories 

couldn't figure out. 

 

From 1908 to 1986 the total outstanding farm debt more than 

doubled to a peak of $6.1 billion.  In the following five years 

the farm debt declined less than a billion dollars.  

Subsequently, realized net farm income has dropped $378 

million in 1991. 

 

The result of this imbalance between farm debt and realized 

farm income is a very significant part of the farm debt will 

never be paid off.  Clearly this cannot continue.  It's just a plain 

and simple . . . Because if it does, and there is a market place 

turn-around, our farmers won't be able to respond because 

they'll be burdened with a crushing debt load. 

 

But I believe we have the beginnings of a viable solution.  I 

believe that the farm debt package we will be addressing 

during this session will make a difference to our farmers.  The 

foundation of our program will be to introduce a leaseback 

program to give extended security of tenure, a six-year 

leaseback to farmers who transfer their land to lenders in 

settlement of debt. 

 

From my point of view, Mr. Speaker, we have nowhere else to 

go but up and into the future.  We have a golden opportunity to 

make a significant milestone because . . . And again we know 

what we need to do and we are working to make things better 

for our farmers -- working to make better programs, better 

policy, better conditions to allow our farm families to survive 

and thrive. 

 

It won't happen overnight, Mr. Speaker, but to borrow a line 

from the singer, Karen Carpenter, "We've Only Just Begun" . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- We are actively negotiating, discussing, 

arguing -- counterpoint after counterpoint -- answering 

questions, and considering alternative scenarios to find 

reasonable solutions to our mess.  And we will keep working, 

Mr. Speaker, keep working to find the answers, 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

to find the way for our farmers to make it this year and for 

many more years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- We have, Mr. Speaker, come a long way and 

may still have a piece to travel, but I do believe that we have 

managed to stay the course.  And by demonstrating that we are 

serious about facing our economic woes, we will ultimately 

turn this province around and bring this province back to a 

province of prosperity and opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to add my 

support to this throne speech and budget speech.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in the House 

today to speak in favour of the budget.  I truly believe this 

budget marks a turning point in the province's future. 

 

One reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is our commitment to open 

and honest and accountable government.  Mr. Speaker, 

appointed . . . Mr. Speaker, my government appointed the Gass 

Commission to open the books, and let me tell you what they 

found was a mess.  Nevertheless, we have acted on several of 

the commission recommendations so as to minimize the 

chances of this happening again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our commitments to open and honest government 

contrast sharply with the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

approach to government.  Last year, when the heat was on, the 

Tory government shut down the legislature. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No budget. 

 

Mr. Langford: -- No budget, right.  Failing to pass their 

budget, they operated on special warrants and hid the books 

from the auditor. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Shame. 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Shame is right.  The Tories projected that the 

1991 deficit was only $265 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Wrong. 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Wrong is right.  That was before the 

election.  After the election, we discovered that the deficit was 

600 million more than what the Tories said it would be.  This is 

not the first time that the people of Saskatchewan have been 

subjected to the twisted mathematics of the PC Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- In 1986 authority elected -- another election 

year by the way -- the Tories projected a $389 million deficit.  

It turned out to be almost $1.2 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how did the Tories get into this mess?  They 

gave big hand-outs to corporate friends like Cargill, 

Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington.  They invested in public funds 

like crazy . . . schemes like GigaText, Joytec, Supercart. 

 

And they spent money like it was going out of style.  

Thousands of dollars spent on liquor to the cabinet ministers -- 

thousands of dollars spent to the cabinet ministers on liquor.  

There was $1,000-a-night hotel bills and $3,000-a-day 

consultants.  Almost 2 million in salaries which were paid to 

the political staff of the premier's office . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Shame is right.  Not surprisingly, their salaries 

were hidden in other departments and Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this New Democratic government has already 

taken solid steps to eliminate this wasteful spending.  

Twenty-eight million was saved by reducing spending on 

supplies, advertising, and others; $150,000 a year was saved by 

closing the Premier's office in Prince Albert; and nearly 200 

million was saved by closing unnecessary trade offices in Hong 

Kong, Zürich and Minneapolis.  These are just a few examples 

of the positive measures my government has taken.  Much has 

been accomplished but there is still much more to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the privatization of ridiculous investments and 

general mismanagement practices by the Tories have brought 

our once proud public sector to its knees.  The holding 

company for our Crowns, the Crown Investment Corporation 

called CIC, lost over 600 million in 1991 alone.  This was the 

taxpayers' money.  This was the result of 166 million lost on 

the sale of Cameco sales; a 64 million write-down on the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader; and a 50 million grant to the Meadow 

Lake pulp mill. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, our government has identified 875 

million in CIC non-recoverable debt.  Three hundred and 

sixty-one million was due to the PCs' privatization loss; 312 

million went to pay dividends to the province; 118 million was 

due to SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) losses; 36 million for STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) losses; 24 million for Sask Forest 

Products losses, and I could go on and on. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will restore the finance state of CIC, but the 

former government's mismanagement of our Crown sector will 

require that this year's deficit be $93 million.  To ensure 

accountability, audited financial statements for CIC will be 

presented to this Assembly for public scrutiny every year -- 

every year. 

 

This New Democratic government will restore the health of our 

Crown corporation sector so we can get back to rebuilding 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Tories left this province in a terrible financial 

state but, as the Gass Commission observed, we are going to 

restore the Saskatchewan government in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

Mr. Langford: -- Our optimism, however, is not based on a 

wait and see or things we will work out on their own 

perspective.  The people of Saskatchewan have to make 

difficult decisions and to make significant sacrifices in the near 

term if we are to see a bright future for our province. 

 

To this end, my government has reduced the deficit to $517 

million.  If we had done nothing, the deficit would have been 

approximately $1.2 billion.  Let me repeat.  If we had not done 

anything the deficit would be $1.2 billion. 

 

We have reduced operating expenditures to 3 per cent from an 

average of 6 per cent over the last 10 years.  Mr. Speaker, if it 

were not for the interest payments on this debt we would have 

had a surplus budget this year.  Still, my government has taken 

big steps on the road to financial freedom.  The government 

will overcome this financial crisis just as previous NDP (New 

Democratic Party) and CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) governments have done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very concerned about protecting families in 

need in my constituency.  The basic need of our children must 

be met.  With the current financial state of this province, 

finding solutions to this problem is not easy.  It requires work 

on everyone's part.  I am very proud to say that this budget will 

increase funding for child hunger programs by 35 per cent.  

The Saskatchewan child tax reduction for low income families 

will be increased by 25 per cent -- $250 per child annually.  

And grants for child care centres will rise by 21 per cent.  New 

Democrats will for ever be committed to fairness and 

compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we realize that the small businesses is our biggest 

employer.  To this end, the budget has reduced the tax on small 

businesses by one percentage point.  This will provide a much 

needed boost to that sector. 

 

This budget will earmark $20 million for new incentives like 

counselling service for expectant teenage mothers, 

community-based family planning programs, and measures to 

address the problem of family violence. 

 

Greater funding will also be provided for the breast cancer 

screening program; child care facilities; the automatic 

enforcement of maintenance occurs . . . orders, I should say; 

the employment equity unit; and child care service in rural and 

northern Saskatchewan.  In addition, the wellness model will 

be fully developed and implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's new initiatives . . . new initiatives will 

have a very positive effect on my constituency.  In particular, 

places like Shellbrook, Canwood, Meath Park, Choiceland, 

Smeaton, and I could name many other small centres. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn my attention to 

agriculture.  This New Democratic government will not let the 

federal Tories off the hook.  We will continue to press Ottawa 

for the promised 500 million of farm aid.  We will have begun 

the long process of making improvements to the flawed farm 

support program, GRIP. 

In particular, we will have made it more market progressive . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Right. 

 

Recommendations of the Farm Debt Advisory Committee will 

be acted on.  First, we will establish a six-year lease back 

program for farmers who have transferred land to the lenders.  

Second, we will develop a voluntary farm debt mediation 

process in order to resolve problems at an earlier stage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Third, we will enable farm families to add 

security access operations and other credit when they decide it 

is their best . . . when they decide it's in their best interests.  

And finally, we will examine alternate forms of financing such 

as a community-based land trust.  As well, Mr. Speaker, our 

government will make sure that 78 per cent of all Agriculture 

department dollars go directly to the farm support program. 

 

I will close, Mr. Speaker, by reaffirming my support for the 

budget.  This is a wise budget because it deals with fiscal 

responsibility, public accountability, fairness, compassion, and 

economic reality.  This budget is the first step in rebuilding 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm honoured to 

join into this budget speech this evening.  I'd like to start by 

paying tribute to the Finance minister for bringing in such a 

good and wise budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, "This budget is founded on 

fiscal responsibility, public accountability, fairness, 

compassion, and economic reality," quoting from the budget 

speech. 

 

Fiscal responsibility, because we are defining the road to 

recovery and working toward financial freedom.  Public 

accountability, because we are laying a solid foundation to 

provide open and honest government.  Fairness, because we are 

calling on our community to join us in rebuilding this great 

province.  Compassion, because we'll protect those most 

vulnerable in our community.  And economic reality, because 

stimulating economic opportunities and helping to create jobs 

is a vital part of rebuilding Saskatchewan. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, shows why we'll have the ability to 

live within our means.  And we had that this year, Mr. Speaker.  

In this budget we had a $243 million surplus, Mr. Speaker, 

$243 million surplus, if we didn't have to pay on the interest on 

the debt, the Tory debt, caused by the members opposite. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, also deals with financial freedoms.  

The grim reality today is that those members opposite 

mortgaged our children's future.  Because of them, Mr. 

Speaker, we can no longer pay for all the government services 

provided.  Programs that we simply cannot afford will be 

eliminated.  Other programs will be modified to ensure that we 

can continue during this 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

financial crisis.  And also, Mr. Speaker, this budget deals with 

the debt, the debt which was created in nine years -- nine long 

years of Tory government. 

 

Saskatchewan families did not create this massive debt, Mr. 

Speaker.  Saskatchewan's new government did not create this 

debt.  Our children didn't create this debt -- they're going to 

have to help pay for it now.  Our community has inherited a 

legacy that will not be forgotten and cannot be ignored, to 

quote from the budget speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you wonder how this debt was created, how it got so out of 

hand, so out of control.  Well let me tell you.  The 1992 

Saskatchewan provincial budget marks a solid step towards 

regaining our economic freedom from the whims of Wall 

Street, Mr. Speaker.  I'm reading here from the Gass 

Commission report.  I'll start with a few notes from that. 

 

In 10 years, our Crown corporations have gone from being a 

major contributor to government revenues to being a major 

drain.  The Gass Commission identified three main reasons for 

this amazing reversal.  First, the losses on privatization 

initiatives, operating losses and write-offs of investments, 

subsidies of non-income-producing assets. 

 

The losses on privatization initiatives, Mr. Speaker -- the 

Devine administration sold the government's interest in a 

number of enterprises.  The largest sales were Saskoil, the 

Potash Corporation and Cameco.  The sale of PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and Cameco resulted in 

losses of $527 million. 

 

The Potash Corporation once paid hundreds of millions of 

dollars in dividends to the government.  Then the members 

opposite were elected.  PCS began to co-operate with private 

potash companies.  Its market share dropped dramatically. 

Then the price of potash fell.  PCS lost hundreds of millions of 

dollars.  Now all but 9.4 per cent of PCS was sold at fire-sale 

prices.  Total losses: $361 million.  Wouldn't that be nice now 

to have for the farmers that the member from Morse keeps 

referring to. 

 

(1930) 

 

Cameco, Mr. Speaker -- in 1988 the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation merged with Eldorado Nuclear, a 

federal Crown, to form Cameco.  Losses on the sale of Cameco 

shares: $166 million, Mr. Speaker.  Outrageous.  Operating 

losses and write offs of investments: Rafferty, $115 million: 

Sask Grain Car Corporation, 36 million; Westank, 28 million; 

Meadow Lake Pulp Ltd., 50 million; SEDCO, 14 million; 

Flexi-Coil, 12 million; Hunter's Manufacturing, 11 million; 

GigaText, 4.4 million; Canapharm, 4 million; Sask 

Diversification Corporation, three and a half million.  After a 

while these millions, they just become numbing figures, don't 

they, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Subsidies of non-income-producing assets: NewGrade, $334 

million; Saskferco, $335 million.  Man, couldn't we do a lot for 

the farmers with that money if the members opposite wouldn't 

have mismanaged so poorly?  Weyerhaeuser, $51 million; the 

Bi-Provincial upgrader, 

$177 million. 

 

The Gass report shows that in light of the provincial financial 

situation, most of these loan guarantees are irresponsible.  

Decisions to increase the exposure to the taxpayers were made 

at a time when it would not be possible to raise revenue 

through taxation.  These decisions were also made without 

review by the legislature. 

 

And here's a few highlights, Mr. Speaker, from the Gass 

Commission report.  The province has yet to receive any 

payments from the privatization of the Prince Albert pulp mill 

to U.S. (United States) based Weyerhaeuser corporation in 

1986. 

 

The Prince Albert pulp mill -- $236.6 million that they had in a 

promissory note and losses on deferred payments alone, to 

date, $51 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Never made a payment on the . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Not a dime.  The Commission uncovered 

several examples where the former government entered into 

transactions or financial commitments without doing a full and 

complete financial analysis of the deal.  The province's 

cost-share of the Rafferty-Alameda dam project has ballooned 

from its original estimated cost of 42.5 million to more than 

$155 million, and the member of Morse knows that full well.  

A cost overrun of more than 200 per cent.  That's quite the 

management you got. 

 

The former government proceeded with the privatization of the 

Potash Corporation at a time when those share prices were low, 

contrary to the advice of its own outside expert advice.  And 

this, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on just with what was in 

the Gass Commission report, but I'll move on because we have 

so many reports that show why the situation we're in is due to 

the management of the members opposite. 

 

And here I'm looking at the Special Report by the Provincial 

Auditor, "Payments to employees not working for employer 

organizations." 

 

 Organizations reported there were 130 employees who, for 

extended periods of time, did not work for the organizations 

paying their salaries. 

 

 Payments to these employees totalled approximately 

$5,166,000 in the two years under review. 

 

That's an enormous amount of money.  Just in that amount of 

money alone, what could we do for the chiropractors, 

optometrists, farmers, the nurses that they referred to? 

 

Section 2, "Payments to advertising agencies for goods/services 

not received."  That doesn't sound up front to me. 

 

 Nine organizations reported that they made payments to 

advertising agencies for goods/services not received. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

 These payments totalled approximately $439,000 in the two 

years under review. 

 

Is that fraud?  Well then I am ashamed, more ashamed of you 

than before. 

 

Section 3, "Goods/services provided without charge to 

ministers."  Did we have some former ministers over there? 

 

 The value of the goods/services totalled approximately 

$42,000 in the two years under review." 

 

Forty-two thousand. 

 

"Goods/services provided without charge to other Government 

organizations." 

 

 The value of goods/services totalled approximately 1,755,000 

for the two years under review. 

 

This is quite a little booklet on these guys. 

 

"Payments to advertising agencies for goods/services not 

received."  They didn't even get the advertising out of it, eh? 

 

 Generally, the advertising expenditures reported below were 

initiated and approved for payment by the Office of the 

Executive Council.  In these cases, the organizations that 

made the payments were unable to determine that the specific 

services were received by their organizations.  Accordingly, 

these payments are not properly supported and we are unable 

to determine that these expenditures are for the purposes 

authorized by the Legislature. 

 

That almost sounds fraudulent too, doesn't it? 

 

And look at some of these figures here.  Provincial Secretary 

payments totalled $206,000.  And of that Roberts & Poole 

Communications got 51,000.  A full list.  Pages of this.  Fifty 

thousand.  Sixty thousand.  It's full of Tory mismanagement 

and waste.  And it took so long for the Provincial Auditor to 

have to get these reports because the members opposite didn't 

supply the auditor with the information. 

 

And I know I'm just a rookie MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), Mr. Speaker, so I probably don't fully understand 

the benefits to some of these next expenditures.  I know the 

members opposite.  They argue on behalf of the farmers a lot. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're not sincere though. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- No, they're not sincere.  Because being a 

rookie MLA, I'd have to have one of the members opposite . . . 

You just go ahead and stop me if I hit on something that sounds 

like it was for agriculture here. 

 

Seventeen thousand, four hundred and twenty-three 

dollars were expenses run up by the premier's office at Regina's 

Hotel Saskatchewan in one year.  Is that agriculture?  Is that for 

those nurses?  All the people that you claimed to defend in the 

last few days? 

 

Nineteen thousand, three hundred and sixty-eight dollars, 

expenses run up by the premier's office at Regina's Ramada 

Renaissance Hotel.  I thought he was at the Hotel 

Saskatchewan and here he's got a couple places on the go.  A 

world traveller this guy. 

 

Two hundred and thirty thousand dollars for the cost of buying 

and furnishing a new Regina condominium for the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

Forty-five thousand paid to former PC member of parliament, 

Stan Korchinsky, to advise the Devine government on how to 

lobby the Mulroney government.  Well that doesn't sound like 

an agriculture bill either.  We'll get to one here sooner . . . You 

stop me when I do, okay? 

 

Sixty-four thousand, two hundred and fifty-three dollars, 

payment to the British Merchant Bank, N.M. Rothschild & 

Sons Ltd. for two months of privatization consulting.  Well it 

must be further down the list here.  We'll get to it. 

 

Nine million dollars, PC government's budget to celebrate 

Saskatchewan's 85th birthday in 1990 and promote the PC 

Party as an extra.  They threw that in.  A possible election year 

I guess. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Getting close to agriculture yet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well I have so many here that . . . Surely 

we'll find some.  A hundred and thirty-two thousand, five 

hundred and fourteen dollars was SaskTel's average monthly 

bill for out-of-province air travel by executives. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- For which department was this? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- SaskTel's.  So that doesn't sound like 

agriculture either.  Our member from Morse . . . go ahead and 

stop me when I hit one.  Forty-six thousand dollars annual 

lease payments for a new premier's office in Prince Albert.  

And we closed it.  We closed it.  Eighty-six thousand dollars is 

the cost of renovations to the premier's office in Prince Albert. 

 

Seventy-three thousand, eight hundred and sixty dollars was 

the annual salary of Premier Devine's public relations advisor, 

Ron Shorvoyce.  Twenty-two thousand six hundred and fifty 

dollars, the cost of a two-day retreat at Cypress Hills for 

political assistants. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's a common practice in this Assembly that 

members' constituencies are referred to, not the names of 

individuals as part of it.  And I'd like to remind the member 

that that's a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member from Morse makes a good 

point.  I believe the member fully realizes he's supposed to use 

the name of the constituency and not the 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

name of the individual. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I apologize.  

I'm glad that the member from Morse is paying attention, 

because he was going to stop me when I hit on one of these 

agricultural ones and I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes, we might be here a long time 

though. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- One hundred forty-six thousand, four 

hundred and forty dollars was the annual additional salary cost 

of the four extra cabinet ministers that the former premier 

added to his cabinet in October 1989. 

 

Eighty-six thousand, two hundred and ninety-five dollars 

annual additional salary costs of the 11 PC MLAs that the 

former premier appointed as legislative  secretaries.  One and a 

half million dollars in additional staff for these extra ministers. 

 

Fifty thousand -- oh, here's an agriculture one -- fifty thousand 

dollars, the cost of a study on the production of oyster 

mushrooms in potash mines in Saskatchewan.  That's probably 

as close as we'll get to agriculture. 

 

One point three million dollars, the advertising and public 

relations bill for one eight-month period at SaskTel paid to 

Roberts and Poole, an advertising agency, associated to the PC 

Party it says here. 

 

Two hundred and twelve thousand dollars, research grant to 

Supercart for the development of a plastic shopping cart which 

the company never produced. 

 

One hundred and thirty-seven thousand, five hundred, cost of 

luxury Regina condominiums purchased for GigaText 

executive, Jean Pierre Paillet.  A thousand and eighty-three 

dollars a month to lease a Mercedes-Benz for him.  That's even 

more than the monthly lease that these guys were trying to 

make an issue out of 10 days ago. 

 

Fifty-one thousand dollars annual salary of defeated PC cabinet 

minister, Jack Sandberg, who was given an executive position 

at SaskPower.  That's over and above the 400-and-some 

thousand dollar salary of Mr. Hill; $182,620 total salary and 

separation payment to the premier's deputy minister, Norman 

Riddell, who left Saskatchewan to work for Premier Bourassa 

in Quebec; 41,900 annual salary of defeated PC MLA Keith 

Parker, who was given an executive position at the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, he must have been this guy that 

supplied the $17,000 worth of free booze. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I think so.  Patronage was right out of 

control with these guys. 

 

Five hundred and fifty thousand dollars annual salary and 

potential bonuses for Chuck Childers, the former premier's 

appointee as president of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan.  And you add in the bonuses and it's getting up 

around the $740,000, I believe -- the same amount they 

budgeted for hungry children that year, wasn't it? 

Forty thousand dollars for the cost of a study on testicle size on 

yearling bulls.  There we go, and the member from Morse 

missed it. 

 

Twenty-two thousand five hundred, monthly operating 

expenses for PC government's trade office in London -- we 

wonder why we're in debt.  You know, I got pages of this stuff.  

If they weren't so interested I wouldn't go on with it. 

 

Ninety-seven thousand dollars, the salary of the PC 

government's new Minneapolis trade commissioner, former 

cabinet minister, Bob Andrew.  He also received 71,000 for 

resigning as an MLA. 

 

(1945) 

 

Ninety-seven thousand dollars, the salary of the PC 

government's new agent-general in Hong Kong, former cabinet 

minister, Graham Taylor.  He also received a payment of 

$65,000 for resigning as an MLA. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He's the guy that gave his kid money for 

that game farm out there somewhere. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- For the game farm, yes. 

 

Twenty-six thousand eight hundred and eighty-nine, 

government payment to the PC Party's advertising company, 

Dome Advertising, for advertising costs related to a chamber of 

commerce conference in Saskatoon to promote free trade.  I 

thought the federal government was promoting free trade. 

 

Sixty-one thousand dollars, additional costs to the provincial 

government for the chamber of commerce free trade 

conference. 

 

Twenty-two thousand dollar payment to Remai Investment for 

feasibility study for a hotel and convention centre proposed for 

Regina.  They were gambling, eh?  The project was ultimately 

built by Remai and the provincial government leased six floors.  

Could that be true? 

 

Ninety-eight thousand dollars is the cost of polling for one 

eight-month period paid for by the Department of Health to the 

PC Party's polling company, Decima Research.  That's just 

coincidence I think.  And what was the answer?  A hundred 

and forty thousand dollars, cost of printing the extravagant 

1987 SaskTel Annual Report prepared by the minister 

responsible for SaskTel, Gary Lane.  Four hundred and 

eighty-five thousand dollars paid to S.W. Warburg Consultants 

for a study on the privatization of Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation.  Forty-two thousand . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- This is amounting to an awful lot of 

money. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- It is amounting to a lot, but you notice I'm 

only doing every other one.  Forty-two thousand dollars, annual 

salary of defeated PC cabinet minister Louie Domotor, who 

was given an executive position with the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation.  We wonder why we have 

to address the 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

debt.  Look at how they've run it up.  Sixty-nine thousand 

dollars, cost of Grant Devine's month-long junket to China 

where he had visions . . .  

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I would remind the member 

again, he is not to use the name of individual members in this 

House.  He is to refer to them by their constituency or their 

position. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  I meant to say 

the former premier.  I just got a little carried away reading all 

these thousands and millions. 

 

I've got a few pages here of patronage, defeated and retired PC 

MLAs: Eric Berntson, appointed to the Senate, salary $71,000.  

And his severance too.  I'm not sure how much that was; it was 

a lot.  Larry Birkbeck received a $48,000 contract through his 

company Venus Consulting in '88-89.  He received a 10-year 

appointment to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in 1990 at a 

yearly salary of $57,820. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Was he a Tory? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- He was a Tory, yes.  Gordon Dirks 

received $30,000 contract from the Department of Education to 

do a study of private schools.  Do we have that study?  Did we 

use it?  Sid Dutchak was appointed to interim president of the 

Saskatchewan Housing after the '86 provincial election.  Tim 

Embury, Ralph Katzman, Miles Morin, head of occupational 

health at the Department of Labour.  Keith Parker, February 21, 

1989, appointed assistant to the chairman of the Liquor Board.  

Paul Rousseau, Saskatchewan agent-general in London.  And I 

missed half of this other page.  Jack Sandberg, customer 

relations with SaskPower.  Paul Schoenhals, first-time paid 

chairman of the board of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan -- another 100,000 bucks.  Bud Smith, appointed 

to the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission.  And as I 

mentioned before, Graham Taylor and Gary Lane -- $97,000 

each.  And the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker.  We 

wonder why we're in such a tremendous debt.  You know, I'm 

just touching briefly on that.  Nine years they carried on 

helping themselves and helping their friends. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this budget changes the direction that the 

Tories were headed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- In this budget we had -- as I said earlier -- 

a $243 million surplus when we didn't have to pay the interest 

on the Tory debt, $243 million.  If the members opposite, when 

they were in government, had $243 million surplus in every 

year of the nine years, can you imagine the money we would 

have available for farm programs and health care programs. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this budget has restraint, but it 

has compassion.  Three hundred and twelve million dollars in 

additional revenue will be generated through a variety of 

increases to personal and consumer taxes.  These were 

necessary due to the crippling legacy of debt left by the PC 

administration.  All increases have been applied as fairly as 

possible, with the rich and the 

corporate sector paying their fair share. 

 

As well the most needy in our society will continue to be 

protected.  And I'm going to name a few of the positive things 

that the budget does for those needy.  Twenty-eight million 

dollars in additional funding for social assistance;  child hunger 

funding increased 35 per cent -- shows compassion, Mr. 

Speaker.  Saskatchewan child tax credit increased 25 per cent 

to $250 per child annually;  grants for child care centres 

increased 21 per cent;  income plan for low income seniors 

increased by $120 annually;  home care funding increased 

nearly 20 per cent to $38 million;  special allowance for 

disabled persons increased 25 per cent;  northern food 

allowance doubled to $50 a month; 4 million for northern jobs 

to improve water and sewer systems; $20 million more for 

family support services like counselling for teen-age mothers 

and family violence programs. 

 

Saskatchewan still has the third-lowest combined tax than other 

govern charges . . . rate in Canada.  And, Mr. Speaker, restraint 

begins at the top.  The province of Saskatchewan was founded 

on a spirit of community and working together for the good of 

all.  That's why in our government efforts to fight that 14 

billion or $15 billion deficit crisis, we have asked no more of 

our community than we demand of ourselves.  Saskatchewan 

residents are willing to do their part in tough times. 

 

And I'm just going to read a few of the ways we're controlling 

government spending, Mr. Speaker.  We had a 5 per cent salary 

cut for cabinet ministers; extra pay for legislative secretaries 

was eliminated; and the smallest cabinet in 20 years will save 

another $1.4 million this year alone.  Allowances for extra 

duties by government members have been reduced and 

eliminated; MLA communication allowances cut by 25 per 

cent; out-of-scope public service salaries frozen; department 

advertising budgets cut near 30 per cent; almost 40 boards and 

commissions dissolved or reduced to eliminate 500 government 

appointments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've got government down-sizing as well; 

the Department of Social Services consolidating all equipment 

and training programs to eliminate duplication.  The Crown 

corporations have been directed to reduce operating costs.  

Farm Ownership Board and Farm Land Security Board merged 

to reduce administration costs.  And funding available to 

positions will be reduced -- just some of the restraints on 

government spending and government down-sizing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, and I ask: will everyone 

support these initiatives?  No.  No they won't.  The members 

opposite won't.  And will everyone find this budget easy?  No 

not everyone will.  But are we going on the right course of 

direction and will we achieve our goal?  You bet we will.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is why I support fully the Minister of 

Finance and the budget that he has brought forward.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure to 

join in this budget debate, and I anticipate the 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

opportunity of participating in the Estimates also. 

 

As you recall, Mr. Speaker, this is a right which I and my 

colleagues were denied last session when the members 

opposite chose to hide from this side of the House and from the 

public.  They didn't want to answer the many questions that we 

have. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, they chose to introduce a motion that 

suspended all rules of the Legislative Assembly;  a motion that 

took away my rights as a member of this House.  A motion 

introduced by the Minister of Finance allowed the NDP to 

dodge questions regarding their actions . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, they have short memories 

because this was just last December and they've already forgot.  

But naturally they would want to forget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it astounds me that this government, which claims 

to be concerned about financial accountability, would not allow 

budget discussion in this House.  Instead, Mr. Speaker, instead 

they had the Minister of Finance up.  They did get the Minister 

of Finance up who could not answer questions of . . . any 

department questions because he said he didn't know.  He 

answered a few, but very, very few because he had the excuse, 

I haven't got the department officials here. 

 

So what an excuse.  And no wonder they want to forget that 

they had such a thing. 

 

I am pleased seeing the government's finally got around to 

delivering the budget speech; that we will now know where the 

money is going, Mr. Speaker.  We now know where the money 

is going.  We hope they don't hide it.  We hope that we'll know 

where it's going. 

 

We all know where the money came from to run the province 

this month.  We all know.  Everyone in Saskatchewan knows 

where the money came from this month.  It came from special 

warrants.  That's right, Mr. Speaker, special warrants.  

Remember them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I quote.  The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview released a legal opinion that concluded it's illegal and 

unconstitutional to use special warrants for the sake of 

convenience.  The opinion was provided by Merrilee 

Rasmussen, the former legislative law clerk. 

 

I continue, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Rasmussen's 22-page opinion (that she gave) found the 

government is abusing a section of The Financial 

Administration Act . . . 

 

 Special warrants are illegal when they are resorted to because 

it is more convenient for the executive (council) to use them 

than to call the legislature to give its approval . . . 

 

She stated.  Leader-Post, July 6, 1991. 

 

I think the key word here, Mr. Speaker, is convenient.  It was 

convenient for them to use special warrants.  The NDP claimed 

they didn't have time to prepare their budgets because they 

were just elected.  That was all right 

to say that in November, but not in February, March and April. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think they were just buying time.  Their British 

Columbia counterparts were elected the same time as the 

members opposite, yet they had time to prepare and present 

their budget on time.  There's no problem out there. 

 

The NDP had enough time, Mr. Speaker.  The fact of the 

matter is that they were buying time.  They were buying time 

for political reasons.  If this budget had been presented when it 

should have been, the NDP members would not have had 

enough time to devote to the massive witch-hunt of the civil 

service. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon made a lot of points 

and through my remarks tonight I'll be touching on quite a few 

of them because I don't agree, and you will hear where I don't 

agree. 

 

They would not have had enough time to conduct their rehiring 

of their patronage appointments.  Your want to talk about 

patronage -- the member from Shaunavon will hear tonight 

about patronage appointments.  He might hear about the whole 

8 or 900 that I got here, we'll talk about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP were buying time.  They needed time to 

desensitize the public, to make them believe that Saskatchewan 

is in worse financial shape than they ever imagined.  That's 

what they wanted to do -- to try to convince the people that the 

province of Saskatchewan was in much worse shape than what 

they ever could imagine.  They needed time to prepare the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers for the worst.  They needed to use 

special warrants, something they said they'd never do. 

 

I quote the member from Riversdale 

 

 "I think if we ever permit the government to fall into these 

kinds of sloppy disrespectful habits, then what the heck -- it's 

ballgame over.  You might as well forget about the concept 

of responsible, accountable government." 

 

 Leader-Post, April 9, 1991.  Mr. Speaker, that came from the 

now Premier.  Shame on him. 

 

This article goes on, Mr. Speaker.  It states, and I quote: 

 

 An NDP policy paper on democratic reforms states the 

budget should be delivered before March 31 of every year.  

(The member from Riversdale) . . . said this should be 

enshrined in legislation. 

 

 Leader-Post, April 9, 1991. 

 

So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a government running 

on special warrants while the House is in session, a session 

which began April 27 -- a full month later than the NDP budget 

deadline date.  They're still running on special warrants.  They 

still are, Mr. Speaker. 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

This government, Mr. Speaker, are contradicting themselves 

right, left and centre.  In the process of delaying the budget a 

number of leaks occurred.  They should never have delayed the 

budget, then they wouldn't have had all those leaks, although I 

know that they intentionally wanted some of them out.  The 

Minister of Finance is a pretty shrewd man, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I'm sure that he wanted a few of those leaks out, just to get 

opinions. 

 

I wouldn't be surprised if the NDP had to reprint the entire 

budget to cover up their incompetence. 

 

Can't you just hear the member from Regina Dewdney, oh, oh, 

another leak, quick, phone the printers.  I'm sure that's what 

happened many times.  Mr. Speaker, the days leading to this 

budget were a farce, a big farce, Mr. Speaker.  The government 

could keep a lid on nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone would like me to 

speak up but my throat isn't that good so I can't talk very loud 

tonight.  And I apologize to the member from Elphinstone if he 

can't hear me. 

 

The first item leaked to the public was the fact that the NDP, 

the self-proclaimed saviours of medicare, Mr. Speaker, the 

self-proclaimed saviours of medicare. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: --  They were contemplating health care 

premiums.  Mr. Speaker, they made sure that this leak got out 

-- that health care premiums, deterrent fees.  We know as I said 

in the throne speech they had no intentions.  I wish they had've.  

It would have been a lot more fair than what they've done.  It 

would have been their socialistic way of doing things -- 

everybody pays.  You'd think if they're going to go socialistic, 

that's the way they would have gone -- everybody pays -- 

instead of just picking on a few. 

 

Some Hon. Members: -- Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I ask the members please, not 

to interrupt.  I think some of you have had your opportunity to 

speak.  Others chose not to speak.  And some of you will still 

be speaking tonight.  So I ask you please, let the member from 

Arm River have his say. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This information 

soon got out into NDP land, Mr. Speaker, about their premiums 

and deterrent fees, and all the things they were going to do.  

And boy, did they ever get a shake up.  But they knew they 

were going to get it.  But it was just a try to fool the people so 

they could bring all the taxes on.  They got this from their own 

people.  Their own people won't know the real facts.  Their 

own constituency organizations were producing and handing 

out leaflets against the NDP government.  The header reads: 

Defend medicare.  Let me read on:  Medicare is under attack 

according to news reports, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale.  Government has approved measures that 

undermine the province's medicare system. 

 

Imagine that, Mr. Speaker.  Just imagine that.  What all the 

NDP supporters for ever and ever have done in this here 

province.  When you wake up in the morning and you look in 

the mirror and you know if you're on the PC side there's 35 per 

cent of the people don't like you.  And when they get up in the 

morning there's 35 per cent don't like them either.  So they 

might as well face it that 35 per cent of the solid NDP support 

in this province went just wild when they heard about 

premiums and deterrent fees.  And I can just imagine.  I can 

just imagine. 

 

The member from Rosetown-Elrose must have been swamped 

with calls for membership.  Why, Mr. Speaker, why would he 

be?  Because his NDP constituency organization initiated that 

flyer.  I bet you it was pretty tough on him.  I bet you every 

telephone call lost him the 50 votes that he won by.  So he don't 

want any more elections in Rosetown-Elrose or he'll lose by 

thousands of votes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in Rosetown-Elrose are not that 

different from other folks.  They're not different than the people 

in Arm River.  I know people, NDP people, that never have 

supported me in my 14 years.  They've been solid NDP.  

They've been saying so out in public, but they're ashamed of 

the members opposite.  They can't hold their head up in the 

streets of Craik and Davidson.  They're ashamed in the coffee 

rows.  They don't even stay there very long.  You only see our 

people there now, or the ones that said they're our people. 

 

No one in the province believes the members opposite when 

they claim that health fees are necessary, necessary only 

because of the state of the books.  The members opposite hope 

that people will believe them when they say, gee things were 

worse than we thought.  They've said it so long that it's not 

flying any more.  People every place is getting sick and tired 

of, gee I thought things were worse than I thought they were. 

 

I mean they knew, Mr. Speaker.  We've been through it over 

and over.  And we on this side of the House said they knew and 

they said they didn't know.  It's getting ridiculous.  It's getting 

absolutely ridiculous. 

 

But let's be grownup adults.  We all knew that you knew.  The 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale is not a novice politician.  

We know he had it well figured out.  He knows how the 

government books are kept. 

 

Now let's just go to the proof now, Mr. Speaker, that they 

knew.  We have the proof, and it comes from them, Mr. 

Speaker.  It comes from their man that they hired.  I don't know 

what politics he is, but it's Mr. Gass, Mr. Gass.  An individual 

appointed by the NDP members opposite confirmed this. 

 

Now let's just quit the heckling and get down to just real 

serious thinking here, Mr. Speaker.  Let's just have the people . 

. . I want the people that's watching on television land tonight 

to know that I'm hitting nerves when I mention what a Mr. 

Gass said.  Because I'm telling the people in television land that 

they're laughing, and they come to attention every time I go to 

speak because they know I hit nerves. 

 

And I'm going to tell the people out there in 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

Saskatchewan exactly what this man said.  You've heard it over 

and over again, but you can't deny it.  You can't deny this. 

 

On CKCK-TV news, February 18, '92, Donald Gass confirmed 

that the member from Riversdale knew.  Donald Gass said that 

the PC administration made no attempt to hide the province's 

financial position.  Now how long are we going to carry this on 

in Saskatchewan, this carryings-on that we didn't know and 

that's the reason for this terrible budget. 

 

If you want to know the reason for the terrible budget, because 

you're trying to get the pot full some place so you can buy 

yourself another election three and a half years from now.  

That's what you're doing. 

 

You . . . I know how this . . . I been here long as anybody in 

here, longer than most, and I know exactly what the plan is.  

It's not hard to figure out the plan, Mr. Speaker.  It's how to get 

elected three and a half years from now.  It's how to get elected. 

 

Oh we didn't know how to do the things that you're going to do.  

We didn't know how.  It's easy to plan because you're a smart 

bunch of operators over there.  They just . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I wonder, Mr. Speaker, where these people get 

the idea that the member from Arm River has anything to do 

with GRIP.  Where do you get the idea?  Where do you get that 

idea from, that this member from Arm River has anything to do 

with GRIP? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You told me. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I didn't tell anybody. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You did so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I did not, and we'll get into that later.  In 

fact, Mr. Gass said on CKCK news the following: the books 

were open all along to credit agencies or anyone else interested. 

 

Now how can we keep on in this legislature for another 50 or 

60 or 70 or 80 or 100 days until we get this cleared up between 

us all here?  You've got to admit you knew.  We know you 

knew because the panel said you knew and every time that the 

Minister of Agriculture gets up, the Minister of Health gets up 

-- they're the two main ones that's been talking in question 

period these last few days . . . And I'm so sick and tired of 

listening to this . . . oh, this terrible shape that the Tories left us 

in, this terrible, terrible $1.3 billion. 

 

Well before the session's over, I'm going to be able to have it in 

writing.  If they can't do it, then we're going to have to call an 

election because they can't show where there's $1.2 billion 

worth of debt in this province that they took over. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We can so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You can't show it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We did already. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No you can't.  In fact, Mr. Gass went on to 

say nothing was hidden.  Why did you . . . You must be feeling 

bad that you hired this guy that was so truthful.  You must feel 

terrible.  This guy told the truth.  You hired him; we didn't.  It 

wasn't Dave Tkachuk saying this.  It wasn't George Hill saying 

this.  It wasn't Jack Messer saying this.  It was Mr. Gass. . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I told you what he said.  That you 

people knew and the books were open, and that's what they're 

going to do.  They're going to, for the next . . . for about one 

more year they're going to try to hide under this, that the Tories 

left us in this shape. 

 

You're not going to get away with it because we 10 people on 

this side will . . . we're pretty well got the province convinced 

now, they're pretty well convinced, because I know that you 

people all know that the member from Arm River knows how 

to sell politics and how to sell the truth.  And I've made a good 

job.  I've been into your seat -- the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Another thing that Donald Gass said, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government opposite would have to know the facts because it's 

the way governments always have kept their books.  It was just 

the most governments keep . . . the way most governments 

keep their books, that's the exact quote, quoted by Mr. Gass.  

The accounting principles that were used under the 

Conservative government were the same as was followed by 

previous governments.  So how do we get this here big story 

that from last summer till now that this great big new story 

about this mess? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale has been an MLA 

for a long time.  He knows how the books are kept.  There's no 

deceiving him.  There's no deceiving the member from 

Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, because he knows, he knows exactly.  

And I know if I was talking to him man to man, alone, he 

would admit it to me exactly what the facts are.  But you're 

trying to fool the public, but not any longer. 

 

Do the NDP members across the floor really believe that there's 

anyone out there that's going to swallow this claim that you 

didn't know?  It just isn't happening out there, Mr. Speaker.  

The former Education critic, the member that was shut out of 

cabinet, she knew, Mr. Speaker.  She and the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale knew.  The whole time they were 

proclaiming that the education was a priority for the NDP Party 

and that there was not enough financial support for education, 

the whole time they were making these allegations, they knew 

the state of the government's books. 

 

It's just unbelievable, this whole story that we've been going 

through and this whole situation about them not believing.  It's 

just uncomprehensible, Mr. Speaker.  It didn't matter what they 

promised.  The promise is broken.  I don't know . . . if there's a 

promise that they didn't break, it would be a group of people 

that they never met.  That's the only people they haven't hurt in 

this province, is somebody they haven't met yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from . . . the Minister of Agriculture 

said they didn't hurt me.  I pay my tax off my cheques the same 

as you do, right here in this building.  And I pay income tax the 

same as anybody else does.  You 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

going to tell it didn't hurt?  You going to tell me it didn't hurt 

when I . . . I'm a diabetic.  I had to buy pills for diabetes.  You 

going to tell me it didn't hurt me? 

 

(2015) 

 

Now come on now.  Don't tell you haven't hurt everybody.  

Everybody is touched.  But I can find myself another few 

dollars to pay for that.  I'm not broke.  But what about the poor 

people that are?  You never considered them. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why don't you pay you're power bill? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, somebody from opposite over 

there said that why don't I pay my power bill?  If anybody can 

ever find that I have got an unpaid power bill or ever had ever 

in the history of this province, I will resign my seat tonight!  

Now that's a terrible statement to come from that man. 

 

The minister from Agriculture got personal here today.  Now 

the member sitting beside the House Leader said, why don't I 

pay my power bill?  How does he know whether I got my 

power bills paid or not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, can I ask you, Mr. Speaker, if that man would 

apologize?  On a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member, I know, from Arm River, is 

upset but he does not have a point of order.  It's a debatable 

point and I think he knows that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think it's too . . . I think 

it's kind of serious when somebody says loud enough for 

everybody to hear, why don't you pay your power bill? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Go on Gerry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Go on Gerry nothing. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Would the members please not 

interrupt.  Let the member have his say and if you can't be quiet 

in the House why don't you go to the members' lounge. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to repeat it once 

more.  If you want to get rid of the member from Arm River . . 

. I'm going to ask the minister responsible for SaskPower to go 

through the books of SaskPower since it came to my farm in 

1958, and if there's ever been an unpaid power bill by Gerald 

Muirhead, the member from Arm River, he will resign his seat 

tomorrow.  Now that's fair enough and that's the way it's going 

to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no more business of getting into the civil service 

because you pack a political card.  That's what the minister 

from Riversdale said, the Premier of this province.  And he 

said, this is a quote that he said: 

 

 No more business of getting into the civil service because 

you pack a political card or access to government because 

you pack a particular political card and I'm absolutely firm on 

that at my stage in my political career. 

The member from Riversdale said this on October 3, 1981, on 

the Harasen line.  He said this during election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We want to talk about patronage, the members from 

Shaunavon.  Who wants to talk about patronage?  I have here, 

Mr. Speaker, OC (order in council) appointments here for 200 

people, almost 200.  I counted, I think there's about 180 or 90, 

that has gone through this government -- OCs since October 

21, 1991. 

 

But it's in the throne speech: 

 

 My government has already appointed 580 people to 

government agencies, boards, and commissions of which 36 

per cent are women and 6 per cent are of aboriginal ancestry. 

 

Okay, talk about political patronage.  If every one of them 

wasn't a political appointment, then why did you change the 

ones that were there?  Why did anybody get moved if he 

doesn't believe in political patronage? 

 

Maybe we should just . . . I've got a few highlighted here.  If 

anybody out in television land thinks that these aren't political 

appointments, we can talk about Duane Adams; we can talk 

about Garry Aldridge, 1991 NDP life membership.  We can 

talk about Gary Beatty, former NDP appointee, Manitoba; 

Gary Benson, NDP strategist; Pat Brown, former NDP 

appointee. 

 

I don't know where they get the idea these are political 

appointments.  Coincidence, I guess, that they all happen to be.  

John Chapman, former NDP MLA.  Well I guess they 

probably, when they appointed John Chapman, they didn't 

know he was an MLA, an NDP MLA. 

 

There's pages of them here.  Tom Gitzel, lawyer in a law firm 

supporting NDP; Peter Glendinning, law partner in the Gates 

firm Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A brother-in-law of 

whom?  Brother-in-law of the House Leader, Mr. Speaker.  

Political patronage, right in the family. 

 

The member from Quill Lakes had his whole family. When he 

was sitting over here we used to say: who have you missed in 

your family for political appointments?  Now this has even 

moved into the House Leader. 

 

Reg Gross.  Now, would Reg Gross by any chance be a 

political appointment . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Isn't that the former MLA? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, it says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, he was -- yes, he was defeated NDP MLA. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who was that? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Reg Gross.  Well, he got . . . And you know 

something, Mr. Speaker, you know something, Mr. Speaker?  

Reg Gross, he's on here for appointment . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Would the members please have some 

respect for this Chamber at least.  We don't need this 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

yelling across the floor, not only to the member that is 

speaking, but to each other.  We should have at least some 

respect for this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Reg Gross, Mr. Speaker, is like many 

others in here.  They got their salary as $87,000, $113,000, 

their salaries.  But they got many -- one, two, three, four, about 

eight on that, salary not revealed; order in council, salary not 

revealed; verbal, not revealed, not revealed; pages of them here 

-- not revealed.  Reg Gross, not revealed; Carla Hansen, not 

revealed. 

 

So that's the way they're going to do it.  If they don't want to 

tell you, they just won't reveal it or have the salary verbal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on and on here about political patronage, 

but maybe we should talk a little about more serious matters.  

The member from Shaunavon wanted to talk tonight about 

Dome Advertising.  Maybe we should just have a little chat, 

Mr. Speaker, about Service printers.  That will put some of the 

. . . the older members here wouldn't know what I was talking 

about, about Service printers.  They were exactly the same; 

they got all the NDP advertising; it's only small dollars in those 

days. 

 

Service printers give out thousands of dollars worth of 

contracts when I was in opposition here from '78 to 1982.  And 

these members know that all they've got to do is ask the former 

premier of this province, Allan Blakeney about political 

patronage.  If you want to talk about political patronage ask 

him, he knows all about it.  He came from . . . native of Nova 

Scotia in about 1951-52, the former premier Allan Blakeney, 

and he started a law practice in this province.  In 1952 he got a 

job with the securities commission.  In 1953 he become the 

chairman.  In 1960 he become an MLA.  In 1970 he become 

the leader of the NDP Party.  In 1971 he become the premier of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I'll take you back a little 

farther because when I follow this through from '52 to 1970, if 

I had to pull Hansard we could tell you what his salary was all 

those years.  And I could tell you it wasn't very much.  It 

started out with about three, four thousand dollars a year in 

1951.  And it wasn't too much of a salary to become premier in 

1971. 

 

Go take a look in 1972-73 and then by '82, and take a look at 

the conflict of interest guidelines and then take a look about 

how much money went from Service printers and other 

services of the NDP went to that old law firm as high as 

$275,000.  Take that in 1992 dollars and see what you've got. 

 

They want to talk about political patronage.  We can talk all 

about it.  I was four years in opposition.  Now the front 

members across the row are very quiet.  The only one chirping, 

Mr. Speaker, is the ones that weren't in the front row before.  

The member from Elphinstone's been very quiet.  The member 

from . . . the Minister of Finance don't even look this way when 

I talk about Service printers and Allan Blakeney.  He didn't 

even . . . 

Anyway, I want you to realize, my friends, Mr. Speaker, that 

there's just about 200 appointments there.  Now why do we 

have the people standing up here all week saying . . . talking 

about the past government and political patronage?  Why do 

we?  And then you turn around and I've never seen anything 

like political patronage in my life as what you people have 

done. 

 

I could take you to some departments over here, and I can give 

no names because they'll be fired tomorrow, but I know some 

people that are at a wage class, class 2, class 3, and lots of 

people have been there 15, 20 years, 10 years and they just sit 

there and they're at a class 1 salary.  Well now as soon as this 

government becomes . . . the NDP becomes government, what 

did they do to award their friends in the departments?  They've 

also moved, now moved to a salary based on a class 2, class 3 

with the same job. 

 

Then they're trying to save money.  They're going to let 

diabetics not be able to buy their drugs.  They're going to let 

somebody that needs a chiropractor treatment, they're going to 

pay for all your drugs now, your complete drug bill has to be 

paid for. 

 

Now they've had cut-backs to no end.  What are those nurses 

going to say that got fired yesterday?  What would they say, 

Mr. Speaker, if they knew that you've got people that you just 

raised them from a class 1 to a class 3 level of pay and you just 

take that right across the face of your government of all the 

political workers that you're awarding by moving them up the 

scale. 

 

You talk about saving money.  You talk about starving children 

in Regina.  Go feed them with the money that you just fed your 

own political boys with, with raises in salary behind the scenes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really thought this behaviour was no longer 

acceptable.  I thought this would never happen.  You used to 

hear about this when the NDP were in government before.  

This is what we went through from '78 to '82, this kind of 

behaviour.  I thought it was gone for ever but it's right back 

there again.  Or maybe they were just talking about other 

political parties when they said they wouldn't do it, that it 

shouldn't be done.  Was the Minister of Finance saying that it is 

acceptable for their party alone to engage to blatant patronage?  

Did he mean their party or just other parties?  It would seem so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this budget is bitter medicine to swallow.  

We all know that, Mr. Speaker.  Bitter medicine.  But not for 

me; I knew most of the budget from the leaks and knew what 

the NDP were up to.  We on this side of the House knew but 

not the poor people in the province of Saskatchewan; they 

didn't know.  But for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

it's a bitter medicine to swallow. 

 

Year after year after year the people of Saskatchewan heard 

how the NDP would get rid of the deficit, improve health care, 

improve education, improve agriculture, reintroduce a dental 

plan, reintroduce the old prescription drug plan, eliminate 

poverty. 

 

That's all they heard from them for nine years.  They heard 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

how the NDP would eliminate the deficit and the poverty -- all 

the same time frame.  They heard how the NDP could 

eliminate the harmonization of the E&H (education and 

health).  How could they eliminate it?  Because it was 

unnecessary.  I would bet, Mr. Speaker, they are regretting this 

action daily.  The NDP claimed that harmonization was 

regressive.  They claimed it created job losses and wreaked 

havoc to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder.  I wonder if the people of 

Saskatchewan now that have been fired and lost their jobs . . . 

we'll just use a few items here.  Seven cents on the price of a 

hamburger, which is a selective tax, you don't have to buy a 

hamburger.  The member from Swift Current, when he was at 

the age of 15, 16, never thought of buying a hamburger.  You 

had to get fed at home.  That's pleasure to go do those things 

away from home.  It's a selective tax. 

 

I wonder if they . . . I wonder what people would rather do, Mr. 

Speaker, pay an extra 7 per cent on restaurant meals or pay an 

additional 30 per cent on their phone bill every month.  Pay an 

extra 7 per cent on a new shirt or pay an additional 5 per cent 

on their SaskPower bill every month.  Would people rather pay 

an extra 7 per cent on a paper roll novel or pay an additional 10 

per cent when they renew their car plates this year?  I wonder 

what they would rather do, Mr. Speaker.  Would people rather 

pay a selective 7 per cent tax or pay an additional 4 per cent on 

their SaskEnergy bill every month? 

 

If the 7 per cent on a hamburger was a regressive . . . and 

would create job losses, what is the increased percentage across 

the board going to do.  The people who said harmonization was 

going to destroy the province increased E&H for everyone -- 

the poor students and the elderly.  Betrayed everybody. 

 

(2030) 

 

How do you call this progressive, Mr. Speaker.  What people 

would say if they had a choice today.  What would they say?  

When the NDP members were voted in on the promise to 

eliminate harmonization I wonder if people knew what they 

were in store for.  I wonder if they knew what they were going 

to get?  I think most people thought, just as the NDP wanted 

them to, that the E&H tax would be gone -- not just 

harmonization.  Fool people on the 7 per cent tax.  There's 

NDP in my area and people that never voted NDP before, and 

floated over and voted for them, thinking that they promised to 

remove the 7 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) and didn't 

know that E&H were coming on.  You forgot to tell them that. 

 

You misrepresented them, Mr. Speaker.  They were 

misrepresented that the PST would be gone.  It didn't go any 

place.  It just went up to 8 per cent.  The PST . . . you go and 

pay a bill at a gas station or a store, they still got PST right on 

their cash, and it's got PST on there yet.  You can call it E&H, 

but it's still a tax is a tax, don't make a difference what you call 

it.  The member from Elphinstone can shake his head right off 

and there's no change in tax.  It doesn't change it one bit.  It's 

exactly 8 per cent, or 7, or 6.  Now it's 8 in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's something that this government did, 

and I don't know whether the Minister of Finance has dealt 

with this or not, but I've been getting calls, Mr. Speaker, from 

construction workers, contractors that had made contracts over 

the winter, and they put in their contract, E&H, 7 per cent.  

And on the day after the budget, Mr. Speaker, they phoned the 

Department of Finance and said, what happens to the other 1 

per cent?  And they said, tough, you'll have to pay for it. 

 

And that's terrible, Mr. Speaker.  We have contractors out there 

that had their crews working just to break even this winter and 

will go in the hole over 1 per cent. 

 

The one person that phoned me was only . . . He said he wanted 

his name mentioned in here.  His name was Leonard 

Schmiedge from Davidson, a plumber.  And he said, it's only 

$450, but I'm only a small, little guy.  I'm only a little 

contractor.  And they said -- he's the guy that phoned, the 

gentleman that phoned the Department of Finance -- and he 

was informed: tough, you're stuck with that 1 per cent. 

 

Now this hasn't really got to be known.  The members around 

you, Mr. Minister of Finance, won't even know this yet.  They 

won't even know this.  This is just another one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is so important for the Minister of Finance I'm 

going to repeat it because I hope he's got an answer for it 

tonight when he speaks.  The contractors out there, people that 

make contracts of any kind, that happened to write in 7 per cent 

E&H -- if they just wrote in "plus E&H," they're all right -- but 

if they wrote the 7 per cent in and they phoned your department 

and said, what happens with the 8 per cent?  Who gets stuck 

with it?  And your department officials told Leonard 

Schmiedge from Davidson, tough, you're stuck with that 1 per 

cent.  And it's costing him $400-and-some. 

 

Con's Construction building, the school in Kenaston, it's going 

to cost them about $30,000.  So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we 

can have an answer on that one because it's very important, 

very important, because I think you fooled all your members 

around you that they didn't even think of that.  But we hope 

that the Minister of Finance did think of that. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, would this government, when they've 

promised and promised and promised that they would not ever 

put deterrent fees or whatever onto the drug plan or onto the 

health plan, and they went and touched the drugs and they 

touched ambulances, they touched the chiropractor, the 

optometrists, and the diabetics, now why did they do this? 

 

And they're saying here today, the minister in the House today 

-- of Health -- said very clearly that the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan is behind them and endorsing of what they're 

doing. 

 

Is that why, Mr. Speaker, that this article here in the Leader-

Post, "Cuts said panic move,", is that why the . . . I won't take 

time to read all this in here but it should be read to you; but 

they probably read it today where the nurses that were fired 

yesterday, and they said that the hospitals in Regina is at a 

long-time low, the morale in 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

those hospitals.  The morale is down, down, down. 

 

And they're responsible, Mr. Speaker.  It's never been so bad.  

Out in the little town of Craik, we have a hospital out there.  

And they're even worried out there there'll be cut-backs and 

one or two will lose their jobs.  They're so afraid of it.  They're 

afraid of it all over this province, because there'll be cut-backs.  

And there'll be some farmer's wife that's working out there to 

try to support and keep that farm going that's going to be fired 

because of their cut 

_backs. 

 

Your deficit surtax of 10 per cent that was announced in this 

budget gave Saskatchewan people the pleasure of being the 

highest taxed people in Canada.  Now are we proud of that in 

Saskatchewan; that we're the highest taxed in all of Canada?  

People of our province pay the highest personal income tax and 

we have the fewest people. 

 

The NDP are increasing everything.  Not many people know 

this, Mr. Speaker, but the NDP have increased the cost of 

getting married.  Did everybody in this Assembly know that if 

you want to buy a licence to get married, you even tax them 

some more?  This was approved through an OC.  They 

increased the cost to purchase a marriage licence.  It used to 

cost $10 back in 1982; now it costs $50 to get married. 

 

And I know what's going to happen and I'll predict, Mr. 

Speaker, that it's going to come back, what they did in the '70s.  

They're going to tax the dead.  They're going to tax them when 

they're born; they're going to tax them when they get married; 

and they're going to tax them when they die.  And that's 

coming, Mr. Speaker, because that was one of the reasons why 

they were heaved out in 1982, of all of these things. 

 

Now they're doing in 1992 all the things they said they would 

never do.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, they're doing all the things that 

they said that the Tories were going to do.  They went out at 

election time and said, this is what the Tories are going to do to 

you.  But they turned around and did it themselves.  They 

stabbed everybody in the back. 

 

I would expect that he and his colleagues are now explaining to 

their NDP political contributors the money they wasted, and 

that's all this money that I've been talking about.  I'm sure 

you're having a hard time explaining to all your contributors 

out there, where did our promises go to. 

 

From what I've heard, not to many folks watched the Premier's 

little show.  Those who did watch made comment to me that it 

was more than a little dry.  Maybe you didn't have enough 

colour in your charts.  One of my constituents told me that the 

new government had a do-nothing chart.  He felt that the 

knew-nothing title pretty much summed up the new 

government's progress to date.  You guys might have coined 

yourselves a new nickname, the do-nothing-but-raise-taxes 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people do not need nor do they 

care to hear the NDP government continue to blame others for 

their problems.  I've covered that many times tonight.  But I'm 

going to be saying it for days and days and 

days ahead until you get off this business of blaming other 

people.  You're in government now -- now govern!  You're in 

government -- do it and do it right, and don't tax the people to 

do it.  It's never worked any place in North America or the 

world.  Any province, state, or government or country that 

says, let's tax the people, you stop the country; you kill the 

country.  You've got to get growth another way; you'll never 

get growth by taxing people. 

 

That's what they did in England back in the early days.  They 

went out with a . . . just like you people, they went out with a 

suit of armour on and a whip, and they went out to collect taxes 

-- whoop, whoop, whoop.  And that's exactly what you're going 

to do.  Where's the socialist sickle going to strike again?  

Because I'll tell you that the socialist sickle hasn't even begun.  

These people are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  One more comment out of the member 

from Regina Wascana, in that interruption I'll ask her to leave 

the chambers. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to refer to an article 

written by Sandra Mitchell.  I think the members know who 

Sandra Mitchell is, the executive officer of the New 

Democratic Party of Canada.  She states in her article that she 

is tired of hearing the Minister of Finance for Saskatchewan 

economic woes.  She's getting tired of the Minister of Finance.  

She's disgusted with him.  To put it simply, she's saying, get on 

with it.  There is a problem, so start offering some solutions.  

So you're own people . . . she don't . . . but all you're doing is 

blaming somebody else. 

 

Quit blaming somebody else and get at it and get some 

solutions other than taxing people, taxing the sick, firing 

people.  That's all they can think of, is fire people, tax them.  

That's all they've got on their mind.  We have to live up to that 

one main promise and that is balance that budget.  And they're 

going to balance the budget at any cost. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, it's great if we can balance 

budgets, but the voters in Saskatchewan are really . . . when 

they used to go to all these meetings and listen to people on our 

side and your side talk about balanced budgets, balanced 

budgets, and they'd stand and cheer for the speaker that says 

balance the budget and on the way home they say to 

themselves, yes, they'd like to see them balance the budget but 

they'd better stay out of my pocket and do it.  They better stay 

out of my pocket. 

 

So the people will not come up and say what they really think.  

When you're going broke out there as a farmer or business man 

or whatever, you're only interested in balancing one budget and 

that's your own.  So balance the budgets, I give you . . . I hope 

you do.  I hope you have good luck in balancing budgets but be 

careful on whose backs you do it on.  Be careful on whose 

backs. 

 

We in the opposition benches have been asking what the NDP 

government's plans are for a long, long time.  The NDP knew 

there was a deficit.  They made reference to the deficit daily 

during the election.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP government had 

ample time to devise some of the 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

positive economic strategies for this province, so for goodness 

sake get at it and do it. 

 

Instead we have the Premier of this province going on 

television with a mess of charts.  If anybody was watching him, 

they were doing so to hear what the NDP planned to do with 

the deficit, not to watch the NDP point fingers at the federal 

government and the previous administration.  That isn't what 

they watched the Premier for.  They watched to see what his 

plan was.  But he had charts out there to show them who was to 

blame.  They don't want to hear who was to blame.  Everybody 

that has any good common-thinking sense knows that we got a 

economic problem clean across the nation, across North 

America and across Europe and all the third-world countries 

besides.  So don't think little Saskatchewan is different than any 

place else. 

 

It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the late Tommy Douglas who 

said he was the saviour of the farmers after the '30s and people 

followed that for years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I knew, Mr. Speaker, that would draw an 

applaud but I ask this question, Mr. Speaker, to all 

Saskatchewan.  Who saved them in Alberta and Manitoba and 

North Dakota and South Dakota?  Tommy Douglas?  Because 

they improved after the '30s too.  They improved after the '30s.  

Everybody did well.  Tommy Douglas just happened to be 

here.  But Tommy Douglas, if he was here today . . . 

 

I tell you, poor Tommy Douglas was a good gentleman, an 

honourable man, the two of the best statements I ever knew. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Tommy Douglas and John Diefenbaker 

were two of the best statesmen I ever knew.  They believed, 

even though I was against his philosophy, he believed in what 

he was doing was right.  He believed; but that was the CCF.  

You people are the New Democratic Party and don't connect 

yourself with Tommy Douglas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Tommy Douglas was a friend of my 

family's.  My mother went to school with Tommy Douglas.  

She was very proud of him as a man.  But I tell you we didn't 

believe in his philosophy but he wouldn't condone what you 

people are doing.  He wouldn't be taxing the sick.  He wouldn't 

let somebody like my youngest son's brother-in-law, has got 

diabetes and he gets $785 salary and that's all he gets.  So he 

gets $785 salary every two weeks and he has to pay his rent, he 

pays his food and his wife has to have $165 medicine for 

diabetes.  Now you tell me how those kind of people . . . 

There's hundreds of them out there are suffering, and Tommy 

Douglas would not do that.  He would never do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this next few weeks we'll see Bills come in 

from the government and they're going to be offering solutions.  

They're going to be offering solutions, but we on this side of 

the House are going to be offering many 

solutions.  We're going to be tabling Bills too.  We will not 

simply sit back and demand the government continue to spend.  

We know what the situation is.  We informed the NDP what 

the situation was.  They just chose to ignore it.  The problems 

cannot be solved through taxation.  We've said that before 

tonight.  Continuing tax increases of the middle class will 

simply drive people out of the province.  And that's a fact.  

People are leaving this province and they'll leave daily now 

after this budget. 

 

This side of the House will be willing to foot a bill, half of a 

bill with you to do a poll.  We'll do a poll, and we'll ask people 

if they've lost their job or just ask people period if they lose 

their jobs, would you leave the province?  We'll do a poll. 

 

We should also . . . And also put in the poll, if you're fired, 

what would you do?  Would you vote NDP again?  I hope the 

NDP wellness model can do something about this particular 

ailment. 

 

(2045) 

 

There are just about two more points I want to make here then 

I'm through, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  I 

would rather see, for the sake of the people that took the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, that we as MLAs cancel our 

pension plan.  We got some good pension plans. 

 

Now why should we, as MLAs, and retire, be any more 

important to have a pension than the people in good faith that 

took this pension plan on, the people in this province.  Why did 

you hit them?  If it had have been your idea you never would 

have touched it.  It's because if the Tories had done it, is why 

you said, get rid of it, get rid of it. 

 

You know that it's not right, it's not morally right, Mr. Speaker.  

They all know that it's not right to take a pension plan away 

from anybody.  It is wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

What about the people who bought homes in this province?  

And they're okay now because interest rates are down for the 

mortgage protection plan.  But if interest rates go back up, it's 

gone.  You took it off because you're thinking it will go back 

up. 

 

Why did you, Mr. Speaker, why did the members opposite hit 

the farmers so hard when they took off this feed grain 

program?  They eliminated it.  Why did they pick on farmers?  

The Minister of Agriculture is sitting here.  Why did he charge 

them another 60 cents a gallon to buy gasoline?  Why is he 

going to break the feedlots in this province?  Why did the lands 

branch . . . These questions I'm asking . . . The Minister of 

Rural Development responsible for lands branch is not here.  

But why was there foreclosure. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member has twice now 

broken a rule of this House that you do not refer to the presence 

or absence of members in this House.  And I ask him to refrain 

from doing so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I got so excited, Mr. Speaker, I didn't realize 

I did, but I apologize.  I'm sorry, because I do know better. 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

But why did the member . . . the minister responsible for lands 

branch send out -- in March, while the freeze was still on -- 

almost 600 notices, in one week, of cancellation of leases. 

 

Why did the minister endorse sending letters out to agents?  

Why does he not fire, Mr. Speaker, the man that wrote that 

letter for saying . . . well yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that man 

should be fired because he said if you speak out against this 

government, you broke your contract and it was not in that 

contract. 

 

If that is right, then we as government should have fired all the 

people that was out in front of the legislature that spoke out 

against the government, said let's hang the premier of this 

province.  Right out here last year.  The people out here by the 

hundreds that lined up and had pictures of ropes hanging the 

premier and they had . . . They said don't take Fair Share 

Saskatchewan.  They were moving all over Saskatchewan.  

How many people, Mr. Speaker, would be so happy to move to 

Yorkton or Tisdale tonight that lost their job?  How happy 

would they be to be able to move? 

 

Talk about don't take my mommy away from me, don't take my 

daddy away from me.  That's what your union people done out 

here.  We didn't fire them.  But if an agent speaks out against 

this government their job's in jeopardy. 

 

Now that's the worse thing I've ever heard and that's what I 

wanted to close on tonight is this here government.  You can't 

speak out against the government; you'll lose your right.  And 

this is going to haunt you till the next election because we on 

this side will never let the people in this province ever forget 

that you said in a letter . . . .and the minister has endorsed it 

because he didn't do anything about it.  He's endorsed that 

letter.  Whoever wrote that letter and signed it should be out of 

job, whoever said that if you speak out against this government 

your job's in jeopardy. 

 

Now that's got to be the worse thing I've ever heard ever 

happen from any government that I've ever heard of since I've 

been involved in politics -- and before.  It is terrible.  

Absolutely the worse thing I've ever heard of. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, did the Minister of Finance -- just one 

more thing here -- did he realize when he said we're going to 

put 3 cents tax increase on gasoline . . . Now that's all right if 

they've got to have that money.  I'm not saying anything about 

that.  But the farmers always had a rebate of the 10 cents tax 

that was there before . . . or sorry, I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, that's 

not right.  They automatically had it off at the pumps but now 

they have to pay it.  It's 13 cents a litre, 59-point-some cents a 

gallon, and they've got to pay cash and they won't get their 

money till a year from now. 

 

Now if you think that's helping farmers and you can say, oh . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and then it's only a portion, 

Mr. Speaker.  And you can say, oh everybody farms with 

diesel.  Go on.  There's people that I know in my constituency 

still hasn't got a diesel tractor.  They're using gas.  They bale.  

They run . . . their smaller tractors 

are gasoline.  Their trucks are gasoline.  The majority of their 

trucks are cleaning seed today.  The majority of trucks, 

probably 80 or 90 per cent, are trucks that burn gasoline that's 

cleaning seed to seed this crop.  And they only make five miles 

to the gallon, the average truck in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if you think that isn't cash right out of their pocket.  You, 

at least, could have said with that number, you don't pay.  But 

you stole their money for one year.  That's what you've done.  

And then give them a rebate back a year from now.  It's the 

worst thing I've ever heard of.  In this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

there wasn't one thing for farmers. Some things they had you 

took away and it's serious.  And that, Mr. Speaker, has to be the 

worst thing that's ever happened to a government that promised 

to save farmers.  And I'm going to close on this note from the 

Premier, from the now Premier who said at election time and 

he said it over and over again that, I promise to balance the 

budget, lower taxes, save the farmers, go to Ottawa and get 

them some money.  And he's going to break them all except 

balance the budget but on the backs of who?  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's actually with some relief that I have this opportunity to 

enter the budget debate.  Mr. Speaker, in some ways it's a treat 

to follow the member from Arm River in any debate. Without 

question he is one of the most entertaining members in the 

House and we can even overlook his infrequent brushes with 

the truth for the entertainment value, Mr. Speaker.  But I have 

to say tonight, Mr. Speaker, I have to say this, I have never in 

my life saw a windmill that runs on water. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm 

River covered a great deal of territory in his remarks, very few 

subjects passed his attention tonight, except I noted that he did 

not in that lengthy entry into the budget debate make any 

reference at all to the April 21, 1992 Special Report by the 

Provincial Auditor in Saskatchewan.  I heard no mention of 

that document and this is unfortunate because I know that the 

member from Arm River is a member with some good 

conscience in some ways and will sometimes tell the truth.  I 

thought perhaps in his remarks he might want to explain to 

members of the legislature some questions that are left 

outstanding from this report from the special auditor. 

 

For instance, Mr. Speaker, on page 19 of the Auditor's special 

report he indicates to the public of Saskatchewan, to the 

members of the Assembly, that the Centre of the Arts here in 

Regina, the Centre of the Arts here in Regina, while those 

gentlemen opposite were in government, the Centre reported 

that a private viewing suite over at the Centre of the Arts was 

used a total of 17 times by three ministers.  Now I thought 

perhaps the member from Arm River might tonight disclose to 

the House which three ministers. 

 

This auditor's report also indicates to the public of 

Saskatchewan, that over the last two years before the 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

change in government, the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance company reported that it paid taxi fares -- taxi fares 

-- of $682 for various ministers and their staff.  And I don't 

need to remind you, Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

legislature, each of those ministers are equipped with an 

automobile and yet SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 

was paying taxi-cab fares for them and some of their staff.  I'm 

wondering which ministers that was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I note here, and this is of some interest to me because my 

wife and I are regular attenders at the Big Valley at Craven in 

the summer, and I note that the Provincial Auditor and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'll bet you pay your way, too. 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- As a member says, we bet we pay our way.  

We sure do; we sure do.  Now the Provincial Auditor in this 

special report says here that the Saskatchewan Liquor Board -- 

get this, Mr. Speaker -- the Saskatchewan Liquor Board 

reported that it paid expenses totalling $16,162 for ministers to 

attend Big Valley. 

 

I thought in debate tonight the member from Arm River might 

indicate to the House which ministers were at Big Valley last 

year costing the taxpayers $16,162.  Mr. Speaker, this special 

auditor's report prepared and delivered in April of this year 

indicates:  "The Liquor Board reported (that) approximately 

$19,285 worth of liquor was supplied (free) to ministers' 

offices."  Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm River didn't 

address the question to which ministers was this $19,000 worth 

of free booze delivered. 

 

My good friend and colleague from Prince Albert, Mr. 

Speaker, just perhaps made the most appropriate comment I've 

heard in the House in the last hour.  He asks and says: they got 

the booze; the people got the hangover. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't want to take a long time 

on this debate tonight.  We're drawing very near to the end of 

the budget debate, and I know there are other members who 

want to share some of their comment on the budget.  So 

therefore I won't take a lengthy time tonight. 

 

Somehow tonight, Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of President 

Harry Truman.  You'll remember President Truman, president 

of the United States during those difficult war years, a 

president who on occasion had to take some very unpopular 

stands, and yet a president much beloved by the American 

people.  You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that it was President 

Truman that had on his desk, in the oval office, that famous 

plaque which read: the buck stops here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of this budget and in light of the 

commitment of this government, it would be my suggestion 

that over the life of the first term of this government, the 

Premier of Saskatchewan and perhaps every member of this 

government ought to have a plaque 

on their desk which reads: the debt stops here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the budget we debate tonight and 

will later vote on tonight marks a turning point -- a turning 

point in the history of Saskatchewan, a turning point from 

fiscal irresponsibility to fiscal responsibility.  This budget 

marks the end of ten years of ever-increasng debt, of 

uncontrolled deficits which now threaten the very existence of 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, as hard a budget as it is -- and, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest that it's unlikely any other budget in 

provincial history has been as tough as this budget, Mr. 

Speaker -- as hard as this budget is, it is the turning point.  And 

the debt, Mr. Speaker, the debt stops here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened yesterday with some interest to 

the former premier, the current member from Estevan 

participate in this debate and he shared with this House the 

record of his government.  I was surprised that he so willingly 

shared with this House the record of his government.  Mr. 

Speaker, I quote from Hansard yesterday remarks made by the 

current member from Estevan, the former premier.  He said to 

the House yesterday, this is what he said: 

 

 The deficit in 1982 (first year he was government) was 227; 

in 1983 it was 331; in 1984 it was 379; and in 1985 it was 

584; in 1986 (this is the member from Estevan reviewing the 

record of his government) in 1986 (he said) it was 1.235 

billion; in '87 it was 568; and in '88 it was 328; 377 in '89; 

358 in 1990. 

 

And what he didn't tell us, of course, was that in 1991 his 

deficit was $960 million. 

 

The member from Estevan and the former government created, 

like a train that's out of control, a debt on our province.  And he 

was the chief engineer.  And he came into the House yesterday 

and reviewed it for us.  But he didn't, of course, say that in each 

and every one of those years he was government, his final 

deficit figure was a far shot from the prediction -- from what 

they told the people the deficit would be -- in any one of those 

given years. 

 

(2100) 

 

And I note the year 1986 an election year.  We were told, we 

the people of Saskatchewan were told by the member for 

Estevan's government, that the deficit that year would be $400 

million.  After the election was over, the truth of that year's 

deficit, as the member from Estevan told us yesterday, the 

deficit was $1.235 billion.  $800 million out. 

 

Now we come to 1991 -- 1991, another election year.  The 

member from Estevan, the Minister of Finance at that time, 

Lorne Hepworth, tells us that the deficit is going to be in the 

neighbourhood of $250 million, confirms as much in the 

middle of the election campaign with a letter.  What did the 

deficit turn out to be after the election?  Nine hundred and sixty 

million dollars. 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's the record of the government 

opposite.  A record of deficit after deficit, debt after debt.  And 

then you combine that with the give-away of our assets.  You 

combine that with all the waste and the mismanagement, the 

payments for trips to Big Valley, and the thousand-dollar hotel 

rooms, and the flights all over the world, and the free cars.  Mr. 

Speaker, is it any wonder that we're in the mess that we're in? 

 

The one other comment that I did not hear tonight from the 

member from Arm River, and it's a comment that I have not 

heard from any member of the Conservative opposition in this 

debate since it begun, was the very short and simple comment 

that I expected to hear from at least one of them -- I'm sorry.  

Not one.  Not one hint of regret in that caucus for the mountain 

of debt that they have put on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may very well have read the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on the evening of May 6.  I want to 

quote some of the editor's comment in the May 6 editorial from 

the Star-Phoenix.  The editorial that night was titled "Tories to 

blame".  And it reads . . . and I won't read all of it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but I want to quote some significant parts: "THE 

ISSUE: (says the editor) Provincial Deficit.  THE SOLUTION: 

Tories must accept responsibility." 

 

The editor goes on to say: 

 

 Saskatchewan taxpayers can only come to the conclusion that 

the provincial Tories are unable to tell right from wrong. 

 

 They appear to operate without a conscience or any moral 

guide posts.  Otherwise, (and I'm quoting, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker) how could deputy Conservative leader Rick 

Swenson and Tory house leader Bill Neudorf accuse the NDP 

of lying about the deficit during the election campaign? 

 

 During the past few months, (I'm continuing to quote from 

the editorial) the Gass commission and the provincial 

auditor's report have unveiled a litany of Tory extravagances 

and ill-conceived expenditures, all of which contributed to 

the province's staggering debt load. 

 

The editor concludes: 

 

 Despite the reports' overwhelming indictment of the Tories' 

fiscal mismanagement, Neudorf and Swenson had the 

audacity to claim that, during the election campaign, Premier 

Roy Romanow pretended not to know the Tories were lying 

about the provincial deficit.  The absurdity (Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this is the final sentence of the editorial. The 

absurdity) of this situation and the complete moral 

bankruptcy of the Tories is not lost on Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and that's obviously why they're in opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, we're in a mess.  The people 

of Saskatchewan know we're in a mess.  You know, just 

yesterday -- and once in a while the truth slips out -- just 

yesterday in question period when the Minister of Health was 

pointing out to members opposite the kind of mess they've put 

this province in, a voice from the back bench, and I won't name 

which member I think it was because I'm not sure, but a voice 

from the back bench came out here as clear as anything for all 

to hear in the House saying that it's your mess now. 

 

Well at last there is some sense of admission that we've got a 

mess.  It's our mess, you're right.  Member opposite, you're 

right.  It's our mess now; we'll deal with it.  The people of 

Saskatchewan will deal with it but at least one has admitted 

there's a mess.  There's a mess. 

 

You know, I started off just moments ago talking about 

President Harry Truman.  People are aware of that plaque 

which said, the buck stops here.  But President Truman had two 

plaques on his desk, the other a quote from Mark Twain.  Harry 

Truman had on his desk this quote as well:  always do right; 

this will gratify some people and astonish the rest. 

 

As difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this budget is, as tough as 

the choices have been, I believe it is the right budget.  I believe 

it sets the right direction for our time in history. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had options here, we had options.  We 

could have left things alone.  We could have run up the debt.  

We could have, as the former premier used to do, say, well 

don't you worry because next year the price of wheat's going to 

sky-rocket, the price of oil's going up and the price of potash is 

going up and everything is going to boom and, oh boy, you can 

afford to mismanage and still break even.  Give her snoose. 

 

I mean we could have taken that approach, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  We could have said, we could have said, well we 

can't do this or we can't touch this area because it will be 

politically unpopular.  We could have done that.  We could 

have taken the easy route.  We could have chosen those 

options, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we did not.  We've chosen 

the route of responsibility. 

 

Now across the way there they tell us now and again this 

budget is the beginning of our defeat, that we'll be a one-term 

government.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'll tell 

you, I'd sooner be defeated having done what is right than to 

get re-elected having perpetrated a fraud on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- And furthermore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

budget is not the beginning of our defeat.  It's the beginning of 

a new era for Saskatchewan.  It's the beginning of fiscal 

freedom for our province.  It's the beginning of release from the 

bondage to the bankers and the financiers in New York and 

Toronto and Geneva and Tokyo.  It's the beginning of security 

for those things which we have and those things which we all 

desire. 

 

It's a tough budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Let no one suggest 

otherwise.  Let no one suggest otherwise.  It's 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

tough, it's tough, and let me say, Mr. Speaker, there is no joy in 

the introduction of this kind of budget.  No joy in reducing 

heritage grants, no joy in cutting pension plans. 

 

There's no joy in putting needed capital construction on hold.  

There's no joy in reducing farm support programs.  There's no 

joy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in having to raise the deductible of 

the drug plan.  Mr. Speaker, there's no joy in any of this. 

 

But there is responsibility.  And there is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

hope.  There is hope for the future because tough decisions not 

taken today would spell disastrous consequence for our 

province and our people in the very near future, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  We've had to make some tough decisions about the 

drug plan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if those tough decisions aren't made today 

in two or three years we won't have a drug plan.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we would be joining the seven other Canadian 

provinces who do not have a drug plan for the general public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know the anguish that must have 

gone into the preparation of this budget.  Programs like the 

drug plan, pioneered and developed by New Democratic 

governments . . . It's not, it's not easy, and there is no joy in 

some of these choices. 

 

But there's hope.  There is hope.  Because in these choices we 

set new directions. 

 

I want to say just a few words about some of those new 

directions that are set out in this budget.  There is reflected in 

this budget a new direction in taxation.  This budget 

re-establishes the principle of progressivity.  This budget asks 

others to begin to pay more of their fair share of the tax load.  

This budget raises the income tax rate on large corporations by 

6.25 per cent.  Banks and trust companies, financial 

institutions, excluding credit unions, will have a tax increase of 

8.3 per cent.  And the corporate capital tax surcharge on large 

resource corporations is increasing by 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This budget asks others to begin to pay more of their fair share.  

If, and I heard tonight the member from Arm River again talk 

about the 7 cents on the hamburger . . .  He's not just quite 

accurate, even in that figure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because by 

now, if the PC plan for harmonization of the tax . . . it would 

have been 14 cents on every dollar that we spend in a good or a 

service across the piece.  A 14 per cent sales tax on every good 

and service we purchase, that was the PC plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that plan of theirs would have 

garnered revenues . . . taken revenues out of the pockets of 

consumers in Saskatchewan of $440 million.  Four hundred 

and forty million dollars would have come right out of the 

pockets of consumers in Saskatchewan.  The revenue to 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would have been $180 

million. 

 

Well now how does this work?  They take $440 million in new 

tax by applying a 14 per cent sales tax on every good and 

service.  But government, to fund health and 

education, highways, social services, education, and so on, 

would only realize a benefit of $180 million. 

 

Well a little slippage indeed says the member.  A little slippage 

indeed.  What happened you see, Mr. Speaker, under their plan, 

was to take $260 million and rebate that to their business 

friends -- not primarily to small business, no, no, no -- to the 

large corporations in our province.  They would have been the 

massive beneficiary of that PC harmonized sales tax; not 

government, not the people, but their large friends in the 

corporate sector.  Four hundred and forty million dollars taken 

straight out of consumers' pockets -- that was their plan. 

 

In this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the increase in the personal 

income tax, the deficit surtax, plus the 1 per cent increase in 

sales tax will take a total of $125 million out of the hands of 

ordinary workers and consumers and people in our province, 

based, based on ability to pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And that's 

what's so fundamental -- based on ability to pay. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, re-establishes the principle of 

progressivity, and there's so much more in the area of taxation 

that needs to be done.  Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I heard my 

colleague from Saskatoon Broadway suggest that we perhaps 

need an entire review of our taxation system here in 

Saskatchewan and indeed across Canada.  I am fully supportive 

of her suggestion.  In this budget we have at least moved the 

direction back to progressivity.  In this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

we also set us, again, in the direction of financial 

independence.  Not only are we getting a grip on the debt and 

deficit, this budget introduces perhaps the most long-term, 

significant announcement we've heard in many years in 

Saskatchewan and that's the introduction of the Saskatchewan 

savings bond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Through that initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to invest in 

Saskatchewan, to invest in our future and our children's future 

and will regain for us a sense of financial . . . of independence. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to note also that this budget sets us 

in a direction for which I rejoice.  It's a direction of, again, 

recognizing those who are most in need in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the times in which we live, I think we're all 

going to have to make that separation again between that which 

we want for our society and that which we need.  We all want, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker -- there's no mistake about that -- we all 

want . . . I know in economics they taught me a long time ago, 

they you used to teach us, you know, in economics that demand 

is insatiable.  It will always grow.  We all want, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  And sometimes, you know, I think the more we have, 

the more we want. 

 

So as a friend of mine says, perhaps in these times we need to 

begin to redefine affluence.  We have to begin to define what 

makes for the good life.  And for sure in these times, in terms 

of our society and our community, we 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

have to begin to separate what we want and what we need, and 

for sure need must come before greed. 

 

(2115) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget takes us back in that 

direction.  It provides a small amount of money for our lowest 

income seniors.  This budget provides new initiatives for 

northern Saskatchewan.  This budget provides child tax 

reduction for low income families, by 25 per cent.  This budget 

provides $20 million for family support initiatives.  And this 

budget provides a 35 per cent increase for child hunger 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to come to a conclusion by referring to an 

article that appeared in last night's Leader-Post by the noted 

columnist, Dale Eisler.  Mr. Eisler, in his column last night, 

leaves us with this headline saying: "Most have little to 

complain about."  And he says: 

 

 For people who feel hard done by in the provincial budget, it 

would be good therapy to drop by the Albert-Scott 

Community Centre (here in Regina) at noon on any Monday, 

Wednesday or Friday. 

 

 A lot of things get put into perspective at the Chili For 

Children hot-lunch program.  Most notably, the fact that the 

majority of us have very little to complain about. 

 

 Somehow a one-per-cent increase in the sales tax, a 

three-cent-a-litre hike in the gas tax and even a 10-per-cent 

deficit surtax on income doesn't seem all that unbearable 

(when, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we compare it with the need of 

some of our neighbours). 

 

Mr. Eisler concludes his article by saying this, and I'm going to 

quote: 

 

 In its budget last week, the new conservative government of 

Roy Romanow (conservative small c) tried to acknowledge 

the problem of child hunger.  In spite of its fiscal restraint 

policy, additional funding of $260,000 for community-based 

hunger programs -- bringing the total to $1 million -- was 

announced.  The plan is to expand efforts into rural areas 

where child hunger has been identified as an emerging 

problem. 

 

 Obviously it won't be enough to effectively deal with such a 

pervasive problem, but at least it's a step in the right 

direction. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will support this budget tonight because 

it is a step in the right direction.  It is a step to fiscal 

responsibility.  It is a step towards financial freedom for our 

province.  It is a step towards meeting the needs of those who 

need the most. 

 

And I want to close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a quote from 

Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the people of America 1937.  He 

said:  I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, 

ill-clad, ill-nourished. The test of our progress is not whether 

we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is 

whether we provide enough for those who have little. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when all the politics are set aside, this too will be 

the test of our government and our society.  Not whether we 

have added much to those who have in abundance but whether 

we have met the needs of those who have little.  Because this 

budget sets us again in that direction, later tonight, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, in following the two speakers 

from this side of the House, the first one from Shaunavon who 

put into perspective some of the reasons why to your left is the 

remnants of the last government, and then the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow who presented a vision and recognized 

where we are having to go because of what had taken place 

under the previous administration, I think are two very good 

speeches and I, myself, will not take quite as long as either one 

of them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the Gass Commission report on financial 

review, there is one item that I want to bring to everyone's 

attention.  And I want to do so in two ways -- one, by reading 

what it says and secondly, by telling of a little problem that I 

had as a MLA. 

 

On page 110 it says that: 

 

 During the Commission's brief existence, we found evidence 

of frustration among not only the general public, but also 

public servants, that they no longer can readily link the 

delivery responsibility for various programs and services to 

specific departments and agencies.  The communications 

system within the Government seems unable to keep up with 

the changes and therefore, individual public servants are 

often unable to assist the public in finding the appropriate 

agency to service their specific needs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's basically where the former 

government found itself.  They were so mixed up, either 

deliberately hiding things or unable to put things together in an 

orderly manner that the public couldn't even determine where 

to look for what was available. 

 

And Gass goes on to say that: 

 

 We feel that a fundamental component of public 

accountability is that the general public should have a clear 

understanding of the structure of government and how 

services are (being) delivered within that structure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this budget and the activities 

behind it are going to bring about that particular change so at 

least the public can understand what's going on. 

 

Now the second item I'd like to bring up is a small item that 

refers to the mismanagement that was going on under 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

the previous administration -- the waste.  And it's not a very big 

item but I think that it demonstrates in a manner what was 

taking place. 

 

In the Turtleford constituency there was a rural service centre 

that was opened in the community of Turtleford.  Not a major 

expenditure by any means; it was part of the municipal 

building in Turtleford.  But this building had three official 

programs carried about with it.  The first one was when the sod 

turning took place.  And the premier was out there with part of 

the program that took place. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The former premier. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- The former premier, that's correct.  Followed 

then, when it was completed, there was an official opening and 

again the premier was in the town of Turtleford at the official 

opening.  And it seemed as if that would be the end of it.  The 

amount being spent on the opening was probably as much as 

the whole building by then. 

 

But there was a need for the former premier to come back into 

the Turtleford constituency and they had done so little in that 

constituency that they had to dedicate the same building, and 

they had the whole thing set up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you could account for all the costs in 

those three media activities, I think that they would probably 

have cost more than the building itself.  The member for 

Shaunavon has detailed a large number of those particular type 

of examples. 

 

But I'd also like to talk about one item that occurred at 

relatively the same time, and that was a project that drained 

Englishman River, or the lake at Turtleford, the Englishman 

Lake down the Englishman River.  And for the last three years 

the river has been dry -- first time in the memory of the people 

around there that the river didn't flow -- and the reason for that 

is that the whole water system has been disturbed by the project 

that occurred there. 

 

Now the premier was there with the Governor of Kansas in 

making this development and bringing about the opening of 

this . . . or the start of this project.  But I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was no premier there to look at the salt flat 

that occurred when it was drained off, a fiasco just opposite to 

what has occurred at Rafferty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, both those items, although small, indicate 

what the problems were.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting the motion on the budget and because there are 

other members that might like to speak, I will take my seat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, it looks as though I'm going to get 

the last word in this debate and I have to say that it causes me 

great distress to rise and speak in support of this budget.  

Frankly, I don't like it.  And I don't think any of my colleagues 

find it palatable.  And I know that the Minister of Finance and 

the cabinet find it equally distasteful. 

 

Our distress is only exceeded by the anger we feel at 

being forced into bringing down a budget like this.  Our anger 

is at the opposition, who when in government, caused a 

disastrous situation that we find ourselves in today.  Many of 

them crawled into the bushes before the election was held.  A 

fortunate few were able to get lucrative jobs as payments for 

their infamy.  The rump that is left are gritting their teeth, 

awaiting their Senate seats or other sinecures.  Then they can 

safely leave the opposition in the hands of the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone, their lady-in-waiting, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- We're getting a lot of complaints about sacking 

members of the civil service.  But sir, we're over a barrel.  We 

just can't win.  Everybody shouts and screams that the 

bureaucracy is out of control,  that government is bloated.  We 

could save millions by cutting down on our feather-bedded 

staff.  You must have heard that many times, we all have.  So 

we do, sir.  We cut back and do we get any thanks?  No, sir, we 

don't.  We're accused of being heartless, snatching the bread 

out of the mouths of a man, his wife and his 2.4 children. 

 

It's a catch 22 situation, sir.  And the crocodile tears that are 

shed by the opposition, it makes me think of the time when 

they sacked all the school-based dental hygenists, sir.  That was 

maybe different.  What was it -- 400?  Who cares now.  

They've all left the province anyway.  And do you remember, 

sir, the road maintenance crews.  They were not fired but just 

given the opportunity to join the private sector.  What 

mellifluous phrases they gave us then. 

 

In 1982, sir, the PCs' campaign was the promise to eliminate 

the education and health tax and to reduce income tax by 10 

per cent.  They had to raise both, sir, because they frittered 

away the province's wealth.  The odd thing is, sir, is that we are 

having to raise both the same taxes and for exactly the same 

reason.  Because the PCs have frittered away our inheritance.  

What a coincidence, don't you think.  Otherwise we're going to 

end up in the hands of the loan sharks for ever if we keep on 

the way that they did. 

 

You know what a loan shark is, sir.  I've experience from my 

own.  I won't go into the story now, but eventually what 

happens is you end up paying no capital on your debt because 

you have in today's province, a cash flow problem.  So you just 

pay off the interest, then something on to what . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I wish to bring to the attention of the hon. 

members, rule 14(3), which reads as follows: 

 

 On the fifth day of the said days, at thirty minutes before the 

ordinary time of daily adjournment, unless the debate be 

previously concluded, the Speaker shall interrupt the 

proceedings and, after allowing twenty minutes for the mover 

of the Budget motion to exercise his right to close the debate, 

shall forthwith put every question 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

necessary to dispose of the main motion. 

 

I have thus interrupted the debate, and I call upon the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

honour and privilege to close the debate on this budget address.  

I say it's my honour, Mr. Speaker, because it is a budget which 

I can say shows leadership and sets direction for the future 

security of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It is my privilege because the 

constituents of Regina Dewdney gave me this opportunity to do 

this by supporting me in the election last October. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I found this debate very informative and 

very instructive.  I listened to all the members on the 

government side of the House, the New Democratic Party 

members.  And I heard the members on the government speak 

with vision, with conviction, with a determination to do the 

kinds of things that happened in this province in 1944.  To 

show the leadership and the courage that it's going to take and 

that it's taking to take a province that is on the verge of 

bankruptcy, created by the members opposite, and provide 

some hope and opportunity for the future generations of this 

province that are yet to come. 

 

And then I listened to the members of the opposition -- the 

Liberal and the Conservatives.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm not 

going to say much about what the Liberal member had to say 

because the Liberal member, other than saying a lot of words, 

simply showed a new transformation to becoming a partisan 

politician.  But that's about all.  I listened to the Conservative 

members, Mr. Speaker, and I want to spend a little while 

rebutting some of what they had to say. 

 

This evening I listened to the member from Arm River and he 

was talking about on whose back is bringing the recovery of 

this province taking place.  And I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that this budget does a lot of things that are important but one 

of the important things that it does is that it makes sure that it's 

fair, it's equitable, and everybody in all sectors of our society 

has to share in what we have to do here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But I can tell the member from 

Arm River, or I wish he could tell this House and the public of 

Saskatchewan, on who's back their $15 billion debt is resting, 

Mr. Speaker.  Their $15 billion debt which they created, most 

of it in the last 10 years, is resting on every man, woman, and 

child of Saskatchewan today and for years to come and those 

yet who have not been born. 

 

And I want to tell the member from Arm River that he better 

get used to something.  I hear him complaining about us 

reminding the members opposite what they did 

to this province for the last 10 years.  And in case he has any 

doubt let me tell him this, that he will hear that day after day 

after day because the people of Saskatchewan know what they 

did to this province and even when we stop talking about it 

they will remember for years and years to come and the 

Conservative Party will never see the sight of power in 

Saskatchewan for more years than most of us have yet to live 

on this earth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Why can't Saskatchewan do today, 

why can't this government do today some of the things that we 

all would like to see done?  Well it can't be done, Mr. Speaker, 

because the member from Rosthern and the member from 

Thunder Creek and the member from Estevan and the member 

from Arm River came to power in 1982 and they inherited a 

prosperous province with a surplus, Mr. Speaker, of $139 

million.  And they took that $139 million surplus, Mr. Speaker, 

and in 10 years, with waste and mismanagement, converted it 

into a $15 billion debt.  That's why there are some restrictions 

that we have today, Mr. Speaker, on the things that we would 

like to do. 

 

Now I've spent the last six months, Mr. Speaker, as all of my 

colleagues have, looking at all of the things that happened in 

that decade.  And I spent that time trying to figure out what it 

was that motivated that government in the '80s,  the 

government of the member from Estevan, the former premier.  

What motivated them to create deficit after deficit after deficit?  

What motivated them to spend each and every year more than 

they had in revenues? 

 

Well as I listen to this debate, Mr. Speaker, and heard what 

they had to say, it became obvious that they never had a vision.  

That they were not motivated by any kind of vision about what 

the future of this province ought to look like.  Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, they looked at every little issue, every little problem 

that came along, and they decided that the only way to solve it 

was to throw money at it. 

 

And what's the result?  Well it's obvious.  The thing that to 

note, Mr. Speaker, is that it wasn't their money.  They were 

looking after themselves and they were looking after their 

friends.  And it was easy to do because it wasn't their money.  

It was the money that belonged to the people of Saskatchewan 

and all that their interests were, were for a short time -- use it to 

benefit themselves and benefit their friends, not caring about 

the future of this province. 

 

All it took is somebody to come along with a brief-case and 

open it up and ask for money and they filled it.  The member 

from Regina Victoria said it was a 10-year Monopoly game, 

and I think that's a pretty good description because it was just a 

game for the members opposite.  It wasn't a sense of 

responsibility.  It was a good time for a short time without any 

regard for what the future holds. 
 

Oh yes, you know, there was the Bob Andrews and the Graham 

Taylors and the Mr. Berntsons and the George Hills and the 

Gary Lanes and all of the others.  They benefitted from all this 

money being spent.  The people involved in GigaText, they ran 

away with millions, or the Joytecs or the Supercarts.  They just 

came and they asked 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

 for money and they had a proposal and the members opposite 

gave them the money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the public interest and the taxpayers' 

interest was never, at any time, of any importance under that 

system.  They were irresponsible, and now we have the burden 

that we have to look after because of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, six months ago the public said that their 

mismanagement, which they created, had to come to an end 

and there was a devastating defeat for the Conservative Party in 

that election.  But have they learned?  Have they learned from 

that?  Have they learned from that? 

 

That's the other instructive thing about debate, Mr. Speaker.  

They have not learned one single thing because in this debate, 

time after time and hour after hour, all they did was stand up 

and defend all that mismanagement and everything else that 

they did during those 10 years. 

 

Now the more interesting thing that I heard, Mr. Speaker, in 

question period and in the debate, was the members admit that 

they created the mess.  I heard the member from Thunder 

Creek admit that they created this financial mess. 

 

And then the interesting thing of even more irony was that they 

had a complaint.  And their complaint was that the opposition 

of the day should have known about it.  And somehow the 

financial crisis that we face is the fault of the opposition of the 

day because we didn't stop them.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that says 

a lot about the members opposite when they were in 

government. 

 

Well who knew about it, Mr. Speaker?  The Provincial Auditor 

said a few years ago, 1988, March 31, in his report, he said that 

he could not account for 50 per cent of the public spending 

because the members opposite wouldn't provide that 

information to him.  The Ernst & Young commission which 

reported on the Crown Management Board said, that the 

members opposite hid $312 million of their deficit by forcing 

the Crown corporations to borrow the money even when they 

didn't have any net income so that they could pay a dividend to 

the treasury, so they would hide their deficit. 

 

The Gass Commission said, Mr. Speaker, I made a whole list 

of all of the transactions which were wrong and created even a 

greater financial crisis in Saskatchewan.  They admitted that 

they created the financial mess, Mr. Speaker.  And what's their 

solution?  Their proposals?  More of the same.  They say, 

spend more, don't get any more revenues, borrow more money.  

And somehow that is going to solve our problem. 

 

Now they claim, Mr. Speaker, that they have an interest and are 

the defenders of agriculture . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 

listen to that, Mr. Speaker.  I listened to the member from Arm 

River and other members, but the one thing that comes back 

time and time again, is when that they had the opportunity to 

show their commitment and support for agriculture and vote for 

the motion in this House to urge the federal government to 

come through with their commitment for the $500 million of 

third line of defence which they promised, they 

stood up in their place and they voted against that motion. 

 

That is not a commitment, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing has been 

learned.  The lesson of a massive election defeat and the 

rejection has not taught them nothing.  It seems to me it takes a 

very special kind of arrogance to defend their actions in the 

face of what happened in that last October. 

 

Now, a journalist, Mr. Speaker, said it very well, Mr. Eisler 

wrote on May 2 in 1992 when he too, as well as others, listened 

to the comments of the members opposite, and he said the 

following: 

 

 It is deeply offensive to hear the Opposition Tories attempt to 

deflect attention from the scandalous way they treated the 

public purse during almost a decade in power. 

 

 They seem not the slightest bit contrite over the fiscal mess 

that the province now finds itself.  It's as if they had nothing 

to be ashamed about, or repentant for. 

 

 Such a defence is unacceptable on political, fiscal and -- 

more importantly -- moral grounds.  The facts are that while 

the Devine Tories were in power people in government 

engaged in practices with public funds that at times were 

despicable and, in some cases, perhaps criminal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the legacy that during this debate the 

members opposite defended for the last five days.  They have 

learned nothing.  I won't repeat the comments made by my 

colleagues in the House today about the Special Report of the 

Provincial Auditor, April 21, 1992. 

 

The list goes on and on about the mis-expenditure of funds, 

about people hired and paid for but nobody knows what they 

were doing.  About people that the former government had in 

the premier's office and spent about $5 million on their salaries, 

working out of other departments when in fact working for the 

premier but paid for the other departments. 

 

I want to contrast, Mr. Speaker, that kind of an approach to 

government with the approach of this government which is 

reflected in this budget.  Because this budget indicated that 

rather than serving themselves, as the members opposite did, 

this government is setting an example.  And that's why cabinet 

ministers' salaries have been cut by 5 per cent.  And that's why 

extra pay for legislative secretary positions has been 

eliminated.  And that's why allowances for government 

members with extra duties have been reduced.  And that's why 

communication allowances for MLAs have been cut by 25 per 

cent, and the out-of-scope employees of the government 

salaries have been frozen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Advertising has been cut by 30 per cent because we no longer . 

. . the members opposite rewarded one or two advertising 

agencies.  And whether advertising was needed or not, they 

pushed money towards them because they were Tory 

advertising agencies.  And the list goes on. 

 

Now I ask the public of Saskatchewan to contrast that kind of 

example, Mr. Speaker, with the example that is set 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1992 

out in the report, special report of the Provincial Auditor of 

April 21, 1992, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure that everyone will 

admit that things have indeed changed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget is here for 

all to see.  And as members have said on this side of the House, 

yes, there are some tough decisions that have been made.  But 

it's a turning point in the history of this province.  It's a turning 

point away from waste and mismanagement, and it's turning to 

honesty, to openness, and to accountability in government. 

 

The choices we had to make were made necessary because of 

what the members opposite did to this province.  But I am 

confident, Mr. Speaker, that one day soon we will be able to 

tell our children and our grandchildren how we joined together 

and we made the tough decisions, and we secured their future 

in the province for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(2145) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And they will be the most 

important judges, I am convinced, of this budget and the future 

budgets of this government. 

 

But there are some people who are passing judgement today, 

Mr. Speaker.  I met today with the investment dealers of 

Canada, and they left with me their economic outlook for 

Saskatchewan.  And you know what they said?  And this is 

since the budget, Mr. Speaker.  They said that after a decade of 

set-backs, prospects for Saskatchewan are now brightening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- After a decade of set-backs, 

prospects for Saskatchewan are now brightening.  Mr. Speaker, 

this budget is being recognized by the people of Saskatchewan 

as a budget that corrects all of the errors and mistakes and 

mismanagement of the members opposite, and begins to turn 

this province around to economic prosperity so that we once 

again can rebuild Saskatchewan away from the destructive 

policies that the members opposite had instituted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I listened to the member from 

Thunder Creek, who was the first one to speak in this debate, 

and he spoke about economic development.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to comment about economic development.  

And let me just quote from the Gass Commission, the report to 

the Saskatchewan Financial Management Review Commission 

which was provided in February.  And here is what he had to 

say about this government's approach to economic 

development and public spending.  And he said the following: 

 

 We identified transactions where members of the cabinet 

were involved directly in the negotiations 

and did not appear to have received or have requested 

detailed analysis of the alternatives that were being 

discussed.  And because they are custodians of the public 

purse, all members of the government have a responsibility to 

the taxpayers to ensure that financial decisions are being 

made in a prudent and responsible manner. 

 

That kind of an approach, Mr. Speaker, is what led us to where 

we are today.  That wasn't economic development.  That was 

waste.  That was mismanagement.  That was rewarding a few 

who were close to the Conservative Party at the expense of 

existing people in Saskatchewan and at the expense of future 

generations.  I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have rejected that 

approach and the policies of this government are and will be in 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget is founded 

on fiscal responsibility, on public accountability, on fairness, 

compassion, and economic reality.  It begins the process back 

to recovery and back to rebuilding Saskatchewan.  But I am 

confident, Mr. Speaker, that we can look forward to the day 

when we can tell our children that though we entered the 1990s 

plagued by financial crisis, we made the difficult decisions.  

We turned a new page in our history and put this province 

firmly on the path to prosperity. 

 

That's why I'm proud of the members of the New Democratic 

Party who spoke in this debate because they support that 

approach.  And that's why I'm proud of being able to not only 

have introduced this budget but today stand up in this place at 

my chair and say that I will support the budget because it's the 

right thing to do for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet?  Order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, during the Finance minister's 

delivery to the House tonight, he quoted from a document 

delivered by the investments dealers of Canada to him today.  

And I wondered if he would table that document in the House 

because he did quote from it in his financial analysis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be more than 

pleased to table that document.  It was made public today by 

the investment dealers and for the benefit of the member so he 

can learn from it, I will table it in the House. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:52 p.m. until 9:59 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 



May 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Cline 

Koskie McPherson 

Goulet Wormsbecker 

Solomon Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Calvert  

-- 39 R 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 p.m. 

 


