




















































Hansard: August 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2811 

 August 21, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Chairman, just before we broke for supper we were treated to a 

great long dissertation from the minister about everything and 

anything except what we've been asking questions about all day 

long.  And I suspect, Mr. Chairman, that has something to do 

with the fact that the government has brought closure down on 

this opposition and they know full well that if the minister just 

stands up and makes political speeches that he won't have to 

answer any questions. 

 

He won't have to talk about fairness and human dignity and 

those types of things because we've got this time limit imposed 

by the NDP (New Democratic Party) majority on us, and we 

can't force this minister to stay here and answer questions as 

has been the normal practice in this House. 

 

I can think back to many instances where members of the 

opposition have held a minister for days on end trying to get 

answers in Committee of the Whole.  But it's obvious that this 

exercise here, because it will be compressed into two days, that 

we simply have to rely upon the good wishes of the minister to 

give answers, not compel him to. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you made some comments before supper 

about responsible actions and that type of thing, and as I refer 

you back to the young gentleman in Humboldt again, and he 

was basically saying that all of us as taxpayers shouldn't be 

responsible for the irresponsible promises that the NDP made 

before the last election -- the very expensive promises that you 

promised to agriculture that the rest of us shouldn't be held 

accountable for. 

 

Then afterwards you come forward with chopping the 

agricultural budget to pieces, and we come forward with this 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) legislation that not 

only changes the way that rural Saskatchewan dealt with itself 

and with the people surrounding it through contracts that has 

fundamentally altered some of the rights and freedoms that 

we've come to cherish in our province and our country . . . And 

I think I had left off by asking you, where in this particular 

piece of legislation that we have this impartiality, this 

judgement that would occur.  And so far you've refused to 

answer that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have said throughout this in your 

responses, the one answer that you seemed quite confident in 

giving is it's simply a matter of the deadline that we have here 

in question.  And I don't believe that's the case, Mr. Minister.  I 

believe there's more to it than even that. 

So I would like you to tell me tonight as we start this evening 

off, I would like to have you give this Assembly a 

circumstance where you would foresee a contract holder under 

the 1992 GRIP being able to take you to court.  Give me a 

circumstance where you think that could happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if a farmer believed that 

the administrative agency, Crop Insurance Corporation, had 

improperly paid or inadequately paid an indemnity, the farmer 

could take the corporation to court. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now let me get that straight, Mr. Minister.  

You're saying that if . . . remember, we're dealing with two 

separate programs here now, and as I understand it, crop 

insurance and revenue insurance are separate.  What we're 

primarily dealing with in this particular Bill is revenue 

insurance.  Is that correct? 

 

Now I want a circumstance . . . You're saying an indemnity 

under revenue insurance that wasn't paid by the corporation to 

the farmer.  Is that what you're saying would be the 

circumstances where you believe you could be taken to court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- To clarify for the member, this Bill does 

deal with both separate pieces of insurance, crop insurance and 

revenue insurance, and the answer to the question is yes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So he could . . . he would have to go to court 

and prove that the Crop Insurance Corporation owed him an 

indemnity because of something in his contract, that he then 

could successfully take you to court and this legislation 

wouldn't negate it.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Nothing has changed in that regard with 

respect to this legislation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm trying to get at 

here, because you keep saying, well it's simply a matter that I 

notified them and the rest of you don't believe me, so we've got 

this point and date.  But section 13 covers a lot more than that.  

And I would think, Mr. Minister, as I read section 13, and I'm 

going to want you to elaborate on this, that we're talking about: 

 

 (a) any amendment to contract of crop insurance; 

 

 (b) (This is an interesting one.) any term, condition, warranty, 

contract, promise, inducement, enticement, representation or 

other understanding that is collateral to or modifies, varies, 

qualifies or amends in any way a contract of crop insurance; 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we're simply talking about the date of 

March 15 that you neglected to handle in a proper way.  What 

are the rest of the things that you neglected to do?  Are we 

needing all of these particular words in here in order to cover 

your backside?  So, Mr. Minister, could you give us a list of all 

the things that you didn't do that you need these words to cover 

off. 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The provision is made with respect to the 

fact that in the 1991 year the intertwining of crop insurance and 

revenue insurance left a number of things uncertain.  And as 

we described earlier with respect to the undefined nature of the 

commitment, this is left there for prevention of an action where 

something had not been clearly defined. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, it's not to 

prevent an action against a client.  I think we're getting down to 

the nub of it now.  What we've got here is we're demonstrably 

justifying the limits that you're imposing with this Bill.  It's you 

who are being protected by this particular clause in 1991.  And 

this is the whole point, Mr. Minister.  You can do all of this to 

demonstrably justify taking way these rights.  1991 farmers 

could go to court with that program. 

 

And you know that's the other funny thing about this, Mr. 

Minister. A court of law, a court of law is probably going to 

say in those cases, those three cases that are going to Queen's 

Bench, that there were contracts involved, would be my guess, 

or there would be no case.  The three cases that are going to 

Queen's Bench court on the basis of '91 contract, a judge will 

have to judge on the basis of the contract signed. 

 

Now all of a sudden we get the argument that there is no 

contract, that it's null and void in 1992.  Mr. Minister says the 

contractee can sue me on one hand, and on the other he takes it 

away. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Bill is full of those kind of inequities.  And 

that's why I want you to show me, I want you to show me in 

this particular piece of legislation where an individual farmer 

can take you to that other area of arbitration that we're all 

guaranteed under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, that 

impartial arbitration.  Show me, Mr. Minister, in this particular 

piece of legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to explain again that we have not 

said there was no contract. What we have said was that the 

contract that the members created last year when they created 

the program was ill-defined or impossible to define; that 

because the crop insurance and the revenue insurance were 

intertwined in last year's program, the description of the limits 

of where legal actions cannot occur are put in place to avoid 

that undefined realm that was there last year.  There is no 

prevention. 

 

It is by definition in our land that one has access to the courts.  

The legislation describes a circumstance where that has 

limitations.  And the fact is that what the legislation does is 

defines that the contract in 1991 is as described in the 

pamphlet, to limit any belief or understanding that it might 

have been from a direct representation by a representative of 

the government, or by a crop insurance agent, or by an 

employee of the government, from which someone may argue 

that that was their contract, since the contract was not defined 

in law. 

 

So that what we have provided in this legislation is a definition 

of that contract and a prevention of action against 

circumstances where the lack of definition of the contract 

might result in actions that would go on for ever. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that simply doesn't wash, 

if three individuals can go into Queen's Bench basis the '91 

contract. My understanding in courts of law is that a contract 

becomes law, and if it is suited to judge it will then be law. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the clause doesn't talk about 

misunderstandings between farmers.  These clauses all say, no 

action against the Crown or Crown agents, no action against 

the minister.  We're not protecting farmers here, Mr. Minister.  

I mean, if we wanted to sweep with a broad brush here, the 

most that we could be protecting would be civil servants and 

yourself.  But I don't think there's any of our civil servants that 

need protection.  I think the only individual that needs 

protection is the one occupying the seat for Rosetown-Elrose.  

That's the only one that this is designed for. 

 

I mean we could have substituted in here -- no action against 

the member from Rosetown-Elrose in capacity as Minister of 

Agriculture.  And we'd have covered off everyone that needed 

protecting.  I mean if we're protecting the people, the 

50,000-plus who signed last year and who signed again this 

year, then somewhere in here I would have seen that defined.  

But I don't.  Not once does it talk about protecting farmers.  

Not once does it talk about protecting farm families.  Not once 

does it talk about protecting the agreements that they've signed 

with other people, with banks, credit unions, their neighbours.  

I don't see any of it in here protecting them. 

 

It simply always says, against the Crown.  Well there's only 

one person, only one entity that we're protecting here then.  

And that's the whole series of questions, Mr. Minister.  If we 

can sue under '91, everybody's rights are upheld, no charter 

problems.  They go to court.  The go to Queen's Bench.  I 

suspect they'll go to motion for discovery.  And the judge will 

say, we're going to have a trial or we aren't going to have a 

trial. 

 

And under the '91 contract, the minister or anybody else could 

be called in, swear an affidavit, swear to tell the whole truth, 

nothing but the truth.  And it would proceed. 

 

Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, why it is that that doesn't 

apply to you, why that doesn't apply to this legislation, why 

you can't go into that court of law and swear to tell the whole 

truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God. 

 

I want you to show me the section in here that protects farmers.  

The only person it protects, Mr. Minister, is you.  And I think 

we're going to have a long night here until you can explain to 

the public of Saskatchewan why you should have that right and 

no one else should have it.  You tell me, Mr. Minister, which 

section we're dealing with. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I've explained it 

several times, and I will explain it again.  There is nothing in 

this Bill which limits or extinguishes actions except in the 

specific circumstances mentioned, with respect to the 

circumstances I have described before, in that the members 

opposite in last year creating the 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

program, created it without a definition of what a contract was.  

Therefore a contract can be anything.  A contract can be any 

representation that was made by representatives of government. 

 

You cannot find, Mr. Member from Thunder Creek, in your 

last year's program a definition of what the contract was.  What 

there is, is a collection of things, one of which is a pamphlet 

that says on it "contact", but it is in no way limited to that.  And 

there is no description in the Act last year of what constitutes a 

contract, which means that what a Crop Insurance agent may 

have said to a farmer could be . . . the government could be 

held accountable for that as being the contract. 

 

This piece of legislation clearly defines what a contract is for 

the first time, clearly defines the terms of the contract, and does 

with respect to those changes in the program.  Because there is 

no definition of a contract . . . says that actions cannot be taken 

with respect to those things that were not clarified last year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're really stretching 

things now.  I must have a dozen things in my life that are in . . 

. I have contracts with and I have insurance with, and I 

certainly don't need a Bill from you or anyone else to do those, 

to enter into those contracts -- many of them private.  I have 

insurance contracts with all sorts of people.  I've even got my 

wife and my kids insured, Mr. Minister.  But that doesn't take 

away my right to go to court. 

 

Any of my other insurance -- I've gone and checked -- my 

house insurance, my farm insurance, the liability insurance that 

I have on my FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) mortgage that 

allows my wife to take FCC to court if there isn't an amicable 

settlement . . . I mean all the way through, the access to the 

court is there.  We don't have to have this nonsense. 

 

I mean all through here, Mr. Minister, we're covering a whole 

lot of ground.  Section 10.1 is the same thing: "any term, 

condition, warranty, contract, promise, inducement, 

enticement, representation . . ."  I mean it goes on and on all 

through here.  We have done triple kill on this thing all the way 

through the Bill. 

 

And I assert to you, Mr. Minister, it's for one reason and one 

reason only.  It's called demonstrably justifying taking away 

the legal rights of people to go to court. 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, if . . . I want to propose this to you: if one 

of these current court cases involving the '91 program go 

forward, and they actually come to trial and there is a 

judgement given based on a '91 contract -- a judgement based 

on a '91 contract, a contract which you are saying is now void 

back to the beginning of 1991 -- if there's a judgement passed, 

what are you going to do about it, Mr. Minister?  What are you 

going to do about it if the government is found at fault? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I need to clarify one 

more time that this Act did not void any contracts, it defined 

the contract that members opposite did not define.  The 

member gave a lengthy spiel about other kinds of insurance 

contracts that he is engaged in.  Well, 

Mr. Chairman, those other insurance contracts fall under the 

insurance Act.  There are many provisions of the insurance Act 

that would prescribe the terms and conditions under which your 

insurance contract would exist. 

 

The crop insurance program was defined in regulations.  But 

unfortunately the last year's combination was not, and therefore 

we have created a piece of legislation which defines the new 

program, which defines what last year's program was, and 

which clarifies that for that undefined contract that the 

members opposite created last year, that there cannot be actions 

because of the circumstances that could not be clarified in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Mr. Chairman, the minister 

wants to, I believe, mislead the people that are watching the 

Assembly tonight. 

 

I have here the member from Kindersley's 1991 revenue 

insurance, and they call it a contract.  It says: revenue insurance 

contract, terms and conditions.  There's eight of them.  And 

then you go a little further down here, you have to have a 

signed form that is request for change to contract.  Request for 

change to contract, where the member had to go through and 

sign his John Henry on the line.  I suspect there was quite a few 

dollars involved at risk here.  And we changed the contract, 

signed by an agent of the Crown.  I mean, it's not void, Mr. 

Minister, it's here, it's on paper, it's real, it occurred. 

 

Terms and conditions, terms and conditions that the member 

from Kindersley, if the terms and conditions weren't lived up 

to, could have gone to a court of law and had his say, had his 

day in court, and he would have had opportunity for a judge 

and some of his peers to impartially decide on it. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it's real; it's not a figment of your imagination 

as much as you might like it to be.  It's real, with certain rights 

attached to it.  The rights attached to it as per the terms and 

conditions were taken by people and made fundamental 

decisions in their life, all sorts of decisions that they are now 

held accountable for.  They are held accountable by our court 

system.  They are held accountable by their neighbours.  Some 

of these things were done with a handshake.  And in some parts 

of our province a handshake still means something. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, they will be held accountable, as per this 

contract, that could be changed as per a contract can be 

changed.  And now you're saying, as per this legislation, that 

you have no responsibility or liability at all attached to it.  And 

I find that hard to believe. 

 

And if you do believe that, Mr. Minister, that you do not have 

any responsibility then I say it is up to a third party to 

impartially judge that decision; that you don't have the right 

simply to come in here and ask the members of that very large 

caucus of yours to say that this didn't exist any more. 

 

This particular piece of paper and 55,000 others like it played a 

very large role in the lives of that many families, and they 

abided by every last rule on here.  And now you're saying that I 

don't have to abide by it at all.  I can 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

bring in a piece of legislation that covers my backside from A 

to Z and I don't have to let a court determine about those other 

things, those other contracts that were entered into and the 

ramifications that they have, and I don't have to abide by that. 

 

It's no darn wonder that those words of the member from 

Riversdale ring so hollow now.  What are these new-found 

democrats who do this?  What are these new-found democrats?  

Show me the clauses that give people back those rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well the member opposite is engaging in a 

wonderful show of emotion.  The fact is that the contract with 

respect to what farmers were covered for last year under the 

document the member is waving, in fact, they will by next 

February have received their final compensation under that 

contract as the member opposite knows. 

 

The dilemma is that the very collection of information that the 

member opposite waves describes the dilemma with respect to 

the definition of the contract because while there is a piece of 

paper called . . . a pamphlet called a contract of crop insurance 

which is prescribed in regulation and therefore, had it been 

separate, is in legal form, there is no parallel, full definition of 

the contract of revenue insurance, another pamphlet just like 

the other one but with a different name on the front. 

 

The contract of revenue insurance is not described anywhere in 

regulation so there is this piece of paper which is not prescribed 

in law that partially describes the contract, and then there is the 

piece that the member correctly waved around and said people 

signed, which they did, which partially describes the contract.  

And then there is this brochure that says, safety net programs: 

GRIP, gross revenue insurance; NISA, net income stabilization 

account, which was sent around, which partially describes the 

commitment.  And then there were the meetings that members 

opposite held across the province describing what the program 

would be, which could be interpreted by farmers as describing 

the contract.  And then there were the conversations and the 

discussions with however many crop insurance agents we have 

in the province.  And then there were the discussions with the 

crop insurance offices across the province that farmers may 

have had conversations with.  And none of that is described in 

legislation in terms of what, of that collection of things, 

describes the contract of the farmers with respect to revenue 

insurance. 

 

So the purpose of the legislation is simply to clarify what was 

the contractual commitment.  Otherwise there is an infinite 

variety of a mixture of these kinds of things based on the 

documents the member opposite waves that can collectively be 

the contract.  And nobody can tell for sure what was the 

commitment of government.  So we make that very clear.  We 

clarify it in law and we clarify it for everybody's benefit 

because there's no sense going on leaving in doubt an 

absolutely undefinable mess. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you didn't 

answer the question as usual -- every time.  I asked you, what is 

going to happen if those three that are currently before the 

courts . . . if this is judged as a contract by a 

judge in Queen's Bench court and makes a ruling on it that 

holds the government liable, what are you going to do about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, as I understand legal process -- and 

as I've said several times before, I'm no lawyer nor do I wish to 

become one -- the farmer may continue with their actions in 

court.  The Crown will bring in as their defence, the Act when 

it's passed.  The farmer may challenge the Act for its 

constitutionality.  If the Act is found to be unconstitutional, 

then the farmer may go back and continue their action in court.  

If they win the original case in court after that occurs, then they 

could sue the government for their loss as a result of changes.  

That's the process.  All possible within law.  All part of the way 

our legal system is constructed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, these three -- and I don't know 

when they were instigated but I'm sure they were prior to the 

Melville court case which centred on some terms and 

conditions that you didn't live up to -- these three could have 

been in place last year before Berny Wiens was even thought 

of.  I mean . . . excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I retract that. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  I think the member realizes the 

mistake he made and please carry on. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Before that member ever took his seat in this 

legislature.  I mean when he was a hog farmer from Herschel -- 

that's better, Mr. Chairman -- hog farmer from Herschel, that 

these actions might have been started. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Member, these aren't politically 

motivated individuals I would guess. I have no idea who they 

are even.  You tell me there's three of them.  Before you ever 

came along.  Now the previous minister of Agriculture was 

quite prepared to have those three go to court and they'd do 

their thing. 

 

Now what is it about this individual who says here are these 

actions, they were started a long time ago, we're going to come 

along but because we got a different Minister of Agriculture all 

of a sudden, no, you're out of there.  You're out of there.  We're 

going to bring this stuff in and make you go through the hoops 

and have a constitutional challenge, Mr. farmer, from 

wherever.  Mr. Minister, is this your intention?  I mean is that 

the way . . . Do you class that as fair treatment, Mr. Minister?  

Is that justice?  Simple yes or no.  You can stand up very 

quickly.  Is that justice, yes or no? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well the justice, as I believe it's carried 

out in the Canadian justice system, is a justice that all of us 

continue to abide and enjoy and appreciate.  And this is part of 

the justice system that we are engaged in and creating law and 

in the delivery of law.  The circumstance that the court cases 

that are before us are very specific.  And they relate to changes 

in the program, changes that are . . . there is, because of the 

circumstances I have already two or three times described, 

those are changes that are in that narrow area. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

There is no cause for action, according to the Bill.  But in many 

other areas of action, something that had been taken before the 

. . . that had taken the Crop Insurance Corporation to court 

before these changes is not influenced by this.  The actions that 

are there presently are around the question of changes to the 

program. 

 

The specific actions, as I understand them, relate to the date of 

notice.  And as we've said, we've removed the notice 

requirement from the . . . in the process of constructing this 

Bill.  And other court cases, I believe, relate to some of the 

specific changes.  And within the federal-provincial agreement 

there is provision that the program changes can be made.  

Those program changes are provided for as a result of the 

federal-provincial agreement, in the same way that the 

members opposite signed the federal-provincial agreement on 

September 19 or 18 last year that was not in place before that.  

They signed it well after the fact, well after farmers had planted 

their crops, and seen their crops grow, and harvested their 

crops, and put them in the bin.  Then the agreement was signed. 

 

The provision is there for the federal-provincial agreement to 

be altered from time to time.  And the response for farmers is 

that they can choose to opt out of the program, if they don't like 

the manner in which the program is altered by the 

federal-provincial agreement.  But it doesn't stop the 

federal-provincial agreement from being changed.  It's part of 

the definition of the program that in fact can . . . so that we can 

make changes in response to changing circumstances. 

 

So those are the provisions that are within the 

federal-provincial agreement and we have made changes this 

year consistent with those provisions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's a different answer 

than you gave me before.  If one of those three court cases runs 

into any part of this, this legislation will override them.  They 

won't get their day in court at all. 

 

I mean you say here in section 5 that everyone who signed a: 

 

 . . . revenue insurance coverage beginning with the 1991-92 

crop year and whose application is accepted by the 

corporation is deemed, on and from April 1, 1991, to have 

entered into a revenue insurance contract . . . 

 

Entered into a revenue insurance contract -- this.  This is what 

they entered into. 

 

Now based on those contracts, these individuals have obviously 

gone to court.  Yet in other sections of this Bill you're saying 

that's void back to January 1, '91.  I mean you've got different 

dates in here supposedly to handle different circumstances 

where someone might want to get you in a court room. 

 

The simple fact is, Mr. Minister, last year they felt quite 

comfortable with the contract they had signed, a contract that I 

attest to you will be judged to be a valid contract in a court of 

law.  And now one answer you tell me that they will have those 

rights extinguished even though the 

action began before your time.  And now you're saying they're 

going to go through.  And I'd like a more definitive answer on 

that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I don't know if I'm misunderstanding 

the question, but I believe the comments the member opposite 

is suggesting, that in fact that a farmer's provisions relative to 

his rights for compensation, that that's not an action that he can 

take against the corporation. 

 

Well it's clear that the farmers last year, their program has been 

fulfilled.  It will have been fulfilled when they get their last 

payment.  And the program this year, and I'm sure farmers have 

no doubt of that, that according to the program definition as 

described on March 13 and as they came to understand and 

sign on to or sign out of in the next couple of months after that, 

I'm sure farmers know that they will be compensated according 

to the provisions that they were given to understand were in the 

GRIP and Crop Insurance program for 1992.  And they will in 

time, according to the conditions of the contract and the 

federal-provincial agreement, be paid those amounts.  And if 

they were not, that they could take the corporation to court. 

 

I think there is confusion about that question relative to the 

question of simply the changes to the contract.  The limitation 

is on actions directly and narrowly to the changes in the 

contract, not to the rights of the farmer under the contract. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well once again, Mr. Minister, your happy 

little Bill seems to cover off far more than what you say.  I 

mean we got to go here to . . . we go to section 14: 

 

 'cause of action' means any claim, cause of action, suit, debt, 

account, demand, claim for damage, loss, cost, expense or 

interest, of any nature, whether arising in or imposed by law, 

equity, statute or otherwise and includes any judgment or 

order of a court; 

 

I mean there's not a whole lot left, Mr. Minister.  There's not a 

whole lot left for anyone in our society in this province left to 

have a go at you.  You pretty well got her covered here from A 

to Z. 

 

I mean I'm not going to pre-suppose what that court, what those 

Queen's Bench judges are going to do with those three 

particular court dates any more than you can tell me what the 

price of grain's going to be next year.  I mean you're going on 

about how wonderful your changes are and how they got a 

contract that means something to them now, that they've got 

something that's worthwhile.  For last year, the bankers all said 

yes, this one's bankable because I know what's coming down 

the pipe. 

 

And I got one in '92.  And the minister can't tell me what '93 

GRIP looks like and he can't tell me what the price of grain is 

going to be.  And if he can, he better darn well put it on the 

record here tonight.  Because if he can tell me what the price of 

grain's going to be, then we can hold him to it.  And then I got 

a contract in '92 that's as bankable as the one in '91.  But if he 

can't tell me what that price is, then I've got an open-ended 

contract. 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

I got the same piece of paper, the same colour, that says terms 

and conditions on the back of it, just like I had last year and I, 

the applicant, understand.  And unless the minister can tell me 

what the price of grain is, this contract isn't any more beneficial 

to me than the paper it's printed on actually, as far as being a 

better contract than what I had last year.  Now you can give a 

guess but you don't know.  The pooling accounts don't close off 

till August, September of '93.  And the minister knows that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the fact that because this 

contract isn't bankable, that it fundamentally changed the lives 

of a lot of people who went out and made other contractual 

arrangements, will you not at least admit that there are going to 

be people out there that are going to suffer not only financial, 

but I say to you, Mr. Minister, they're going to suffer mentally.  

Their families are going to suffer.  There are going to be lots of 

people put in situations that will be very, very uncomfortable, 

Mr. Minister, because of these changes. 

 

Don't you think at least those people, those people that have 

gone out and signed mortgages and that type of thing should 

have recourse through the court system?  I mean I guess it's 

fine for folks like me that didn't go out and do a whole bunch 

of new things.  I can suck it up and handle it.  But at least those 

people that had to go out and make other arrangements, won't 

you at least give them their day in court if they want it? 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, it's not to late,  We can amend this Bill.  

You can introduce a House amendment in this piece of 

legislation that says we don't intend to harm third-party 

arrangements that were made basis to 1991-92 contract year.  

We fully recognize that commitments were made and we're not 

here to deny the people their rights.  I mean, Mr. Minister, we'll 

always argue about March 15, but at least you could do that for 

people that have gone out and made other contractual 

arrangements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite is . . . maybe I can 

explain it more clearly, because I believe the member opposite 

is either not fully understanding what is happening in this 

legislation or is over . . . or differently representing it from 

what it does. 

 

The piece from which the member read, with respect to cause 

of action, is a definition of what cause of action is.  The use of 

cause of action then in the Bill is very specific with respect to 

matters around notice and with respect to some provisions 

around change.  It is not any kind of extinguishment of 

contract.  This Act defines the program for 1991 because it was 

never defined and this Act defines the . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I'm having a little difficulty hearing the 

minister and I'd ask the members to co-operate by just giving a 

little more silence so the minister can be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The Act defines the contract for 1991 

because it never was defined.  And the Act defines the contract 

for 1992, and collectively with the regulations will fully 

describe the program for the first time. 

 

Now the member suggests that this program is not 

bankable.  This program is very bankable.  This program . . . in 

fact the crop insurance payments may be received earlier under 

this program than they were on the other ones with respect to 

cash flow.  The farmers know that in their worst cropping 

circumstances they are guaranteed the percentage they chose 

for crop insurance coverage, which could range from 50 to 80 

per cent, for their long-term individual yield.  They know that. 

 

They also know that between the market-place and the 

program, they are guaranteed a price which represents the 

collection of IMAPs (indexed moving average price) for the 

crops grown in their area.  There is an estimate of that amount 

that's put out in spring that will be close; but then when acreage 

adjustments are made that would be more clearly defined.  And 

that is known. 

 

And we met with financial institutions because the claim that 

the members opposite are making now was made repeatedly by 

colleagues of theirs.  So we met with the financial institutions a 

number of times who confirmed and reaffirmed and reaffirmed 

that it was bankable, that last year about 9 per cent of clients 

had used a GRIP assignment for credit.  And I don't know what 

the number is this year, but I suspect it's at least that high.  So 

it's as bankable as it ever was.  The numbers may be different, 

but it is bankable. 

 

With respect to the 1991 contract, GRIP by definition, the 

federal-provincial agreement, is what makes the dollars coming 

out of the program undefinable.  You may be aware, you 

should be aware, that when farmers were receiving their 

payments in spring, there was a great deal of anger because 

some farmers got bills instead of cheques.  Now the member 

opposite says you cannot define what kind of money is coming 

out of the program.  You could not define the kind of money 

coming out of the program last year.  Estimates were made and 

initial payments were paid and then it was believed in spring 

that those payments were excessive. 

 

(1945) 

 

So under the rules of the federal-provincial agreement, some 

farmers received bills, substantial bills, and they were quite 

upset about that -- that had everything to do with the design of 

the program.  Now those farmers may next year, a year from 

now, next January or February, they may get more money or 

they may get another bill, who knows?  Because it's completely 

related to the nature of the design of your program last year, 

because what was guaranteed was a minimum level of dollars 

between the market-place and the program. 

 

That is also true in the revenue insurance program this year.  

There's a defined level of support.  If there's less coming from 

the market-place, there's more coming from the program.  So 

nothing has changed.  So one shouldn't talk about that at great 

length from the other side. 

 

With respect to what the 1993-94 contract will look like, my 

hope is that it will respond to the consultation with farmers that 

will be held beginning soon. That farmers will again have a 

chance to come and look at the program and again say what 

kinds of things . . . what kinds of changes should be made.  

And then changes will be 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

introduced that are within the realms that seem acceptable.  

One thing that I think farmers want is they don't want to see a 

lot more change.  Farmers are tired of changes.  But farmers 

will be again describing what their wishes are for a program 

when they meet this fall. 

 

But we have to remember, that is within a federal-provincial 

agreement that limits the scope of what can happen.  The 

federal-provincial agreement says the compensation has to be 

done on the basis of a 15-year moving average.   That's what 

the federal-provincial agreement says.  The farmers don't like it 

but the farmers can't change it.  The only people that can 

change it are the federal government with the provinces.  And 

there has to be broad provincial support and the federal will to 

do it. 

 

The dollars will change next year.  Wheat, sure as shootin', will 

go from 4.07 to 3.86.  That's what the program says.  That's the 

way it's designed.  We delayed the slide one year.  So 3.86 it 

will be next year.  Farmers don't like it.  Farmers are going to 

experience a lot of financial pain as a result.  But there's no 

contract broken.  The fact is that's how the program defines that 

there will be that kind of hurt.  The program defines that that's 

the inadequate level of support farmers will be getting.  That's 

what's defined in the program, in the federal-provincial 

agreement, about none of which the farmers had anything to 

say.  That contract, that federal-provincial agreement, was 

signed by the members opposite last year.  That's the nature of 

the program.  Now the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It went down this year because the price 

of wheat in 1977 went down.  That's the reason why it went 

down, and the input costs went down too.  That's the reason it 

went down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite from Morse is 

adding input to the discussion here from his seat.  He says it 

went down because the cost of production went down.  Well 

you talk about farmer input, I'd invite you to go get a whole 

conglomerate of farmers who would agree with you. I believe 

the explanation is, I believe the accurate explanation is, that 

when the program was constructed, $4.15 was promised, but 

when the calculations were made on the basis of which the 

$4.15 was promised, they found that 4.15 wasn't the number 

that the calculations that were agreed upon delivered at all.  It 

was 4.07. 

 

That's what happened last year.  Because all that happened this 

year is that the slide in prices was just delayed by one year.  

That's all that was done this year, that the slide in prices was 

delayed by one year.  The next year, the slide that would have 

happened this year will happen.  Those are the facts for the 

benefit of the member opposite. 

 

Now the members opposite talk about people hurting relative to 

programs.  I do not quarrel from one ounce, one ounce with the 

contention that people are hurting.  There are many, many 

farmers hurting in Saskatchewan.  I know of no farmer who 

signed up for GRIP 1991 who was not told that he had to sign 

up for GRIP 1991 if he wanted to get third line of defence 

funding from the federal government.  I know of not one.  If 

you can find me one, bring him to us and we'll find him. 

There is not one farmer in Saskatchewan and I don't know of 

the other provinces but one message was clear when people 

were signing up for 1991 GRIP, that if you ever want another 

penny of federal money in special assistance in tough times, 

you better sign up for GRIP 1991.  We'll have a gun to your 

head and you want federal assistance, you better sign up. 

 

Well farmers signed up, farmers signed up and there is 

financial hurt because even though that was the reason they 

signed up the federal government has not come through.  

Farmers are very, very short of money.  The third line of 

defence that farmers signed up for has not been delivered and 

farmers have a right to it because that was the deal.  The deal 

was farmers put their money in, the province puts their money 

in, and when that wasn't enough the federal government would 

make their special recognition. 

 

Now I just want to end by making one more point.  The 

member from Thunder Creek's last point was that we should 

want now to amend the Bill.  And in the same breath he says 

we know we've talked a lot about March 15 and the importance 

of that but let's amend the Bill on August 20 anyway.  Well the 

member opposite ought to know that amending the provisions 

of the contract on August 15, legal or illegal, would be 

completely contrary to the will of the agricultural sector. 

 

Because what in fact does it say?  It says I made my farming 

decisions based on the commitments made on March 13, and 

now you're going to change the nature of the provisions.  It's 

simply not fair and we wouldn't do it and for that reason the 

member opposite knows we wouldn't do it and he's asking us to 

do something he himself I'm sure would not do. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, once again we don't want 

to answer any questions.  You know darn well, I mean this is 

sheer, sheer bunk that you perpetrate in this Assembly and I 

can't think of any kinder way to put it.  I've always been able to 

take my Crop Insurance contract into the banker and it's varied 

on the percentage of whatever that is.  Some years you had 70 

per cent and some years . . . last year you had 100 per cent, this 

year you're going to get 80 per cent.  That always was 

bankable. Yet you stand up here and you try and make the folks 

believe that you've got something brand-new here for the 

people.  And that's sheer garbage. 

 

And you can't tell me what the price of wheat is, therefore you 

can't tell me what your revenue insurance for '92-93 is going to 

be at the end of the year.  You don't have a clue.  You can have 

that market-place moving up and down and you can't do it.  If 

you could, I don't think you'd be sitting in here; you'd probably 

have a seat on the Winnipeg Grain Exchange or something. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know, as every farmer in this province 

knows, when those commitments were made last year that 

FSAM1, FSAM2, the changes on NISA and the federal portion 

on the revenue insurance in that particular year all happened.  

Now they didn't happen as fast as some of us would have liked, 

but the fact is they happened.  So don't try and let on in this 

Assembly that nothing transpired after that.  Those four at 

least, were there. 



2818 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

Now what we're talking about here is what you're trying to do 

in this particular year to people who have particularly made 

other contractual arrangements, legally binding contractual 

arrangements. And those are the ones I was talking about. 

 

The bigger questions are still in this Bill.  But there are people 

that they can come forward and prove that they signed other 

contractual arrangements based on '91. I would have thought 

that you would at least have some consideration for them 

instead of saying, well I've got it all covered off here.  It doesn't 

matter what happens to you.  You can go by the wayside.  

There'll be adjustments. 

 

It's like you told the young fellow the other night, well I guess 

there'll be adjustments in the hog industry.  I mean beyond 

some budgetary savings here that the Minister of Finance won, 

is the other plan here to sort of reduce the population in rural 

Saskatchewan?  Is that what we're about when we're telling 

people, well there'll be adjustments?  Because that's what 

you're going to get out of it -- adjustments to Calgary; 

adjustments out of here.  We've got a government that won't 

live up to contracts.  Every time they get a little more time they 

prove that to us over and over again. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that in '93-94 there will be 

a change to the GRIP program and every farmer that's signed 

on, you're right, knew that there was the possibility of changes, 

but they also had those provisions on fair notice built into it so 

that they could plan their life.  They never thought they'd run 

into a minister that quite simply ignored . . . or at the worst 

said, well don't worry about that folks, I'll get around it 

somehow -- in his words - 

_ when problems were presented to him. 

 

I wonder what a judge would do with that statement, well I'll 

get around it somehow.  I suspect that's why we've got the 

legislation designed the way it is, so that we wouldn't have 

somebody to have to get on a stand and say, well we'll get 

around it somehow.  I don't suspect that kind of verbiage does 

well in a court of law. 

 

Well anyway, Mr. Minister, I suspect that we're going to have 

changes in '93-94.  Because if this program is going to 

continue, it has to be Canada-wide.  And I don't think we're 

going to have the Manitoba farmers and the Alberta farmers 

operating under a different circumstance than the 

Saskatchewan farmers.  The federal government can't allow 

that to happen.  They can't let you just ride roughshod any time 

you feel like it.  They can't let you just go out and willy-nilly 

start changing the law.  Federal governments can't do that. 

 

There's going to have to be some uniformity in the Prairies.  

We all grow the same crops.  We do the same things.  We 

borrow money from the same bankers.  And I don't think for a 

minute that come '93-94 that you're going to have the federal 

government allow this program to be different in Alberta, and 

different in Saskatchewan, and different in Manitoba.  Because 

that's what you got right now. 

 

If there was a third line defence payment triggered, Mr. 

Minister, they would get exactly the same as we would. 

 Every last one of them would get that third line of defence 

based on their acreage, or based on the crops they grew, based 

on the contract that they signed.  And it would be a different 

payment than we get in Saskatchewan.  And that's the reality of 

it. 

 

Now I want to know this.  If we've got a change in '93-94, are 

you going to come back into this legislature and rescind this 

odious piece of stuff, because we're into another contract?  Are 

you going to rescind this and get this smelly piece of legislation 

off the books of this province?  Could you at least give us that 

commitment, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

continues to attempt to indicate that he still does not understand 

the 1991 GRIP program or the 1992 revenue insurance 

program, in his opening remarks.  The member opposite makes 

the contention that somehow he knew differently in 1991 what 

the revenue insurance payment would be than he knows in 

1992. 

 

Well the fact is that both payments were highly dependent on 

the market price of grains.  And the member opposite is aware 

of that.  And the member opposite is sitting there laughing 

about it and saying, how nice it is that I can sit here and laugh 

about it after I made a very serious speech about it.  The fact is, 

the member opposite knows that in both 1991 and 1992, the 

program was defined . . . the payment was dependent on the 

market price.  And that's what it was supposed to be. 

 

It was attempting to guarantee a certain level of pricing for a 

product.  The fact is that the committee that examined the 

program decided that the way in which that guarantee was 

offered in 1991 clearly gave farmers the need to look at the 

program to decide what they were going to do on their farms as 

opposed to looking at their farming operations.  But surely the 

member opposite will stop pretending that he does not know 

that the level of revenue insurance payments in both years, 

under both programs, were dependent on the market price.  

Surely he knows that. 

 

The member opposite talks about payments made by the 

federal government.  Yes, the federal government has made 

some payments but the federal government has not yet made a 

payment for shortfalls in 1991.  The federal government has 

not yet made payments to respond to the shortfall in money for 

1990.  They still are $500 million short in Canada, and farmers 

are still waiting for that money that their own committee 

identified last year to be a shortfall for the 1990 year. 

 

The fact is that what's real for farmers is that they are short of 

money, that they are short of money for the reason of 

international trading circumstances that they have been asked 

to help fund in terms of the trade war.  They've been asked to 

help fund the trade war against the United States and the trade 

war against the European Community, and now the members 

opposite would suggest that they should fund more of this war, 

that their friends in Ottawa should not come forward to their 

commitment. 

 

(2000) 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2819 

Well there clearly is a financial crisis in the Saskatchewan 

farming industry, and it is clearly because the federal 

government has not met their part of the obligation, the 

obligation that the members opposite touted in every town hall 

meeting they were at when farmers signed up for the 1991 

GRIP program -- meeting after meeting after meeting after 

meeting. The members opposite, as they went to them, said, if 

you don't sign up for GRIP 1991, you are not going to get any 

more federal third line of defence.  That was the contention 

across Saskatchewan, across the province for the whole period 

of time that the marketing of the program was going on. 

 

The fact is that the changes to the program that have been 

proposed by the committee of farmers are provided for in the 

federal-provincial agreement.  The members opposite say that 

somehow, because there is a change in this Act relative to the 

notice that must be given, that somehow farmers' rights are 

extinguished.  Well the members opposite need to know that 

the federal-provincial agreement could be altered tomorrow 

without Saskatchewan support, in some areas, and could leave 

Saskatchewan dependent on the outcome of that, which would 

leave us in no position to give the notice the members opposite 

believe should be offered. 

 

The members opposite need to be aware that the provisions for 

change within the 1991 program description were inconsistent 

because two pieces were brought together.  They were also 

inconsistent because it was impossible to define what it was 

one was trying to change.  And the members opposite continue 

to heckle and continue to point their fingers into the air.  But 

the fact is, those are the facts. 

 

The fact is that there wasn't adequate definition of the program 

last year.  And the notice provisions were disrespected annually 

by the members opposite because they didn't believe they were 

important. 

 

Well they are impractical and impossible to live with within the 

marriage of the two programs, and therefore the new 

description of the program requirements are that farmers be 

given notice as soon as changes are known.  And they will be.  

And they will be involved in discussion. 

 

And every rational being knows that no government is going to 

make changes to a program in July when it has to do with the 

spring seeding for farmers in spring.  And we will bring those 

changes forward as a result of mutual discussions and mutual 

agreements as we did this year.  And farm programs will 

continue to be guided by the advice farmers give us. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, I've been observing this Committee of the Whole 

on this here Bill since 2:30 this afternoon -- two and a half 

hours this afternoon, another hour tonight.  I've witnessed 

something that I'm not really too pleased with . . . Oh, another 

three hours this morning.  Sorry, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. 

 

The member from Morse asked you a question at 9 o'clock this 

morning and that hasn't been answered yet.  Because you've 

just been going all day and making speeches.  I've never seen 

anything like it -- for two and a 

half hours, Mr. Minister. I've never seen this happen in 

committee.  But if it did happen, we'd always have lots of time 

to come back because we could hold you another day and 

another day and another day. 

 

And I watched at 20 to 5 tonight when the member from 

Thunder Creek asked you a question.  And you got up and you 

talked the clock out till 5 o'clock.  Now that's not a right and 

proper thing to do when you know that we've got a closure on 

and we have got 18 hours, and you've got it in your mind if you 

could talk about 12 of those, we can't ask many questions. 

 

But just before the closing hour, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I 

got up on a point of order and said I'd like to have the minister 

talk some sense.  Then I said to the House Leader, take that 

man out to supper and teach him a little bit about politics and 

how you handle yourself in the House.  And I was very 

pleased, Mr. Minister, that worked, because for exactly one 

hour you were at least attempting to try to answer questions, 

but you were attempting without the political rhetoric. 

 

And then at the last question, you couldn't control yourself, Mr. 

Minister, the way you went into your political rhetoric.  We 

have only got till 11 o'clock tomorrow night.  And if you're 

going to keep this up, I'll tell you, you're going to talk for 12 

hours and we only get about 6 in, you're going to be one tired 

minister.  But it wouldn't be so bad, Mr. Minister, if you were 

saying something with some common sense.  You have said . . 

. I've got a lot of things we're going to get into, Mr. Minister, 

but I wrote down just a few comments that what you've been 

saying. 

 

Just before supper, you said to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . The member from Churchill Downs, I wish to goodness that 

farmer would get into this debate.  I wish he'd get up.  He's a 

lawyer.  He could soon straighten out the mistake this 

department's making.  He knows that it's absolutely 

unconstitutional what they're doing.  He knows that they broke 

a contract on 50 or 60,000 farmers. 

 

The member from Churchill Downs knows right well, that 

what my son said to me tonight at supper time, when I said, 

these guys have robbed more farmers in this last few months 

and going to in this crop year than Jesse and Frank James did in 

their entire career, and my son said, please don't compare this 

government to my friends, Jesse and Frank James. 

 

As long as I can keep from getting comments from the member 

from Churchill Downs, we will do not too bad.  But you said to 

the member from Thunder Creek, prior to supper time, that we 

-- the Conservative caucus here -- are misrepresenting the 

farmers and the public.  You said that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm glad that you all clapped because now I 

thought there was only the front row that was in on this here 

gerrymandering that's been happening here, but now they're all 

in it.  They're all against farmers because we are speaking on 

behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan.  And what, Mr. 

Minister, have you got 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

against the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus and all the 

farmers in Saskatchewan? 

 

All we're doing . . . You'll get a chance to answer because . . . 

and then when you get up, Mr. Minister, you don't need to get 

into political rhetoric because you said enough for about seven 

hours today, that my little political rhetoric won't amount to 

nothing because you've already answered me a long time ago. 

 

Mr. Minister, the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan have 

been betrayed.  You have betrayed every farmer in this 

province, whether they . . . Some of them may say, well for me 

this year or last year, '92 GRIP may be all right.  It's not the big 

issue.  We're going to get into the '91-92 GRIP.  You got your 

officials here.  We're going to get into some details on it.  But 

the big thing is that there isn't one farmer -- I can't find one, 

Mr. Minister, not one, not one individual farmer and you can't 

bring me one -- that says what you're doing with this here, 

making the contract void and then not taking and let them go to 

court, you can't bring me one farmer, including yourself as a 

farmer, to stand here under oath and said it's right and proper. 

 

You can't stand up here and says it's right and proper to void 

part of last year's contract.  You can't do that under oath and be 

telling the absolute truth.  If you say anything otherwise, then 

you are saying a falsehood to everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You are absolutely saying a falsehood because 

there isn't an individual born in Canada, a Canadian, that 

believes in saying that that contract there is void and never was 

there. 

 

That was a real contract.  And you'll hold up your brochures 

and said, the farmers had a brochure to read here and they 

heard another member here say this and another member from 

Crop Insurance said that.  Mr. Minister, you know quite well 

that a contract is not a contract until it's signed.  You know that 

you can talk about it and talk about it and talk about it -- and 

when it's signed it's a contract. 

 

And you went and made a statement a little while ago that, it 

wasn't really a contract that we done because we advertised this 

and we had hall meetings and you had hall meetings.  Well I'll 

tell you, you don't need government law to make a contract 

legal.  You and I can sit down and make out a contract and that 

contract signed with witness is a legal document. 

 

And I can tell you . . . You said yourself you're not a lawyer 

and you said that the members from this side aren't a lawyer, 

but you've got one sitting beside you and she is responsible to 

tell you the facts.  And I would like to know some of the things 

that the lady beside you would give you advice about legality, 

that if you were repeating it exactly the same manner, because I 

doubt if you are. 

 

Because you've been misrepresenting everybody in this 

province ever since GRIP '92 has been even initiated.  You've 

done it from the very beginning.  You've been playing games 

with farmers.  You're going to . . . look at, just before I came 

into the House, well just a few minutes ago, look at the 

headline in the paper.  And you think that Saskatchewan's 

doing well under an NDP. 

Headline: Saskatchewan leads in farm bankruptcies.  Then the 

next one is quite important too: Ontario farmers blast NDP. 

The New Democratic Government of Ontario, attacked by the 

business community, now is getting criticized by farmers.  

Right across this country they can't stand the socialists, what 

they're doing.  They've got something against farmers.  They've 

always had something against farmers. 

 

I'd like to know what would be happening here tonight if the 

great John Diefenbaker was sitting in this Assembly speaking 

tonight, what he would have to say, the great Canadian.  And I 

would like to know what Tommy Douglas would be saying, the 

great Canadian, if he was here.  What would Tommy Douglas 

say? 

 

I say to all the people watching, I say all the people that's 

watching on television tonight and is going to hear about what's 

going on here tonight that they watch what the member is 

saying and listen very carefully and think to themselves the 

good old CCFers (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) in 

this city of Regina and Saskatoon which will maybe be 

watching they would say to themselves, well I don't think that 

Tommy Douglas would ever do a thing like that.  And then 

they would say, well I'm absolutely sure that Allan Blakeney 

would never allow this to happen.  Even though I didn't agree 

with his philosophy, I agreed with the standards of the man. 

 

And then we come to the Premier of Saskatchewan today and 

I'm absolutely sure that he would say the same thing as 

Diefenbaker and Douglas and Blakeney only he's not here.  He 

doesn't know what's going on.  We know that he's been down 

in Ontario and Ottawa for . . . he's been down there for . . . he 

couldn't help it, he had to be.  But where, Mr. Chairman, where 

is the liaison, where is the liaison between the Premier and 

who's in charge. 

 

The Deputy Premier sits there reading a paper, facing towards 

the wall.  He couldn't turn around and look me in the face 

because he's in charge.  He's sitting there reading the 

newspaper and, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the Deputy Premier, 

he's been around for a long, long . . . good many years and he 

should have the fortitude to stand up in that cabinet of his and 

say to the Minister of Agriculture, I want to change the order 

that I gave you last fall.  I'm sorry, he should say, I am sorry 

what I did to you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, because you'll 

never kid me on your remarks to the member from Morse.  

You'll never fool me, you won't fool the public that this here 

revenue Bill is only to save the Finance man.  That's all it is.  

It's to save the Finance man. 

 

And it's been said, and he has said it, that it was too rich a 

program.  He has said it and you people have said it, it's too 

rich a program, that '91 GRIP is too rich.  So that means you're 

against farmers.  You are against every farmer that walks out 

there if you say, we are giving them too much money under the 

'91 GRIP. 

 

Just before I put this here paper down: Saskatchewan farmers 

suffered more than half of all Canadian farm bankruptcies, 117 

to 214 nationally in the first six months of this year.  And don't 

blame the Tories for that because that's January '92 till now.  

Bankruptcies.  And I think that I 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

could recall, I'm sure I can sit down here and I can name, at 

least 12, 15 of those and the majority of the ones have gone 

bankrupt because they said the '92 GRIP finishes me.  It 

absolutely finishes me. 

 

Now listen very carefully, Mr. Minister, because there's been 

several thousands of farmers that have dealt with the Farm 

Debt Review Board, Farm Land Security Board, mediation 

services, and they had no place to go but out because they 

couldn't get a financing package for their refinancing of their 

farms a year ago.  Whoops!  All of a sudden they hear about 

the '91 GRIP program.  And they go to the hall meetings and it 

takes a while to understand it.  And you know that I'm right.  

Everybody knows that I'm right.  Because it was absolutely 100 

per cent bankable. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You bought GRIP too. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The member from Elphinstone says that I 

bought GRIP.  I never got 1991 GRIP.  I bought 1992 GRIP, I 

did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now you know.  Now you know.  And I'm 

glad.  I'm glad the member from Elphinstone reminded me 

because I wanted to very carefully say that tonight -- that in my 

family I have two sons that have the '91 and the '92 GRIP.  I 

have the '92 GRIP.  And I pleaded with my constituents, don't 

drop the '92 GRIP.  I pleaded with them. 

 

The '92 GRIP is better than nothing.  It's better than nothing, 

but it's not the 1991 GRIP .  So don't say these 1,000 people, 

which I'm one of 1,000, that isn't brand-new.  Because I never 

had a quota book last year, and I didn't have one the year 

before, and I didn't have one the year before.  But I can tell 

you, I would have had the 1991 GRIP, and I would have been 

one of my family that would be suing you. 

 

Because I guarantee you that there'll be lawsuits coming from 

my family to this government.  My family have just been 

through a lawsuit in 1992 and it's cost my family $115,000 to 

sue the government, and we lost.  And I'll tell you, we believe 

in the rights of Canadians.  And we will do it again.  My 

family, my two sons are going to be part of a lawsuit suing this 

government. 

 

Because we believe in the rights, in the charter of rights.  That's 

why my family come to Canada, because we believe, we 

absolutely believe that you have a fundamental right, and that 

is to sue.  You've got that right. 

 

I was brought up in a family where we don't believe in suing 

our fellow man.  But I tell you, I wasn't brought up in a family 

where we don't believe in suing a corporation or a government.  

I wouldn't sue my neighbour, but I'll sue you. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I'm kind of strapped because I didn't have 

the '91 GRIP.  But my family . . . and I'll sure be helping them 

in the lawsuit, because in the Craik and Davidson area, people 

are phoning me now, right in my 

constituency  

_- where do I leave my money?  Where do I send my money 

for this lawsuit to help the farmers in Melville. 

 

And I said if this government gets away with what they're 

trying to get away with, if they get away with it, you won't be 

able to sue.  Only the Supreme Court of Canada.  Tell us where 

we send our money. 

 

You said tonight, Mr. Minister . . . You don't even understand 

crop insurance.  You're not the minister of Crop Insurance and 

you've been saying some statements.  You talk about the new 

crop insurance contract, about the new options, the 50 to 80 per 

cent.  For goodness' sakes, it's always been there, 50 to 80 per 

cent.  Crop insurance didn't come in in 1952 like you said this 

morning; crop insurance started in 1962.  You said 1952.  

Anyway that doesn't make any difference. You did make that 

mistake. 

 

And the 50 to 70 per cent option has always been there -- I'm 

sorry, when it first started, it was 60 to 70 per cent, then it went 

to 50 to 70, then under individual coverage it went to 80 per 

cent, and now it's 80 per cent for all if you want to choose that. 

 

Then you talked about, Mr. Minister, some of the farmers are 

getting bills on their 1991 GRIP program.  They got a cheque 

maybe last fall and at Christmas time they got a bill.  Well do 

you know who's to blame for that?  It's stopping the bin police.  

It's you guys.  You're irresponsible.  You don't go out and deal 

with a multimillion dollar corporation like Crop Insurance and 

not measure bins. 

 

You yourself, Mr. Minister, stood here this morning and I 

heard you say to the member from Morse that you could 

measure a 3,300-bushel Westeel bin as many times as you want 

and you won't get a real accurate measurement.  You won't get 

an accurate measurement.  I say to the minister: what kind of a 

measurement would you get if you don't measure it at all?  

What do you get?  So you're saying crop insurance adjusters 

since 1962, what are they there for?  You might as well just tell 

the farmer to guess it.  Go ahead and guess it, like you did last 

fall.  Just tell us what you got, we'll send you a cheque.  Here's 

the poor farmers out there with a pile of wheat in their Quonset 

and another pile on the ground, and they take out a little, take 

some quota out, and dips and dives in it.  Goodness, the 

farmers in here understand that, and you should understand 

that.  How do you measure that?  How do you measure that?  

So some farmers did overestimate. 

 

And then by the time the next one came, the wheat's in the 

elevator, the piles are off the ground, then they were told the 

second time not to just take a guess at what the combine kicked 

out the auger.  You're supposed to go and fill out an application 

and . . . It was all sent to everybody, had to be sent in by 

January 7 -- I believe it was January 7 was the date-line -- and 

it has to have bin 1 to 20, if you've got 20 bins, and it must be 

marked and all the measurements.  So there was farmers that 

estimated too much grain.  But they got too much maybe the 

first time. 

 

If you got 50 bushels to the acre and you got a . . . and 40 

bushels to the acre, people in my area got paid.  On the 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

1991 GRIP with 40- to 50-bushel crop, they still got some 

money.  And that doesn't happen very often.  And I say to you 

on that point, Mr. Minister, that it's irresponsible for Crop 

Insurance and the Department of Agriculture to say, oh, we 

trust farmers.  And we're just going to take their word for it.  

Well that sounds nice. 

 

But I'll tell you, if I smashed up my car, if I smash up my car, it 

is totalled, I don't think it's worth anything . . . So I'm just going 

to phone up SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and 

say, SGI, I just smashed up my car.  The car's worth 20,000.  

Send me a cheque.  Will I get one?  No way.  I'll have to fight 

with them for a couple of months to get whatever it's worth -- 

which it should be.  I shouldn't be able to make out a statement 

what I think it's worth.  It should be the actual value. 

 

It's irresponsible for Crop Insurance to say we're not going to 

measure these bins.  And what's it do?  I was the minister of 

Crop Insurance for several years, so I know what it does.  

When you overpay a farmer, then an audit comes along.  And 

somebody found out there was a mistake.  And then you make 

them feel like a criminal.  And he owes 2 or 3 or 4 or $5,000 

back.  And the money's spent.  He's in an awful bind.  And then 

up comes the lawsuits.  You make a criminal out of a farmer.  

He didn't do anything wrong. 

 

But if all you do is just say, guess it, Mr. farmer, we're not 

going to worry about what your measurements are, we'll just 

send you a cheque, you're going to get yourself into an awful 

problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, so far you don't need to bother answering any 

questions, because that was just a . . . I was just making a 

statement in answer to you from 9 o'clock this morning till 8 

o'clock tonight, excluding maybe one hour when you kind of 

kept off the political rhetoric.  So I don't even need a reply on 

that because that would take another two hours. 

 

I'm going to ask you a question.  You stated you had letters 

asking the change to the 1991 GRIP program.  You said you 

received letters in your office.  How many letters did you 

receive asking for a change from the 1991 GRIP?  How many 

letters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 

listened to some of what I've said but not all of it.  I'd be happy 

to answer that question again, and also address some of the 

other issues that have been raised in the little demonstration 

we've just enjoyed. 

 

There have been in excess of 300 letters and submissions to the 

Farm Debt Advisory Committee on the question of the 

program.  And I think, although I can't verify this at the 

moment, I think every one of them was asking for changes. 

 

The member opposite . . . Maybe I'll begin from the back, 

because the member opposite has talked about the 

bin-measuring activity.  It wasn't the accuracy or the 

inaccuracy of bin measurement that caused farmers to have to 

pay back bills.  It was the design of the program the members 

opposite created.  It was in fact the change in pricing Estimates 

that caused the need to pay back funds. 

Now the member opposite says, you make a criminal out of the 

farmer by telling them they should give money back.  The 

program you designed does what you describe, if that's how 

you describe it.  That's the fact about the program. 

 

Now the question with respect to the volume of grain in bins, 

as the member opposite is aware because he asked the question 

in the legislature the other day, that where there is inaccuracy 

at the end of the year, that the farmer has the right to approach 

the corporation and suggest that the numbers are different than 

the Estimates that were made.  And what I recall, that wasn't 

part of the original design of the program.  We are just very 

fortunate to have a very sensitive minister in charge of the Crop 

Insurance Corporation, the Hon. Cunningham, who has made a 

number of significantly improved . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'll remind the minister, and I'm 

sure he didn't do it intentionally, that you're not to use the 

names of other members of the Assembly in your remarks in 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Right.  I'm sorry about that.  I will say that 

we are very fortunate we have a very sensitive and responsive 

minister in charge of the Crop Insurance Corporation who has 

made a number of significant improvements to the program 

since he took over, including the improvement of the 

administration of the program.  And we should be thankful for 

the energies that he has put into that and the officials of the 

corporation who have made those improvements as well. 

 

Now I need to find the list of other questions you asked me.  

Now here we go.  The member opposite, I want to say again, as 

I said a few minutes ago, I will answer the question several 

more times until the member opposite hears it.  There were in 

excess of 300 letters and submissions and it is my belief, 

although I can't confirm this absolutely right now, that each one 

asked for changes.  I may quote from a number of letters that 

came in and a number of submissions that came in: 

 

 Then came GRIP which threw market neutrality out the 

window.  I received false signals on what to seed and to top it 

off, those who choose to reduce inputs and practise poor 

farming methods are rewarded by the program. 

 

Now that's a letter to me on a submission to the GRIP-NISA 

review committee on various issues including costs.  As he 

says: 

 

 The present GRIP program is too costly for the producer 

especially when compared to other insurance programs.  The 

only reason there was a large sign-up this past year was that 

producers had no . . . 

 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it would have cost even 

more had we not changed it. 

 

 . . . The only reason there was a large sign-up this year was 

that the producer had no other alternative that was worth 

considering plus the fact that they were threatened with not 

being 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

eligible for additional government programs if they didn't 

join. 

 

That's a submission to the GRIP-NISA review committee.  

Here's another producer who's disgusted with the design: 

 

 . . . we greatfully accept our GRIP cheque which totals $5000 

for our 1300 seeded acre farm.  And we listen in disgust to 

other . . . who seed only four times as much, boast about how 

you have to be a good manager to farm in these tough times.  

And to have a little holiday in (Las) Vegas this winter.  His 

cheque amounts to $100,000.00 . . . it's not right. 

 

A producer on the measurement of grain bins said: 

 

 A program that trades off a dollar of benifits for every dollar 

of measured production is going to provide an incentive to 

underestimate production.  I have measured a pile of grain to 

be 5000 bushels, after it was sold that same pile was 

measured out as 6300 bushels. 

 

So those are quotes, and it's my belief that each of the 

submissions and letters were critical of the program as it stood.  

And it was in response to that kind of input to the review 

committee, which the members opposite first established, that 

the changes were proposed and brought forward. 

 

When the member opposite was talking about bankruptcies a 

few minutes ago, well I'd like the member opposite to just think 

about it for a minute before he gets too carried away with his 

analysis of what's caused bankruptcies.  We have not yet had 

the end of the first crop under 1992 GRIP.  So we haven't had 

the opportunity to have a payment out from 1992 GRIP. 

 

Farmers are suffering from the design of farm programs that 

the members opposite were responsible for.  Farmers are 

suffering income shortfalls as a result of the lack of fulfilling of 

agreements the members opposite made.  The members 

opposite know that the bankruptcies that farmers are 

experiencing have to do with the fact that they are short money 

that they have made their commitments to. 

 

When farmers signed up for GRIP 1991, the members opposite 

are aware, as the farmer in the letter said, that they were 

threatened with not being eligible for additional government 

programs if they didn't join.  The members opposite know that 

farmers expected that, and farmers bought into the program 

because there was a commitment to additional federal dollars 

of third line of defence. 

 

(2030) 

 

And tell me how much a billion dollars in the Saskatchewan 

economy would help these bankrupt farmers that you describe.  

I think a great deal, if we have 60,000 farmers in the province.  

That's a significant amount of money for every farmer in the 

province that will help bankruptcies. 

 

The member opposite ought to be also aware that we 

have done something to try to protect farmers in the face of the 

very serious income shortfalls they've had as a result of the last 

number of years.  And we will, once we get past the stalling 

and blockading of the members opposite on this Bill, be able to 

pass the legislation with respect to the farm debt policy that 

was brought forward by another group of producers and 

recommended to us, so that we can provide the security of 

tenure for farmers who do lose their land, so that farmers can 

have six years of lease if they have the misfortune to have to 

lose the ownership of their land. 

 

Now that's a difficult thing to have happen to a family.  The 

member opposite ought to know that.  That's very difficult for a 

family to go through this process.  But at least there is at the 

end of it the security of knowing that the family can have 

access to the land for another six years, and most farmers I 

know are willing to put their hearts and souls back into the 

exercise of farming and do what they can to survive the next 

few years.  Hopefully times will get better and they'll be able to 

keep their families on the farm.  They love their farms and they 

love their rural communities and they love their neighbours and 

they will continue to work very hard to be there. 

 

The member opposite said that somebody over here said that 

the program was too rich.  Well that's not been what we've 

been saying.  The fact is that the program . . . there's a 

difference between a program being too rich and a program 

costing too much money.  And that was a differentiation that 

the committee made. 

 

It's clear that farmers in Saskatchewan do not have any 

programs which are too rich.  But it's also clear that the first 

program, which cost more, was a drain on farmers and a drain 

on the province that was not appropriate.  What we need is a 

program that delivers aid appropriately.  When we visit around 

the province with farmers, farmers want a simple program.  

They want one that doesn't take 14 tonnes of bookwork and 

annual changes that are based in the kind of federal-provincial 

agreement that the members opposite signed. 

 

And the farmers are going to have an opportunity to tell us that 

this fall.  We're going to have a review committee that's going 

to give them an opportunity to speak about what kind of 

program they really want.  But the fact is that the program 

needs to be sensitive to the qualification of administrative 

efficiency and efficiency of delivery of the program. 

 

I want to comment on another comment the member opposite 

made, where he again contended, as each other member who 

has spoken has contended, that somehow an order came out 

from the Minister of Finance to the Minister of Agriculture, 

from where it went to the committee and said: thou shalt do it 

this way. 

 

Well, members opposite, I want to say it for you and for others, 

that that kind of comment was never made, not at the beginning 

of the process, not in the middle of the process, and not at the 

end of the process.  And the members opposite need to again 

reconsider what they say if they want to speak truthfully.  

Because the program design that was brought forward . . . if the 

members opposite believed they appointed a committee that 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

would listen to that in the first place, had it even been said, then 

I wonder who it was they appointed. 

 

The fact is that the members opposite hopefully appointed 

people who were willing to examine the concerns of farmers 

and the needs of the agricultural sector, and bring forward 

recommendations based on a sound administrative process that 

in the long run resulted in a more sustainable program than was 

first established. 

 

I want to say something about farmers and the CCF.  The 

member opposite talks about farmers and the socialist 

governments in Saskatchewan.  Well I want the member 

opposite to know that the farmers of this province, along with 

the working people, since 1944 have had to pick up the pieces 

of mess left by the black cats or the white cats, in Tommy 

Douglas's words -- and you referred to Tommy Douglas earlier 

-- three times now: first in 1944; then in 1971; and now in 

1991. 

 

And farmers and working people in Saskatchewan will 

continue to work to clean up the messes that are created when 

others before them, with self-interest and with interest in only 

their corporate friends, and with no interest in the kind of 

benefits that people require to live comfortably and to live in a 

good social environment have . . . We've had to come in on 

three occasions in the province's history to clean up those kinds 

of messes.  And I know that farmers will continue to work with 

us and the working people of this province, together to build a 

stronger province. 

 

The member opposite was talking about sign-up deadlines.  

Well it was interesting because last year, while the discussions, 

the meetings, began on March 1, it's my understanding that the 

publication which the members opposite call the contract was 

not delivered until May 1.  So on what basis could farmers 

have assumed they had an arrangement in the absence of this 

paper?  They could not have had it. 

 

And the members contend again and again and again that 

somehow this represents a contract.  Well I can tell the 

members opposite, if they spent as much time talking to a 

lawyer about what constituted a contract and the definition of a 

contract before they designed the program, and if they had 

spent an ounce of time talking about it in the last two days or 

three days instead of going back and reading the Magna Carta, 

they might have learned that in fact it is very difficult to define 

what constituted a contract.  Because the members opposite 

didn't even have their pamphlet out until May 1 when they 

constructed it. 

 

So the fact that the members contend that farmers wouldn't 

believe that their contract was something they were told by a 

Crop Insurance agent or something they were told by one of the 

members of the cabinet that toured the province or something 

they were told by someone else through the Crop Insurance 

network, they had no other way of knowing what it was that the 

program was.  There was no other information, so that it is very 

clearly a risk to the Crop Insurance Corporation to not believe 

that that was the deal.  Because it's the only deal they had. The 

only deal they had was the spoken word that they had.  And 

that was ill-defined because it was 

spoken by many different people in many different places 

under many different circumstances. 

 

And complicate that or compound that if there were in fact 100, 

or 150, or 300 different people verbally describing this 

program to farmers, and if by the time I got to my meeting you 

were on change number 94 and change number 95, consider the 

infinite number of combinations of things that farmers could 

have believed the program contract was when they allegedly 

signed up for it.  So the fact that that needed to be cleared up in 

legislation ought to begin to be coming clear to the members 

opposite who created that horrible mess. 

 

Well I think I've come back to the top of my list, the first point 

the member opposite raised when he began to speak, and I've 

tried to do it as briefly as possible.  I think I've answered in half 

the time that he took to ask the question. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that we have met with 

farmers on a continuing basis and we have met with farmers as 

early as this week.  And there is not a farmer around who has 

contended to us in any way that they did not understand, that 

they didn't have time to understand the program this fall, that 

the notice that was given on March 13 and the time given to 

understand it was a problem for them. 

 

The problem for farmers in Saskatchewan is income, and we've 

discussed that from a variety of perspectives.  We've discussed 

it earlier today from the perspective that farmers signed in to 

second line programs like GRIP in exchange for a promise of 

third line support.  And we will continue to work with farmers 

to request of the federal government that they meet the 

commitment that they made and that farmers' income problems 

can be relieved to that extent. 

 

I look forward to your next question.  And again, may I repeat, 

there were probably about 300 submissions, maybe in excess of 

300 submissions in letters, and submissions to the minister and 

to the GRIP review committee. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I thank you for 

answering those questions even though it's going to take a long 

time to go through them because you didn't answer them right.  

They're absolutely wrong.  I mean there might be the odd 

question you might have got right, but I don't know where. 

 

To start with, the 1992 GRIP -- we'll start there -- you were 

saying that the 1992 GRIP . . . or the 1991 GRIP wasn't going 

to put cash into the hands of the farmers . . . Oh, no, sorry, Mr. 

Minister. You said that it could have to pay money back if you 

overpay.  Well what in the world do you think the 1992 GRIP 

is?  You're going to have to pay some payments and we're 

going to be asking that later, when we expect the farmers to get 

cash in their pocket, because that's what we're all sitting here 

for.  We're talking about farmers.  We're talking about when 

are they going to get the money, the actual money.  That's what 

they want.  But if you over . . . you know perfectly well, and 

then don't go giving ridiculous statements like that, that the '92 

GRIP is going to be an improvement over 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

'91 for overpayments. 

 

Because you sent a payment out this fall.  Maybe one next 

Christmas time, like the other program did.  Then the price of 

wheat goes up.  You'll have to send a bill out the same as 

anybody else did.  You know why anybody got a bill.  Why did 

they get a bill?  This didn't happen under our government.  It 

happened under you, that the farmers get $2.45 a bushel 

roughly, for number one wheat in my elevator.  That's after the 

increases this spring.  It was a lot less than that.  But crop 

insurance and GRIP paid out on the 2.86 figure.  And that cost 

a lot of money for the farmers because they paid on the 2.86 

figure. 

 

All right now, if they got overpaid last fall, some of them might 

have to send it back.  But that was wrong, absolutely wrong to 

ask that to go back.  And I am on behalf of one of my 

constituents that phoned me just . . . I was just talking to him 

on Monday night.  And he asked me, is Agriculture Estimates 

up yet?  And I says, no it hasn't.  Don't forget my request. 

 

This individual got a cheque last fall and then he got a bill.  

Now I want the GRIP program for goodness' sakes to have the 

decency and the government to have the decency if there's 

three payments lined up and the second payment's a few dollars 

going back or whatever it is, don't make them send it back.  It 

may be $50.  It may be 50,000.  But he shouldn't have to send 

anything back until the final.  Because this man's going to get a 

good cheque on the next one, either from the wheat or the 

GRIP. 

 

Because somebody has to make it up to that 2.86 or whatever 

the price is going to close out on on July 31.  And you know 

that, Mr. Minister.  So he's going to get the money.  But why 

take the money back from him?  And that's not our government 

doing that.  That's your government. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well you set the rules. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well then, you sure like changing them, so 

why didn't you change them?  Don't blame us, Mr. Minister, for 

anything that happens after October 18 last fall.  Don't blame 

us for anything. 

 

You're the bright minister that's supposed to be looking after 

the farmers.  If, when you seen them sending these cheques 

back . . . And farmers must have phoned you because they 

phoned me; I just had the one that reminded me now.  We had 

many of my neighbours and my constituents and from the 

surrounding areas.  They were pretty upset.  And you talked 

about the efficiency of the Crop Insurance department.  I know 

it's not yours, Mr. Minister, but it's not very efficient when they 

made such a blunder here, they didn't even get their . . . they 

messed up their cheques going out. 

 

There was farmers that got a dollar and a half and it should 

have been a thousand fifty dollars.  They made a whole mess.  

Some didn't get cheques at all.  Some got bills that found out 

they had cheques coming.  So don't go blaming our government 

for that.  Don't blame the past minister of Crop Insurance that 

you can't even handle cheques. 

 

I can never remember in our nine and a half years that 

there was thousands of cheques that this happened to.  Now 

that's only human error.  But for goodness' sake, don't stand up 

and say what a wonderful Crop Insurance and how you're 

improving on it.  I've seen mistakes of wrong figures going in.  

You might make . . . the agent or the adjuster may give the 

wrong figures.  It could be misread or there could be mistakes.  

That's always going to be there, but there's no need to have 

thousands of farmers have their cheques messed up and then 

turn around and say how efficient you are. 

 

Anyway just so you've got that clear, Mr. Minister, you were 

wrong on that because the same thing can happen in the '92 

GRIP if you pay out a payment or two and the price of wheat 

goes up, then you'll have to ask for it back.  That could very 

easily happen and you know it. 

 

And about the 300 names, you mean to tell me here that you 

got 300 letters asking for a change, and we're in this mess over 

300 letters.  My goodness, we table that many petitions every 

day asking for changes in government.  You don't pay any 

attention.  We've tabled thousands and thousands of petitions in 

here. And if you've only got 300 letters, I say, Mr. Chairman, to 

the minister, if he got 300 letters, I would like him to contact . . 

. I would like the minister to contact the 300 letters . . . the 

individuals that wrote the letters wanting a change in GRIP and 

see if they're satisfied with what you got today, with what 

you're giving today.  See if they're satisfied with the '92 GRIP 

plan, but be sure you put in that letter, are you agreeable that 

we change legislation and make part of it void and then make it 

so another part of the section of the Act says you can't sue.  I 

mean you just put that in a letter to all 300, and I'll bet you got 

300, another 300 that are against what you're doing.  But 300 

people, what about the other 50,000-plus people that should 

have had something to say about it? 

 

(2045) 

 

You picked a committee.  You picked a committee and they 

look like good individuals.  I've read some of the names on 

there.  We have talked to some of them. And I don't agree with 

you, Mr. Minister, on you coming back and saying that that 

absolutely did not happen, that we got directions from the 

Minister of Finance or cabinet, whatever. So my next question 

to you is: when did the cabinet get involved and how did they 

get involved in this here program?  When did they come into 

effect in here.  They must have endorsed it or did something or 

directed, because the members on that committee would not 

have said, they would not have told us, a lot of them, that they 

were financially directed -- financially directed.  So that could 

account for why they had to change the program, because they 

were financially directed.  And don't tell us they weren't.  And 

naturally I'm not going to give you those names any more than 

you will the names out of your office. 

 

But people on that . . . members of that committee, Mr. 

Minister, have stated that they were financially directed, that 

their hands were tied with finances.  And so if that happened, 

I'm sure that this plan didn't get thought up by you, Mr. 

Minister.  I don't believe that you just came off a hog farm, and 

came in here, and could possibly have put this program 

together.  So somebody else did. 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

And I don't believe that the members of that committee 

completely put that program together.  Because we sat with Mr. 

Hartley Furtan in our caucus office, and he told us about the 

flaws in there, and he told us there'd have to be provisions for 

this and provisions for that.  And he was worried about the 

March 15 letter.  So don't come up and say that it's all fine and 

dandy, and everything was just great, because it's not true, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

You're saying things here, and I will not believe . . . I believe 

that you're absolutely saying a falsehood to this House tonight 

when you said you were not directed by cabinet, or the 

Minister of Finance, or someone, to put . . . This is going to be 

financially controlled. 

 

Because to prove it, many times in the interim supply, and 

other times we've had debates with the Minister of Finance, he 

has said he's the one.  We can get out a Hansard and show you.  

He's the one that said that it's too rich a program; the taxpayers 

couldn't afford it.  Well the taxpayers couldn't afford it; the 

farmers couldn't afford to be without it.  The farmers couldn't 

afford to be without it.  Put that money into the hands of 

farmers and then see what would happen, Mr. Minister. 

 

Just a few more remarks on your remarks and I'll sit down, Mr. 

Minister, and let you respond. 

 

You said . . . oh yes, you said here, we should have read the 

Magna Carta.  Well I think you better read it.  I think you better 

read the charter of rights.  And I think you better get into the . . 

. talk to your lawyer.  Go over to Justice and talk to the good 

people over there.  Sit down with them and talk about 

constitutionality.  Don't give them the mandate.  Because I 

believe what you've done, that you said to the Minister of 

Justice . . . the Minister of Justice must have said to his people, 

come up with a Bill that is going to get the job done. 

 

You probably didn't say, come up with a Bill that's going to be 

constitutional, because that wouldn't be their mandate.  Their 

mandate would be to protect your butt so you wouldn't have to 

be in court.  That's what the mandate would be. 

 

I am sure that the minister went to the Minister of Justice -- 

protect me, protect me, protect me, protect me; I need help.  I'm 

going to get it.  I can't even go to Rosetown on the weekend.  I 

have to send my wife to do the shopping, because they're going 

to get me. 

 

I mean it's serious.  And you know.  You talk about going out 

talking to farmers.  You said to the member from Thunder 

Creek, why don't you go out and talk to farmers.  Well I'll tell 

you, when you get 15 years in as I have, and talk to as many 

farmers as I have, you'll know what they're thinking.  And 

you're not right when they're saying they're upset about this 

here March 15 deadline because they don't know much about it.  

They're only talking the '91-92 GRIP. 

 

But as soon as you tell them what you're doing . . . You say to 

the next group of farmers you're meeting, say to them, are you 

agreeable with us changing the law, having part of your 

contract void?  The part of the contract that was 

showed to you or you were read to here tonight, where a person 

signed that contract, and ask the farmers right out.  Ask 

anybody.  Ask anybody in the city of Regina here.  Just say to 

them, we're talking about a Bill in this House, and we want 

your permission as supporters.  We want your permission.  Is it 

all right if we have part of that Bill void, and out of our life for 

ever?  It'd be no different. 

 

That Bill is no different than if you brought a Bill into this 

legislature to have a Bill legislated that you were never born.  

And that's exactly the same thing.  Just void us out of our life.  

There's no difference.  You've voided that there right out of our 

life. 

 

And I think that it's absolutely . . . I get carried away here, but I 

can't get carried away enough, because my heart and soul is for 

farmers.  I am absolutely for farmers, and you know I am.  And 

the people in this legislature know I speak on behalf of farmers.  

They know I'm right.  Because I'm going to challenge you . . . 

We don't have time before this Bill's railroaded into law, 

because 11 o'clock on Monday this Bill's going to be law.  It's 

going to be law in this legislature, but we're not through with 

you. 

 

And I'm going to ask you, Mr. Minister, my last question 

before I sit down is: after this House is out, I'm calling a 

meeting in the town hall in Davidson and going to tell them 

that the Minister of Agriculture will be there.  And I'm sure 

he'll come to explain to all the people of my constituency . . . I 

know they'll come from Rosetown, Watrous, Humboldt, all the 

Last Mountain constituency.  We got a hall that holds 1,000 

people.  That's how many was there when I got nominated in 

1977 -- 1,100 people.  So if they won't . . . We have a big park 

out beside.  We could fill the park.  And you explain your 

actions to the people, and then say to them, will this crowd 

endorse me for what I'm doing?  And see if you can get an 

endorsement, because you can't get it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

provides interesting night-time entertainment.  The member 

opposite was talking about talking to farmers.  Well I have 

taken advantage of every opportunity that I can to be out 

talking to farmers, whether I'm home or whether I'm in the 

legislature.  I do wonder what the members opposite were 

doing.  Again, it's interesting that the members opposite usually 

break out in gales of laughter when they sit down after having 

pretended at seriously being concerned about farmers. 

 

I wonder what the members opposite were doing for the last . . 

. since June 10, if they've been out talking to farmers and 

farmers have these high-level concerns they're talking about.  I 

think the last count that I had from the petitions that you have, 

what you brag about your chiropractic petitions being in the 

thousands, I think you had 288 of them, 288 people, when you 

spent months chasing them. 

 

Well I want to tell you about the committee. The committee 

met with as many people as they could meet and heard from all 

the people who sent letters in, and there was a unanimous 

response to that.  The fact that the member opposite has 

difficulty hearing as well I suggested that possibly . . . not that 

the member shouldn't be reading the Magna Carta, but maybe 

instead of reading 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

the Magna Carta, he might ask for a legal opinion about 

something more recent than that just to find out what the law in 

Canada is. 

 

I need to address again the contention of the members opposite 

that has been made so repeatedly with respect to the direction 

the committee received.  I don't know, I don't believe the 

member opposite would want to mislead us intentionally but I 

don't know how the member can make that statement. I mean 

it's simply not true.  The fact is that the committee worked 

independently and the committee reported to me. 

 

The member opposite asked when the cabinet got involved.  

Well I think it was sometime late January or early February 

when a preliminary report was sent to me before a final draft 

was sent.  And I took it to cabinet as an information issue in 

terms of informing them about the committee report.  That's 

when it came to me. 

 

At that time the committee was finalizing its discussions.  And 

that was the first time that the cabinet had a report on the nature 

of the discussions of the committee because that was the time 

the committee first indicated to me their intentions.  So the 

members opposite have continually said that because there 

were . . . the recommendations of the committee happened to 

be financially more responsible than the earlier design of the 

program, that somehow that meant the committee was directed. 

 

Well I want to say to the members opposite that they may 

believe that someone has difficulty making decisions about 

efficient administration and about good program design 

without being directed.  The fact is that this committee of 

people examined the existing program and suggested it should 

be designed differently because it was more efficient to design 

it differently. 

 

And I want to tell the member opposite that this government, 

that has a very large debt to deal with now in this province, 

looked at the program options and said well it's a more efficient 

design, it's one we will accept because it does not leave the 

province in a serious situation with respect to program deficits.  

It does not leave farmers in a situation where the premiums will 

continue to escalate, because program payments are made 

based on cropping decisions that are not the cropping decisions 

that would be made if one were basing their decisions on the 

market-place.  So that the cabinet looked at it from that 

perspective, and dealt with it and approved it in that regard. 

 

Now it may be surprising to the members opposite that people 

could actually look at program design from the perspective of 

trying to do something more efficient.  But it's clear that the 

people of the province want things done more efficiently or 

they wouldn't have changed governments.  They had quite 

enough of government administration that was careless with 

government dollars.  And therefore, when the producer 

committee brought forward a recommendation that was a more 

efficient design, a design that at the same time enabled, 

because of its efficiency, enabled the province to offer . . . to 

offer support for wheat at $4.07 a bushel instead of at 3.86, the 

members opposite continued to ignore the fact that under the 

1991 design the prices were falling. 

Well we were able to, in conjunction with the other provinces, 

boost the price up, the guaranteed price, from 3.86 to 4.07 by 

the savings that are as a result of the program design.  And still 

at the end of that process, the program costs less than the 

original design. 

 

The member opposite talked about the Crop Insurance 

administration.  Well the Crop Insurance administration has 

done a good job.  The Crop Insurance administration has taken 

over.  It's changed some things that were wrong before.  It's 

improved the efficiency of their operation.  The member 

opposite ought to be aware that not too long after we came to 

office there was an order from the federal government that said 

no more funds were coming to the Crop Insurance Corporation 

because of some serious accounting difficulties in the 

corporation. 

 

Well it was under the new administration and under the new 

minister that those matters were cleared up, and removed this 

very sore financial risk from the Crop Insurance Corporation.  

It was just another example of things gone wrong, that the 

members opposite ought to have corrected when they were in 

office. 

 

With respect to the program payments that the member 

opposite was discussing with respect to when the farmers 

received bills last spring, and the member opposite said this 

happened during our administration, and that I should take 

responsibility for that.  Well the member opposite needs to 

more fully understand the terms and conditions of the 

responsibilities and the contracts under which the program 

operates. 

 

The description of when the payments are made under 1991 

GRIP are part of the federal-provincial agreement.  That 

agreement was signed on September 18 or 19, 1991, and it is in 

place until a new federal-provincial agreement is signed, and 

that will be soon.  But there has been no time in between when 

the contract could have been changed -- the federal-provincial 

agreement -- to actually have changed those payment terms. 

 

I'm not optimistic that we'll be able to convince the federal 

government that those payment terms can change, but the 

federal-provincial agreement requires that farmers pay back 

any amounts owing at the second payment before they receive 

their third payment.  That's the federal-provincial agreement 

that the members opposite constructed and the members 

opposite signed. 

 

And so we will work the change to facilitate the cash flow for 

farmers, but the members opposite locked us into some pretty 

difficult circumstances and some pretty illogical circumstances 

for farmers.  And we will work to try and fix that because it's 

important to fix program things that can be fixed.  Some things 

are very difficult and will require some ability of the federal 

government to begin to recognize the needs of farmers in that 

regard before we can achieve them.  I will be happy to work 

with the members opposite in helping to achieve those kinds of 

changes. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we'll have to move on.  I 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

now we've asked you questions from 9 o'clock this morning 

until now, and you have answered some, but most of them you 

answered them in your way, and we don't agree with you.  And 

all we can do is ask you a couple of times, and if you don't put 

the proper facts on the table, when we're in a closure situation 

and haven't got that many hours left, we'll have to move on.  

We'll just have to get the facts out to the people and then they 

make up their mind. 

 

Like pretty near everything we say, you just contradict it in 

your own way.  I think maybe you believe it yourself.  But 

somebody . . . Either you're trying to fool the public or else 

somebody's giving you improper information.  You can read 

the paper yourself on that one statement about whether the 

mandate of those members were financially pressured.  Well 

you can read that in the paper. That came out in the paper.  And 

I think the members that were on the committee ought to know, 

and some of those members on that committee have told us so. 

 

So anyway, I want to ask you, in your words and nobody else's, 

in your words, Mr. Minister, as Minister of Agriculture and 

responsible for the GRIP program, I want you to tell me in your 

words: where did you see moral hazards in the 1991 GRIP 

program that farmers could take advantage of, and how many 

farmers do you think were cheating and taking advantage of a 

moral hazard?  What do you call a moral hazard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wish the member 

opposite had been here when I answered this question before, 

but for his benefit and for those who may not have been 

listening then who are now, the moral hazard is a term that was 

not coined by me.  It's a term that was used in the committee 

report.  For me the term moral hazard refers to the program.  It 

refers to the program which directs people to make decisions 

that they would not normally make. 

 

We discussed at some length this morning as a result of some 

numbers given by the member from Kindersley with respect to 

program coverage with a farmer growing durum.  Under the 

old program, durum was guaranteed at $4.56 a bushel last year; 

$4.56 a bushel as a result of the design that the members 

opposite agreed to when they signed the federal-provincial 

agreement.  The $4.56 a bushel represented the 15-year average 

price. 

 

The wheat price, the hard red spring wheat price, was $4.15 a 

bushel.  So while there was a 37 cent or 41 cent spread, 

whatever it is, on the program coverage for those two grains, 

the market had durum 50 cents a bushel less than wheat.  So 

that a farmer making a good management decision would make 

the decision to grow durum in the face of those facts, because if 

he was trying to maximize his or her return on the farm, that 

would make some sense. 

 

Now some farmers wouldn't do it because it wouldn't fit their 

rotation.  And some farmers wouldn't do it for other reasons, 

because they didn't want to grow durum. But the program in 

fact gives a signal different from the market-place. 

 

What the committee said was that you can't have a 

program where the program has moral hazard.  It's not farmers 

who have moral hazard, it's the program that has moral hazard.  

Farmers are good and ethical people.  They will respond to the 

circumstances that they find themselves in and they will 

produce according to the circumstances that we design around 

them. 

 

If we require them to respond to that kind of a signal, then they 

are left in a quandary, because if they want to maximize their 

returns they may say, well government knows best.  If 

government says durum's going to be worth 4.56 a bushel, I 

guess I better grow it because that seems to make sense even 

though the market might have been at $2.  So that is an 

inherent hazard in the old program and the members of the 

committee said it had to be corrected. They called it the crop 

selection difficulty. 

 

The other difficulty in the program was that farmers under the 

old program could, under most circumstances, receive the same 

compensation for a 5-bushel crop as they would for a 40-bushel 

crop.  Now the members opposite have sometimes said, well 

that's fair.  Well there is fairness in it in a way, because it says 

no matter what circumstances befall you, you have one level of 

income. 

 

But I ask the members opposite, if I'm a farmer and I'm trying 

to decide whether to spend $11 an acre on an input of one sort 

or another, whether it be a biological herbicide or a pesticide or 

some other crop input, maybe just more tillage or that kind of 

activity, or whether to trade in my old equipment on equipment 

that is better for soil conservation -- I ask myself, if as a result 

of changing my farming practices and getting a better yield, 

can I pay for the improvements I make.  Well most farmers and 

and most business people would like to believe that if they do 

better and they invest something in doing better, that they can 

get some additional compensation for it. 

 

Well under the old program, that was virtually impossible 

because the minute you had more than average production, that 

extra was taken away from your compensation.  Now the 

Alberta and the Manitoba governments recognized that error in 

the program before it was ever implemented.  The members 

opposite did not. 

 

The review committee looked at the difficulty and they looked 

at the solutions that had been implemented in Manitoba and 

Alberta and they recommended a different kind of solution.  

And I respected their opinion.  They had the free choice of 

looking at the Alberta or the Manitoba solution -- which they 

did not do.  They looked at it but didn't accept it -- or looking at 

any other solution. 

 

And the recommendation they brought forward was, as I read 

this morning, a program that should be provided as separate 

crop insurance and revenue insurance programs, a program 

under which the crop insurance program should operate as it 

was prior to 1991.  And they recommended that the crop 

insurance price be set at the same level as the market price used 

in the revenue insurance program.  They recommended after 

these observations that the revenue insurance program should 

operate more as a deficiency payment type program. 
 

I should add, there was one other observation these members 

made about the program that you might want to 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

call moral hazard -- but they didn't describe it as such within 

the program -- that was the high cost of administration of the 

program, the cost of a program where bins had to be measured 

once or twice in a cycle, the inaccuracy that can lead to 

program costs from bin measurement.  That was their 

contention.  That when you measure bins and the bin 

measurement becomes the final determination of what the yield 

was, without going to elevator records, when the bin 

measurement becomes the final determination, that there is 

great room for error.  There is also a great cost in 

administration sending people around to measure every bin in 

the province twice a year.  So that was another difficulty. 

 

So their recommendation was: 

 

 that no offsets between price and yield should be included in 

the revenue insurance program; 

 

 (They recommended) that both crop insurance and revenue 

insurance should reflect the management abilities of 

individual farmers in determining coverage and payments; 

and 

 

 (they recommended) that only the revised program be offered 

to farmers in 1992, (i.e. current GRIP should not be 

continued as an option to farmers). 

 

February 11, 1992, signed by: Barry Senft, Chairman; Brian 

Perkins, cattle feeders; Roy Piper, UGG (United Grain 

Growers Limited); Lloyd Johns, appointed by the minister; 

Brett Meinert, soil conservation association; Gordon Cresswell 

-- I think canola growers, was it? -- western wheat growers; 

Hartley Furtan from the university; Keith Hayward from the 

Crop Insurance Corporation; Leonard Kehrig from the canola 

growers; and Sinclair Harrison from SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities). 

 

Attached to this report, and sharing the analysis in many 

respects, was a minority report submitted by Gil Pedersen and 

Nettie Wiebe, one of my appointments and one from the NFU 

(National Farmers Union).  The minority report agreed with 

separating the programs.  The minority report offered a 

different solution for the payment of the revenue insurance. 

 

But many of the observations of the existing program were 

shared by all of the members, including those who signed the 

minority report.  I have to say that the members, with integrity 

and sincerity, listened to farmers, analysed the results of the 

discussion, and brought forward the recommendations that 

have resulted in the program.  And if there are any other 

questions about the program, I'd be pleased to answer them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, your 

colleagues think that you answered right but I don't agree with 

you.  Some of them you did, but most of them you didn't.  Let's 

just discuss more what you call a moral hazard.  A moral 

hazard is what Crop Insurance Corporation calls a moral 

hazard.  Crop Insurance mandate is to farm in a husband-like 

manner.  There's no law any place in this world that says how a 

farmer has to farm.  There's no one says they have to.  And you 

or 

nobody else can dictate whether the person wants to put on 

fertilizers, chemicals, or whatever.  And if that farmer out there 

wants to put fertilizer on, he can.  But you're saying that: make 

the decision that he would not normally make.  And so when 

someone didn't fertilize in 1991, and so you can say, well gee, 

that's a moral hazard; he didn't put fertilizer on. 

 

Just to give you an example, Mr. Minister, this is all coffee 

shop talk and farmer talk and elevator talk, because we . . . 

Let's just give you this example.  There was meetings put on by 

your department in Craik and Davidson and Findlater last 

spring.  And a farmer stood up -- and I forget whether it was 

the town of Davidson or the town of Craik.  It was one of those 

meetings on the same day -- and the question was asked at one 

of those meetings, that there's five or six adjusters in this 

meeting and there's two or three agents.  Can they, without 

mentioning any names, tell us if they thought there was a moral 

hazard in this whole district.  That's district 12. They covered a 

big district.  That went from Chamberlain to Dundurn -- a big 

area. 

 

And not one comment from any of the adjusters or the agents 

until another farmer got up and says, well I'm one; I'm the 

moral hazard.  Because under the new program, he said, under 

the new program I did not put fertilizer on this year.  I didn't 

put fertilizer on in 1992.  So nobody seemed to say anything 

for a minute.  But the man that asked the first question was his 

neighbour, and he just yelped it out and made this man look 

foolish.  Oh, come on now, you told me this spring you didn't 

put fertilizer on because wheat was $2.15 a bushel. 

 

A lot of people, when they think the price of wheat is going to 

be two or two and a half dollars a bushel and you're short of 

money, or even if you got money, you think it's a poor risk at 

the price of wheat, that's the reason why so many people didn't 

put fertilizer on last spring. 

 

But this spring there was more fertilizer went on.  I will admit 

that.  But it wasn't the 1992 that caused that.  Because the 

general talk seemed to get throughout this province of 

Saskatchewan, well I don't think I'll even bother putting on the 

1992 GRIP.  I guess I should have protection.  And some 

would say, the banker makes me put it on.  But really they 

think the price of wheat is going to be three and a half and four 

dollars a bushel.  That's why the fertilizer went on. 

 

My youngest son was guilty of that.  They run out of fertilizer 

in the Wheat Pool in Craik.  He was hauling fertilizer like crazy 

out of Moose Jaw because he thought wheat was going to be $4 

a bushel.  I advised him, I said I wouldn't be doing it if I were 

you.  You're just spending extra money that you're not going to 

get a return from.  It was nothing to do whether it was '91 or '92 

GRIP, Mr. Minister. 

 

Then you made the comment about premiums per acre under 

the '91 or '92 GRIP -- is the farmer's premium higher.  Oh, 

that's the question I wanted to ask you.  You didn't comment on 

it.  That's the next question I want to ask you.  Is the farmer's 

premium, the client's premium higher under the '92 GRIP than 

it was under the '91 GRIP per acre for the same grain for the 

revenue insurance? 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- To answer the technical question, and I'm 

sure he wants me to answer some of the others as well -- the 

member opposite -- as the member opposite is aware, last year 

the federal government, in holding a carrot out with one hand 

while holding a gun relative to federal support with the other, 

paid 25 per cent of the farmer premiums for the program.  So 

there was a 25 per cent premium increase across the board.  

Well there was actually a 33 per cent premium increase across 

the board because you added the 25 per cent the federal 

government paid and put it over the 75 per cent the farmer 

paid, times a hundred, gives you 33 per cent increase in 

premiums for that reason alone. 

 

There were also increases in premiums resulting from some 

calculation changes by the federal government, and there were 

also some premium increases resulting from the inclusion in 

the yield records of farmers of some drought and short crop 

situations.  So there was a substantial premium increase in 

Saskatchewan this year, which continues to be the cause of 

farmers saying that GRIP is too expensive and delivers 

inadequate support.  The fact is that had the 1991 program been 

translated into the 1992, the premiums would have been even 

higher. 

 

Now with respect to the discussions around moral hazard.  The 

member opposite -- and I need to enter it into the record one 

more time -- the member opposite continues to describe 

farmers as having moral hazard.  And the fact is that it is not 

farmers who have moral hazard, it is the program that has 

moral hazard. 

 

And the member opposite talks about farming practices.  I 

agree absolutely that some farmers want to be organic farmers 

and they run their operations in a particular fashion.  And they 

have a certain set of costs that are different from the kind of 

costs that a different farmer has. 

 

The object of good farm programming is not to direct what 

kind of farming practices people have.  They should make them 

on the basis of how they believe they should farm.  And in my 

comments earlier I had made that quite clear that in fact it is 

only . . . there ought to be the opportunity that if I decide to 

invest in extra input for my crop I ought to be able to expect a 

return from spending the extra money or the extra effort or 

buying a different piece of equipment that would result in 

better cropping or better results in my farm. 

 

The Saskatchewan farmers have become the most efficient, the 

most adaptive farmers in the world based on that premise.  

They believe that if they work hard and if they do the best job 

they can that they will somehow be compensated for it. 

 

The pioneer spirit of working hard and building the province 

and building the community comes from that kind of belief in 

the farmers of this province.  But all of a sudden the members 

opposite created a program where it didn't matter what you did, 

you got the same return.  Well that was the subject of very, 

very many concerns, and I don't think there's anybody in 

Saskatchewan that quarrels with the need to have changed that.  

So I needed 

to make that clear. 

 

Now with respect to what actually happened in the province, 

the member opposite says it was the belief that wheat was 

going to go to $3 or $4 and therefore people produced more 

grain.  Well wheat at $4 wouldn't have done anybody a hoot of 

good yet, in terms of increasing the personal incomes.  The 

reality is that people in Alberta would have had the same 

beliefs as people in Saskatchewan with respect to what crop 

prices were going to be. And in Alberta the increase in input 

use was 1 per cent.  In Saskatchewan the increase in input use 

was 22 per cent.  Now I'm not trying to flog input sales. I'm 

simply saying that the program allowed farmers to make the 

decisions based on what they believe they should produce and 

how they believe they should farm.  And the results are 

apparent from some of the evidence that's coming forward. 

 

I think those are all the questions the member asked, and I'll 

look forward to the next series. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You said . . . well just to comment on the 

moral hazards and we'll drop that for now, Mr. Minister.  I 

asked you about the 1991 moral hazards, but if I wanted to take 

the time and we can both go through it, and the same moral 

hazards are still there for 1992 GRIP.  The farmers can still do 

what they want. 

 

They can still . . . In my area the people last year sowed pretty 

near every grain you can think of.  On our farm there was 

canola planted, there was spring wheat planted, and there was 

barley planted.  That's mainly what we plant.  But this year, 

under the 1992, we couldn't afford to put any barley in at all 

because the prices were so low on the barley coverage on crop 

insurance.  That was . . . sorry, Mr. Minister, the crop insurance 

coverage was so low on barley.  So it's still there; it hasn't 

changed much. 

 

Like last year, you said that it was all the same regardless, that 

you would collect.  If you got zero bushels an acre, 20 or 30 

bushels an acre, you'd all collect the same.  Well on the 

revenues this time, for goodness sake, what do you think 

you've got?  Every meeting you held, every example that . . . 

whatever your rate's going be, you would get exactly the same 

for oats and for lentils and for canola and for wheat and durum. 

 

In my area the example was $30 an acre, and it didn't make any 

difference if you got zero or 50 bushels an acre, you got the 

same.  So don't try to say that that isn't . . . that's a socialist way 

of thinking, that way, if I ever heard of anything in my life. 

 

The revenue side, you separate it from crop insurance and 

you've got a revenue plan, and all what your revenue plan is, is 

just whether you're going to decide what the price of wheat's 

going be.  You're just going to have to flip a coin and decide 

whether the price of wheat's going to be low or high.  So that's 

really all your program is. 

 

And as I said before, I did put on the 1992 GRIP because it's 

better than nothing.  It's going to pay something.  Because I 

didn't believe the price of wheat was going to go to $4 bushel.  

If I had've had insight and known for 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

sure, why would I carry it?  Why wouldn't any farmer if they 

figured the price of wheat. I pleaded with my neighbours, for 

goodness' sakes, don't drop it, because you'll collect for sure. 

On anything you put in you'll get something as long as the 

price of wheat and the price of canola stays at whatever the 

level is. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have an example here.  You told me the other 

day that you could guarantee exactly what a person's going to 

get out of the revenue insurance.  I'm going to give you an 

example.  We're going to use this farmer and we're just going 

to talk about one acre -- not the thousand-acre farmer -- one 

acre.  And his potential over the long term, he's covered for 30 

bushels an acre.  So in the 1991 GRIP at 4.15 a bushel at 30 

bushels an acre, it would be $124.50 an acre.  Durum, I believe 

it was 4.55 -- I'm just doing this by memory -- he'd get $136.50 

on durum. 

 

So you were saying that, why wouldn't people grow durum last 

year.  Well on our farm we've always grown half durum.  Our 

area grows a lot of durum wheat.  And last year we didn't 

because that other $10 an acre in there was taken up in 

premiums.  So we just . . . and durum doesn't grow quite as 

good as spring wheat so we didn't.  We sowed all spring wheat.  

So that's not right that people went for the 4.55, because the 

premium was high on the durum, and you know that. 

 

And so the farmer will receive $124.50 an acre, guaranteed 

some way or another.  And here's the whole concept that we're 

into here.  Because of the GATT (General Agreement on 

Tariffs and Trade) agreements we have in this country and 

from all we get for a price of wheat in Canada is we have to 

depend on a market that's not very stable. We have to have 

United States, Europe, or Russia. They have to depend on them 

for a crop failure for us to have our wheat fluctuate up and 

down a little bit. 

 

We get a good crop, it goes up maybe a buck.  With poor crops, 

she goes down.  So that's not a very good market, and you 

know that.  That's what the problem we got.  I think we all 

agree on that, that we've got stabilized farming.  And so that's 

what this plan was. 

 

The plan was starting to work on two years prior to coming out.  

And some of your officials would be working on that plan.  It 

was to try to get a guarantee for farmers so they know where 

they're at.  And what this program has done is taken that away 

from them.  They had to know to hang on and make deals and 

pay their bills and try to make deals to refinance their farms. 

They needed to have some guarantee like the other countries, 

even though I don't like that.  I wish we didn't have to go that 

method.  But that was the idea of the 1991 GRIP, to give a 

farmer a guarantee. 

 

Now in the 1992 GRIP, we'll take that same example.  In 1992 

he's got 30 bushels to the acre and the market price right now is 

$2.45 a bushel.  That's what it's set at, roughly, in my area.  

And that gives him $73.50 a bushel and $30 an acre is what 

they're saying in my area, unless you can come up with 

something different.  That's the example they use for district 

12, was $30 an acre from GRIP. 

Now that was to give a total of $103.50 an acre.  Now that's a 

shortfall from last year for $21 an acre.  These aren't my 

figures.  The figures for '91 were the actual -- they were the 

actual.  Because that's what the contract would be at 30 bushels 

an acre at such and such.  Now I had farmers in my area go as 

high as $157 an acre; Regina Plains, we know there were some 

people that . . . (inaudible) . . . 45 and 50 bushel an acre and 

they got big guarantees.  We had farmers that were naturally 

much lower than that. 

 

But that's the example they use because that's the example that 

the department used.  So for 1991 GRIP, $124.50 on spring 

wheat is what he was guaranteed . . . (inaudible) . . . from the 

market-place in GRIP he knew that he had a bankable figure of 

124.50.  Now they're telling us, your department said that that 

farmer would get $103.50 an acre because that's the figure they 

use -- 30 bucks an acre.  Now that's a shortfall of 21. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you agree with that $30 an acre?  Is it 

more or less?  Or do you have the magic figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the analysis that is lacking 

there is the fact that 1991 GRIP applied in 1992 would have 

been paid out at $3.86 a bushel not at $4.15 a bushel.  So that 

would substantially reduce the 1991 estimate for 1992. 

 

Farmers also experienced serious premium rate increases in 

1992, which makes it more difficult again.  The difficulty with 

the GRIP program, as I said earlier, is that under the formula 

agreed to by the members opposite the level of support slides 

annually because of the 15-year moving average and the prices 

have been very, very low in falling. 

 

Now the member was talking a few minutes ago about the 

stability of income and the difference between last year's 

program and this year's program.  Last year's program, as you 

say and as the committee observed, gave you a specified level 

of support that was your bottom but then also was virtually 

your cap. 

 

So a farmer could not benefit from improving his or her 

production practices last year.  The national GRIP committee, 

in their most recent meeting on July 7, said, recognizing this 

problem, they said: 

 

 (It states) the goal of a highly individualized program which 

is fully predictable for producers, (and which) is crop specific 

and maintains full price-yield offsets at the individual level, 

is in direct conflict with the objectives of maximizing the 

level of market responsiveness and minimizing the potential 

for moral hazard and program abuse. 

 

And as they give direction towards changing programs across 

the country, they say that the programs need to go in the 

direction that ours has gone.  When you compared last year's 

program and tried to say that last year and this year is the same 

in terms of the revenue insurance payment, they are . . . One of 

the distinguishing differences between last year and this year is 

that last year a farmer could lose their revenue insurance 

benefits by 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

having above-average yields. 

 

It's exactly the fact that contributes to the fact that you end up 

with the same return for a 5-bushel crop as a 40-bushel crop.  

Because up to your individual average, you're assured of the 

minimum return.  From your individual average and up, every 

time you get another bushel of grain sold and get the return 

from that, it comes off the program payment.  That's how you 

achieve this very flat income response. 

 

Well when you're comparing last year's program to this year's 

program, one of the features that's focused on is clearly the 

bottom line.  What could happen in the extreme circumstance?  

And that's an important consideration.  Because in the event of 

drought, where a farmer has had nothing to do with having a 

below-average yield, farmers can be hurt.  It's a hurt that 

farmers have been prepared to take over the years, but it's a 

hurt that farmers cannot take now because of the income 

shortfall that has been going on with the fact that the federal 

government has not made their payments to farmers for third 

line of defence. 

 

(2130) 

 

And farmers accepted the risk attached to 70 per cent crop 

insurance coverage from 1962 to 1990.  And they dealt with 

the ups and downs of their production as a result of that.  Why 

then do they have difficulty dealing with an 80 per cent 

production now? 

 

Well the reason is that they are suffering from the income 

shortfalls that have resulted from international trade 

circumstances that they are not being adequately compensated 

for.  And it's for that reason that we have called on the federal 

government to put in place a disaster-relief package and why 

our officials are going to be meeting with federal officials to 

continue to negotiate on that basis, that in fact farmers should 

have coverage for that loss that is no fault of their own and we 

will continue to work for that.  We believe that that's third line 

of defence programming.  And we'll continue to negotiate with 

the federal government to make that point.  We will have full 

discussions and hopefully we can arrive at some agreement. 

 

But the fact is that under the new program . . . While under the 

old program you had the same return whether you had a 

5-bushel crop or a 40-bushel crop, under the new program that 

bottom line that I described could be, in the extreme 

circumstance, 20 per cent lower.  But the farmer also has the 

potential for an income that breaks that cap that was on it from 

last year.  And when a farmer produces above average, a 

farmer can be compensated for producing above average so 

that they can continue to engage in farming practices that result 

in production above average and continue to pay them back for 

the investment they make in order to do that. 

 

The committee believes that's a sound principle. I think most 

business people in Saskatchewan believe it's a sound principle. 

I think most working people believe it's a sound principle -- 

that if you work hard and you do well, you should be able to 

receive some compensation for it. 

I don't know if I've answered all of the questions the member 

asked, but if not, I'm sure he will remind me and I will answer 

him in the next series. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't think 

you really understand what the farmers in Saskatchewan want, 

and what they have to have to survive.  You do not understand.  

By your answers all day today, you don't understand. 

 

The 1991 GRIP guaranteed them the money.  Now many 

people were quite happy to pay a premium if they 

over-produced.  Why did so many people have to pay a 

premium last year?  Because they over-produced.  But they had 

the money.  My colleague just said to me here that he got some 

stubble covered for 12 bushels per acre, and he got 40 bushels 

to the acre.  He had the money.  Your program is for the rich.  

And I can't believe that.  Socialists always design programs for 

the poor, but you have designed programs for the rich and said: 

to heck with the poor.  That's what you've done. 

 

Now I give you the scenario of 124.50 an acre and a 30-bushel 

crop guaranteed last year for spring wheat, and I give you the 

same scenario under this program, and he's going to be $21 an 

acre short.  But now, that's at 30 bushels an acre.  Let's take 

that scenario, Mr. Minister, if he gets zero bushels an acre and 

the price of wheat goes up, and you wouldn't pay him a thin 

dime, not a thin dime.  That's what the worry is out there.  

What if the price of wheat had've went up? 

 

It may be for . . . We won't know until January of '94.  The 

farmers will not know in this province what they got for 

bankable under your program until January of '94 when they 

come out with a final wheat price, with the final payment on 

the 1992-93 crop year and you know that quite well.  There's 

no guarantee, that's why it's not bankable.  The only thing is 

bankable here is the crop insurance portion.  Nobody in their 

right mind, a lender, would lend on . . . oh if maybe if you 

didn't need the money to start with they might give you 10 

bucks an acre of your 30.  But somebody that's desperate and 

having a hard time to borrow money, he's got a problem here. 

 

Now my colleagues are going to ask some questions, but I'm 

going to ask you one last question.  Did you make a mistake 

when you neglected to inform the farmers pertaining to a 

change in their GRIP '91 program, in writing, by March 15?  

Did you make a mistake, Mr. Minister, or did you not?  And I 

just want one response to that and then I'm through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The farmers were informed of the program 

changes on March 13, 1992, which was the earliest date that 

they could have been informed, because that was the date when 

the discussions with the federal government ended after a 

month's delay.  Now the member opposite has been fed a few 

lines by his friends to say, you should say this is a program for 

the rich.  Well I can assure the member opposite that there are 

no rich farmers in Saskatchewan resulting from the level of 

support they received through these programs. 

 

Accepting that the program that the members opposite 

designed last year had a sliding rate of return that began at 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

$4.15 a bushel last year and that was destined to be $3.86 this 

year by the moving average price, that was a major concern for 

farmers, that you can't have a program where the support 

disappears on you year after year after year.  That's what 

farmers were concerned about.  We have not been able to fix 

that.  But the fact is that the federal government did agree to 

pay special needs when the second line programming was 

inadequate, and we will continue to push the federal 

government to establish the triggering mechanism when that 

money is paid. 

 

The unfortunate thing is, the triggering mechanisms for farm 

payments have traditionally been election campaigns.  Well 

that's unfortunate because it creates, in the minds of the public, 

a very serious distrust for farmers because they believe that 

they don't need the money.  They believe that it's only a pay-off 

at election time. 

 

Well what we need to do is to establish programs that deliver 

money predictably and the farmers were assured that the 

federal government would provide program funding . . . that 

the federal government's third line of defence committee has 

repeatedly tried to establish a triggering mechanism, the federal 

government's own committee, so that farmers would know 

what circumstances would trigger support. 

 

The fact is the federal government continues to avoid making 

that commitment.  We have at the last ministers' meeting put a 

committee together.  There was a report brought forward from 

Ontario.  We are making some progress. We got it back on the 

table at least. 

 

But the discussion dithers on and on and on.  The farmers are 

frustrated by anything . . . It's when provinces don't and 

governments don't want to make a commitment to something 

and they put it into some stew that goes on for ever. 

 

Well farmers need money now.  They need a triggering 

mechanism and we have encouraged the federal government to 

recognize that in this case drought ought to be a triggering 

mechanism.  And we're going to push for that because there 

hasn't been another triggering mechanism established. 

 

The member talked about funding for farmers and income for 

farmers.  And I have said it repeatedly today, that there are 

serious income concerns for farmers.  And those concerns are 

based on the fact that the program that was designed by the 

members opposite was seriously flawed and cost too much and 

delivered inadequate support.  And as I've said a number of 

times and I will say again, you can't make a silk purse out of a 

sow's ear. 

 

This program needs to be seriously reviewed or dumped, and 

something put in place for farmers that makes good sense for 

them.  Saskatchewan farmers get dragged into these kinds of 

programs.  Canadian farmers get dragged into these kinds of 

programs, while our major competitors, even those who sign 

agreements with us and say they will not interfere with our 

markets by using their export programs to interfere with our 

markets -- those farmers are supported by their federal treasury.  

They don't have to pay for those programs.  Their federal 

treasury pays for those programs.  It happens in the United 

States.  It happens in the European Community. 

 

We have an agreement with our friends in the United States 

that says they shouldn't use their export enhancement program 

in markets that we are trying to access.  And yet, in a news 

release last week it said that Canadian farmers have suffered a 

loss of $1.6 billion as a result of the use of the American export 

enhancement program over the last three years.  And they 

anticipate farmers in Canada losing an additional $1.5 billion 

over the next three years. 

 

Well farmers have put into their own program support, millions 

and millions of dollars.  And the provinces have met their 

commitment to the programs.  And we're now asking the 

federal government to meet their commitments because that 

was the deal, and that's what farmers need if you really are 

seriously concerned about that. 

 

I think you members opposite ought to be reminded that we put 

a motion forward in this House early in the session calling on 

the federal government to pay out the third line of defence 

payments, and the members opposite voted against it. 

 

And then they pretend to be interested in the well-being of 

farmers.  They continually come to the defence of their federal 

counterparts and say no, no.  You shouldn't have to bother.  

Leave it to the Saskatchewan taxpayers.  Leave it to the 

Saskatchewan farmers.  Let them suffer in silence here. 

 

Well that's not good enough for Saskatchewan people.  And we 

will continue to press the federal government to make those 

payments. 

 

But with that, I would like to wait for further questions from 

the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we've had a good exchange of 

questions here tonight on the . . . when I started at 8 o'clock.  

That will soon be two hours.  Mr. Minister, certainly I 

expressed my views a couple of times quite strongly.  And then 

we got down to answering questions.  But that was only 

technical questions about the GRIP program -- '91 and '92. 

 

When we get right to the meat of it now -- and that's why we're 

here -- right to the meat of it, I asked you a question very 

clearly.  I asked you very sincerely.  And you thought that I 

was so nave that you could give a political speech and I would 

forget what I asked you. 

 

Now I asked you: would we be here presenting this Bill, Bill 

87, about having that there March 15 part void from our life, if 

you had've sent out a letter prior to March 15.  If you had've 

sent a letter out March 15, would we be here, Mr. Minister? 

 

Just a yes or no answer.  No rhetoric.  No political speech.  

Answer that to the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Would we be here, would we be in closure, would we be in all 

this impasse we've had, if you hadn't have blundered and sent 

that letter out to the farmers on March 15? 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

Because I think, Mr. Minister, you're trying to get away with 

that little news announcement on the 13th.  If that was good 

enough you wouldn't have needed this Bill.  Now tell me, Mr. 

Minister, with no rhetoric, if you had've sent the letter out -- 

your department -- would we be here discussing this Bill in this 

manner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I have to answer this question very 

technically.  If it were not for the blundering of the members 

opposite -- the blundering which causes them to try to interpret 

a very fouled-up construction of a program last year in the 

legislation, that tries to interpret it as saying something 

specific, and then holding up a whole legislative session since 

June 10 on the pretence that this deadline they talk about means 

something -- if it was not for that kind of blundering by the 

members opposite, we would not be here, I assure you. 

 

The members opposite have tried to make a case out of a fact 

growing out of the legislative blunder they made last year.  

They have tried to pretend that this is significant to anybody.  

Farmers in Saskatchewan know that the program was 

announced on March 13.  And the purpose of that 

announcement was to inform them of changes -- changes that 

were explained to them in greater detail over a period of time 

through the crop insurance agents and through other 

information.  Farmers have had more than adequate 

information to understand the program.  And surely that's the 

reason for provision of notice. 

 

But let me get back specifically to the technical point the 

member raises with respect to the date.  We announced the 

changes on March 13 because that was the earliest we could 

announce them.  What constitutes legal notice is a question that 

is difficult to answer because we don't know what legally we 

were giving notice of, because the members opposite created a 

contract that was so ill-defined, and that we have explained 

several times here today that it would be very difficult to 

determine what one was giving notice of and what the required 

procedure for them giving notice of that would be; because the 

contract, the contract was only in the verbal communication 

between members and farmers. The only description of the 

program was verbal until May 1 when the pamphlet on which it 

says . . . the pamphlet which is here somewhere, on which it 

says revenue insurance contract -- this pamphlet was sent out. 

 

So there is a piece of paper the farmers signed, which looks 

like this, that the member from Thunder Creek was waving 

around before.  And there is a pamphlet that was sent out on 

May 1, six weeks after March 15, this pamphlet was sent out.  

Changes continued to be made in the mean time.  The members 

opposite need to stop playing games with this. 

 

There was such a misconstruction of what the program was, 

such an undefined  construction of what the program was, that 

we gave notice but who knows whether that kind of notice is 

legal when we didn't know what it was we were giving notice 

of?  The fact is that it is a relatively insignificant point in the 

lives of farmers. 

 

(2145) 

 

What they needed to know is what the programs were 

and having adequate time to choose and make their decisions 

about the program.  And they have done that and farmers 

recognize that.  And yet the members opposite have spent the 

money of the taxpayers holding up the legislature.  They have 

tried to make great glory out of this simple point around a 

deadline, the March 15 deadline, that we followed by making 

our announcement, but that they repeatedly ignored in the years 

leading up to the new GRIP program but also ignored in the 

year of the implementation of the GRIP program.  I fail to 

understand how that can be described as anything other than 

hypocrisy. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, it's too bad you can't 

understand this.  Somebody that's not understanding it, that's 

going to lose their job over it, should be trying to figure it out.  

Because I will say that there is no way that this Premier will 

ever leave a blundering Minister of Agriculture that brought us 

into this mess in this position. 

 

And I ask you for the last time, and then I'll let my colleagues 

ask you and ask you and ask you: would we be here with a Bill 

with that void part of the contract, that part -- we might have 

had a GRIP Bill -- but would we be here discussing this terrible 

retroactivity of the void part of the contract, if you had've made 

the announcement like you did on the 13th and then got the 

letter out on the 15th, would that have protected you and you 

wouldn't have had to be here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a question that only 

the members opposite could answer, because had they not 

chosen to make noise around that point because they felt that 

was one that they wanted to make noise about, they could have 

made noise about some other point that they wanted to make 

noise about . . . I think that they were determined to make noise 

about something, and far be it for me to judge what it would 

have been they would have made noise about. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

House Leader and the Minister of Economic Development said 

in the Leader-Post on June 19, he said: 

 

 He (Lingenfelter) wouldn't commit to the ultimate removal of 

a clause that retroactively determines farmers received proper 

noticed of the GRIP changes. 

 

Would you make a comment about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Excuse me.  It's not a quote I've heard 

before.  I will repeat what I think you've said, and if it's 

accurate, I will answer it.  You say the quote said the House 

Leader indicated in the paper that he would not commit to 

removing a clause that required notice, or he would not commit 

to not removing a clause that required notice? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- 

 

 He (Lingenfelter) (quoting the Leader-Post June 19) wouldn't 

commit to the ultimate removal of a clause that retroactively 

determines farmers received proper notice of the GRIP 

changes. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well it seems to me that that quote says 

very little other than not committing to the final outcome of the 

legislative changes.  The legislative changes that have in fact 

been implemented are the ones that removed the requirement 

for notice.  They do not indicate that the notice was given 

retroactively.  What the legislation now provides is that it 

removes the requirement for notice from the 1991 contract. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, another quote from the Leader-

Post: 

 

 NDP House leader Dwain Lingenfelter admitted Friday the 

bill covers up for the fact the government missed the March 

15 deadline to notify farmers about changes to the GRIP 

program. 

 

Would you comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes I will.  I thought I had already several 

times, but maybe you will understand the answer if I do it one 

more time. 

 

The requirement for notice is very undefined in terms of what it 

is.  We gave notice on March 13, the earliest point at which we 

could, at a press conference, of the changes to GRIP.  The 

dilemma that one faces is that nowhere is adequate notice 

described.  Nowhere is it described what adequate notice is, nor 

can one anywhere in the construction of the 1991 program 

determine exactly what the contract is, and therefore it is very 

difficult to determine what a change to the contract is because 

there was no definition to the GRIP program contract in 1991. 

 

We have gone through this several times but I will go through 

it one more time.  In the 1991 year the members opposite began 

discussions of a program on March 1.  Producers indicated 

their willingness to participate by signing on a piece of paper 

that the member from Thunder Creek was waving around some 

time before.  The government members of the time went on a 

crusade across the province, a series of meetings at which they 

described the program as they believed it to be.  Then on a 

daily basis they made changes so however many teams they 

had out talking to farmers were responding late to changes on 

an ongoing basis. 

 

I know of farmers who went to three or four meetings in order 

to try and find out what the latest story was. And so clearly 

many farmers -- most farmers -- would not have had a clear 

understanding of what the contract was.  That went on well 

after March 15 when the members opposite believe there 

should have been a contractual commitment.  It went on . . . 

The first piece of paper that showed up showed up on May 1, 

I'm told, when a pamphlet which is called the revenue 

insurance contract showed up. 

 

But that's not the only piece of paper that describes program 

features.  There is another one that describes program features 

that talks about safety net programs.  So if one combines this 

pamphlet and this pamphlet, and the descriptions of crop 

insurance agents and the descriptions of cabinet ministers on 

parade across the province, and the description of Crop 

Insurance employees -- if one combines all those things one 

can 

possibly calculate what one farmer believes the program 

contract is.  But I can guarantee you at the end of that process it 

will be different for every farmer in Saskatchewan.  There is an 

infinite combination of things that people would believe their 

contract was. 

 

Now that would be fine if in the legislation somebody had 

described what it really was.  But in the legislation it wasn't 

defined what it really was, so there was no definition of what 

the GRIP contract was last year.  So for the members opposite 

to then be critical of the fact that we believed we needed to 

clarify that, and that we needed to clarify the notice provision 

in order to simply do reasonable administration, is an 

interesting contention.  Because I think most reasonable people 

would believe that in the face of that kind of lack of definition 

of what a program is, surely one needs to define it. 

 

So in the new legislation we have defined the 1991 contract as 

being what's in this pamphlet.  It has defined that the notice 

provision from last year is voided so that there is no 

requirement for notice.  But that's all that this legislation does.  

It then goes on to describe the 1992 GRIP program, the 

program that was announced to farmers on March 13, the 

program that farmers had originally up until April 15 to 

respond to, and later to April 30, and later until May 15. And 

eventually they had the right to withdraw from it until July 20. 

 

So farmers clearly know what it was that they were signing up 

for with the new program and what they had the right to 

withdraw from.  Most reasonable people would agree that one 

had to put definition to something that had no definition.  So 

that's what we did.  And we did it in the only way that was 

possible in this legislation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the House Leader said: 

 

 NDP House Leader Dwain Lingenfelter (June 13, Leader-

Post) admitted Friday the bill covers up for the fact the 

government missed a March 15 deadline to notify farmers 

about changes to the GRIP program. 

 

He said it, I didn't.  I'm asking you to comment on it, on 

missing the deadline. 

 

And now I want to ask with that, why did it take two places in 

there to void it?  You didn't do it once, sir.  You did it twice -- 

one's in crop insurance and one's revenue insurance.  Why did 

you do it twice?  Isn't once good enough? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It's my understanding that the crop 

insurance provisions in the contract, in the legislation, are in 

section 3, is it, Part III?  So it's done within crop insurance and 

it's done within revenue insurance.  My understanding is that it 

is because of the fact that those programs were intertwined last 

year that it's required on the crop insurance side now because 

it's impossible to separate the way in which they were 

constructed last year. 

 

With respect to the notice, one more time, you could have 

asked each one of the MLAs (Member of the 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly and each one of the 

cabinet ministers, and you could probably go ask each member 

of the public to decide whether March 13 announcement by 

press conference was adequate notice.  That's the decision that 

somebody else would have to reach. 

 

The fact that I might have an opinion on it and that someone 

else might have an opinion on that is . . . leaves them as 

opinions.  The fact is that it would be impractical to leave the 

interpretation of that question up in the air so that one could go 

on and on and on and on with wrangling around a simple 

technical point, when the only reason the definition of it was 

required was that nobody could define what the contractual 

commitment was, the program was. This was the only option 

for government.  It was the only option that made any sense.  

And it makes sense to everyone except for a few members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, Mr. Minister.  It does not.  I'm not the 

only one with a problem concerning the date.  The court in 

Melville says: 

 

 What is clear from the affidavit of Kramer is that notice was 

not given to the farmers on or before March 15 . . . as 

required by their individual contracts of revenue insurance 

under GRIP . . . 

 

That's exactly what they said.  I didn't say it.  The Minister of 

Economic Development, your House Leader, said you missed 

it.  You goofed.  Admit it.  March 15 has come and gone.  You 

can't restore it.  What do you say to the very fact that you had 

your deputy minister swear an affidavit saying that we'll deem 

it to have been sent out.  My legal contacts say deeming is legal 

fiction -- deeming it to have been sent out prior to March 15.  

The Minister of Economic Development, the member from 

Elphinstone, says we missed it.  Now I want to know whether 

you think we missed it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite has misquoted earlier.  I think he requoted more 

accurately later, the affidavit that was sent.  I believe the 

affidavit is consistent with the interpretation that I gave a few 

minutes ago, that the notice was deemed to have been given.  It 

would be interpreted that the manner in which notice was given 

was notice.  That's what that says and it follows from the fact 

that it is difficult to determine what adequate notice was. 

 

I have explained it now several times that in a contract that was 

not a contract, in a contract that was defined . . . clearly farmers 

had some kind of a contract but nobody knows what it was.  

The members opposite didn't know what it was.  I don't know 

what date the legislation was passed -- the officials here may 

know -- but the legislation when it was passed didn't include 

the definition of the program.  The legislation establishing the 

GRIP program didn't include a definition of the program, of 

what the program was. 

 

(2200) 

 

So if one took the form that the farmers signed and pamphlet A 

and pamphlet B -- pamphlet A having been 

published on May 1 -- and anything that a farmer may have 

been told . . . Now if they happened to go to the first meeting 

before changes 94 and 95 and I suspect up to 120 -- I don't 

know how many changes were finally made -- if a farmer 

happened to go to one meeting and no more and to be told that 

this is the program and that no other information came out until 

May 1, six weeks after the March 15 deadline the members 

opposite talk so much about, I would think it would be 

reasonable to expect that that farmer might believe that what he 

was told at the first meeting was the contract that he was 

entering when he signed the paper.  Because there was no other 

evidence other than what the crop insurance agent might have 

told him or her when they were signing up this piece of paper. 

 

So having such an ill-defined program, having such a 

non-defined program when it is reasonable to believe that any 

farmer being told by a minister of the Crown or by an 

employee of the Crop Insurance Corporation that this is the 

program and because that's the program, you can now decide 

whether you want to sign up for this program or not, I would 

think they would have a right to believe that that was their 

contract. 

 

But nowhere did it say that, nowhere did it say whether it was 

the communication of the crop insurance agent or the 

communication of the minister who went to the meeting or any 

other source that completely defined the nature of the program.  

Therefore the idea of providing notice becomes a very, very 

difficult exercise because what do you tell someone, what do 

you tell someone who believes the program is something that's 

not even written in the piece of paper.  How do you tell them 

that what they understand the contract to be is not true when 

you don't know what it is they believe the contract to be, 

because you don't know what any one of the 150 people that 

were out there talking to them said to them?  That's the point on 

notice, that makes it virtually impossible to respond to in any 

other way than by clarifying what the 1991 contract was, and 

then to define that in fact there was no requirement for notice.  

The requirement for notice is also virtually impossible to 

square with the federal-provincial agreement provisions for 

change.  The federal-provincial agreement can be amended at 

any time and if the federal-provincial agreement is amended, 

then March 15 may have absolutely no relevance to that. 

 

The members opposite demonstrated that they believed there 

was no relevance to the March 15 deadline in the fact that they 

ignored it for all the years crop insurance was in place, and 

they ignored it in the year of the implementation of the new 

program.  And it was for those reasons, it was because there 

were changes made to the crop insurance program in spite of 

the March 15 deadline the members opposite talk about, that it 

is necessary to state once and for all that the provision for 

notice be voided, because one does not know who might come 

forward and say that, I have been harmed or I've been harmed 

or I've been harmed, because the government in 1991 ignored 

the notice provision.  Those are frustrating and continuous 

efforts that will be made in that regard that are fruitless in 

terms of what they accomplish in terms of the program.  So 

what was necessary to do was to define the program. 

 

But I want to say to the members opposite that the issue 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

they continue to raise and the issue around which they've held 

up this House since June 10 is not an issue that anyone other 

than they are concerned about.  And it ought to be clearly 

demonstrated to them by the fact that only 288 people, in the 

whole time that they were out there, 19 days out during the 

bell-ringing, that only 288 people sent in petitions saying that 

they were concerned about it.  The fact is when this 

government engaged in the bell-ringing exercise against your 

SaskEnergy legislation, there were 120,000 petitions that were 

brought forward in response to that.  People were concerned 

about that. 

 

Well I'm not saying farmers are not concerned, but farmers are 

not concerned about that issue.  Farmers are concerned about 

their incomes; farmers are concerned about their ability to 

survive in a world of unfair trading practices, in a world where 

unfair trading practices are even engaged in against an 

agreement that we have with one of our neighbours.  Farmers 

are concerned about the consequences of that on themselves 

and their families, their ability to send their kids to school, their 

ability to make their payments, their ability to replace their 

equipment, their ability to just feel good about themselves and 

the fact that they are getting a reward for what it is they are 

doing. 

 

The federal government, as the members opposite are aware, 

established for themselves that with respect to farm 

programming, there ought to be three lines of defence.  The 

first line of defence is the farmer and the farmer's efforts in 

producing a crop, the farmer's commitment to doing what 

farmers do best: going out and seeding the crop, and using 

production practices that make sense for their operation and 

taking off the crop and looking after it and marketing it in the 

most advantageous way.  That's the first line of defence. 

 

The second line of defence described by the federal 

government was shared-cost programming, the tripartite 

programming where the farmer and the province and the 

federal government would share in the cost of these measures 

and they would provide a block of support. 

 

But the third line of defence that the federal government 

described in their own programming was that for unforeseen 

events, disasters and those kinds of things, that there was the 

need for emergency and disaster relief and the federal 

government would come good for that.  That was described by 

the members opposite, the whole time that the GRIP program 

was being marketed.  That has been described by all 10 

provincial ministers sitting at the table with the federal minister 

in the time that I've been the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And I ask the members opposite to stop trying to say that's not 

so.  I ask the members opposite to join us in calling on the 

federal government to provide this disaster relief, to provide 

this funding for Saskatchewan farmers because it is very clear 

that when Saskatchewan produces one-half of Canada's export 

grains, from only 4 per cent of the tax base, Saskatchewan 

cannot be expected to pick up that cost on the backs of our 

taxpayers and our farmers.  And we ask the members to stop 

playing politics and get involved with getting Saskatchewan 

back on its feet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to quote for you again 

from the affidavit that the deputy minister asked you to sign.  

And it says here: 

 

 I am aware and do verily believe having been advised by the 

Honourable Mr. Wiens that in addition, he intends to 

introduce legislative amendments in the current session of the 

Legislature.  These amendments will include a provision in 

which notice of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have 

been given to Producers by March 15, 1992 as required in 

their individual contracts. 

 

You said it: "as required in their individual contracts."  The 

statement made by the justice says this: what is clear from the 

affidavit of Kramer is that notice was not given -- you had your 

deputy sign it -- "as required in their individual contracts."  I 

didn't say that.  You did. 

 

 These amendments will include a provision in which notice 

of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have been given to 

Producers by March 15, 1992 as required in their individual 

contracts. 

 

There is no doubt that the court has to believe you if you're 

going to say that. 

 

What is clear from the affidavit is that notice was not given to 

the farmers on or before March 15.  I didn't admit it.  You did.  

Your House Leader said the same thing. 

 

As a matter of fact, on June 17, the Leader-Post was asking 

you the question: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 15 

deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee (who you've been quoting 

all the time). 

 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

Now you admit in your signed affidavit, that it is required in 

their individual contracts.  The court says, there it is.  Notice 

was not given.  And in your Bill you throw it out.  In the 

contract.  It's in it -- section 49.  You say specially, twice in the 

Bill, section 49 is gone.  And in it it says any changes in the 

contract shall be mailed.  Any.  Okay? 

 

Now in the affidavit again it says, "as required in their 

individual contracts."  The justice has no choice.  It was an 

admission of an error.  She says this: what is clear from the 

affidavit is that notice was not given.  You said it.  I didn't.  We 

want you to tell us here that you didn't do it.  That's the point 

we're wanting to make. 

 

The member from Arm River asked you the same question.  

You haven't given me that answer yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well if it's your intent to ask me questions 

that I can answer, I will.  If it's your intent to put answers into 

my mouth, I'm sorry, that's something you 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

don't have the capacity to do.  One needs to be careful how one 

interprets comments before one quotes them. 

 

The members opposite have oft quoted the press comment 

where people remain unidentified with respect to what I have 

said about notice.  The comments that I can recall making were 

made publicly at the arena here when there were several 

hundred farmers there, when that was not the answer I gave.  

The answer I gave was that it would be dealt with according to 

whatever mechanisms that needed to be used to deal with the 

issue because it was undefined.  And the answer I've given 

repeatedly today is that is has been undefined. 

 

But the members opposite are willing to accept as gospel things 

that have no identified source.  They are willing to accept as 

gospel stuff that cannot possibly be true.  Because the 

contention that the members opposite have made repeatedly 

with respect to direction from Finance, if you . . . I would 

appreciate if the members would put me in contact with the 

member of the committee who would talk about that, who 

would say that because the only time I met with the committee 

was to talk about . . . when they began their deliberations, to 

just let them know that I appreciated their service and that I 

look forward to their final report. 

 

And I suspect if the committee had any frustration, it was that I 

did not direct them because committees sometimes want to 

know what ministers think.  And it's not my belief that I should 

tell them that.  It's my belief that when I appoint a committee to 

look after something, that they would go out and independently 

here and bring me the best information available -- bring me 

the best recommendations based on what they hear, not on 

what I think.  That's not . . . Because I don't have that kind of 

personal knowledge or wisdom of the industry that I can design 

a program by myself nor would I want to.  That's why one 

appoints these kinds of committees and that's why one tries to 

get broad representation on them. 

 

Now when the member opposite talks about Judge Hunter's 

comments with respect to the judgement, that is not what's in 

the affidavit.  So it ought to made very clear that you ought not 

to represent what is in the affidavit as being what Judge Hunter 

said and her interpretation of what is said in the affidavit.  

Because the affidavit says: 

 

 . . . These amendments will include a provision in which 

notice of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have been 

given to Producers by March 15, 1992 as required in their 

individual contracts. 

 

Judge Hunter interpreted that as meaning that notice had not 

been given.  And that is one of the items under appeal, that in 

fact that's not what was said. 

 

The fact is that this is not the mechanism that was in the end 

used in terms of the correction of this undefined question of 

notice.  The solution that was used was to void the requirement 

for notice in the 1991 contract in the new legislation, to simply 

say that notice was not required. 

 

(2215) 

 

And I have explained I think six or seven times now the 

circumstances under which . . . that define why notice . . . why 

that voiding was done.  The members opposite have also tried 

to interpret that somehow great chunks of the contractual 

obligations have been voided.  That's not so.  The only thing 

that's been voided has been the requirement for notice. 

 

Because under the program that was described by the members 

opposite last year, there was no definition of the program.  The 

crop insurance contract had always been within legislation and 

within regulations described, but the revenue insurance 

program, the GRIP program, had not.  So there is no one that 

could tell you what the 1991 contractual commitments were, 

because there was no paper out on the subject until May 1, six 

weeks after the March 15 deadline the members opposite 

continually come back to. 

 

So I want to make it clear one more time that the issue of 

dealing with that notice was as a result of the inaccuracy and 

the carelessness that the members opposite engaged in last year 

in their hurry to prepare some kind of farm programming in 

preparation for a spring election; a hurry which cost the 

province of Saskatchewan $157 million, that it did not used to 

cost the province of Saskatchewan for farm programming, to 

get something in place quickly for an election -- a strategy used 

by the members opposite on a number of occasions where they 

made commitments for political visibility that cost the province 

dearly.  And this is another one that cost the province and the 

farmers dearly.  And not only did it cost us, but it was so 

carelessly constructed that it needed to be redefined in accurate 

legislation this year. 

 

And as I said before, beyond the members sitting opposite, 

there is no one that has a concern about this.  What the farmers 

are concerned about in Saskatchewan is their incomes -- their 

incomes that have been devastated by trading practices that are 

unfair, incomes that continue to be devastated by the premiums 

they have to pay for the kind of protection that is offered 

without premium to their competitors in Europe and their 

competitors in the United States of America, who use their 

programs to target our markets to take away our market 

opportunities and reduce the value of our commodities in the 

world market.  All the while, they go around pretending that 

they want to free trade up in this world.  That's what farmers 

are concerned about.  The members opposite ought to know 

that. 

 

And if the members opposite would stop their blockading and 

get out in the country and talk to farmers, where they ought to 

be instead of sitting here wasting taxpayers' money talking 

about this and blockading it for ever, when they really have 

nothing they want to talk about at all, other than take time up, if 

the members opposite were to get out there, they would learn 

that from farmers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A statement made in the Leader-Post on June 

17 says: 

 

 Agriculture minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 15 

deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

Our contention is, sir, that you don't have the courage to say in 

court what you told those committee members.  You don't have 

the courage to have those people on the committee tell the jury 

what it was that you told them.  And that's why you have this 

Bill before us today.  You don't have that courage because they 

would have to swear under an oath that they had heard you say 

that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well then why don't you 

tell us and tell the court, allow the court to hear you.  Let it go 

to court.  That's what we asking. 

 

If you think that somebody in the committee is not telling the 

truth here, then he should be set on a court where he has to 

swear what he heard.  That's what we're asking you.  We can 

get around it somehow.  We are going by the facts as presented 

to us and the information we have available to us.  And that is 

what we have in information available to us.  We have the 

affidavit that said the individual contracts on March 15 were 

not met, the contractual obligations, they weren't met by you. 

 

And so we're saying, go to court and allow the opportunity for 

farmers to present that evidence.  And if it isn't true, we'll find 

out.  And if it is true, we'll find that out too.  But you're saying: 

we can't go to court, void it, say it never happened, and then we 

don't have to go to court, we can get around it somehow. 

 

Going on in the same article: 

 

 "Essentially, he (Wiens) didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not to be identified. "He 

thought we would get around that (legal question) . . . He said 

we would get around it somehow." 

 

Now we would like to have the court of law determine that.  

Not a political agenda as we have it in here.  But allow a court 

of law where you have an independent individual, who is not 

tied to this process, base his decision on fact.  You won't let it 

happen.  And we're asking you, sir, why don't you let it 

happen?  Allow the people, the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, their day in court. 

 

But, no.  No, no, you're going to protect yourself by eliminating 

the opportunity.  And that's what we're saying you're doing by 

this Bill.  We can get around it somehow.  Prove it in court.  

Take it to court.  Allow it to go to court, instead of blocking it 

all the time.  And then we'll find out whether the farmers are 

right in what they're doing or whether you're right in what 

you're doing.  We'll find out whether the committee told the 

truth or whether you're telling the truth.  That's what we want 

to know.  And that's what everybody wants to know, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

gets very deeply engrossed in a topic for which he had no 

concern for all the years he was in government, for a deadline 

which was there in a crop insurance contract when crop 

insurance contracts were mailed out to farmers before we had 

agents, where on March 15 

 changes were mailed to farmers and they were mailed back to 

the corporation 15 days later. Farmers had 15 days within 

which to do that -- a March 15 notice provision that had 

absolutely no relevance to a program that had within it a 

three-year commitment and a provision within the 

federal-provincial agreement that changes could be made. 

 

The member opposite absolutely ignored the March 15 

deadline for changes to the program all the time he was in 

office and now pretends that somehow they have some special 

relevance and makes impassioned comments about it.  As I've 

said before, the only person that believes that is the member 

opposite and those around him. 

 

The members opposite have made disparaging remarks about 

the committee on a number of occasions in the House.  On 

other occasions they say they are good and honourable people.  

The fact is that all of the people who sat on that committee 

worked with integrity in the design of the program, the design 

of a program that the members opposite have been attempting 

to scuttle along with the federal government since the day it 

was announced.  I don't know why.  I don't know why. 

 

They provided for the mechanism for change that was in the 

legislation.  They wrote the legislation that provided for a 

committee to review.  They appointed the committee, most of 

whose members were the same when they brought me the 

report as when the members opposite established them.  These 

same people, these same people would then challenge the 

report of that committee that they established and would 

challenge their recommendations for nothing but political 

reasons. 

 

That committee worked diligently from the time they were 

appointed until February 11 when they delivered their report.  

They worked diligently in that period of time in terms of 

consulting with farmers, in terms of consulting with the federal 

government, in terms of keeping them up to date and 

interpreting through their officials where the thinking was 

going within the committee.  This committee played fair. 

 

This committee put all the energy that was possible to put into 

the idea of review.  This committee worked consistently with 

the intent of the federal and provincial governments when the 

federal-provincial agreement was signed that after the first year 

of the program that the program should be reviewed. 

 

This committee then had its recommendations subjected to a 

political agenda whose intensity I have never seen before and I 

hope Saskatchewan never sees again.  I think, for the simple 

reason that the members opposite and their friends in Ottawa 

were so politically incensed that farmers in Saskatchewan 

could reject them as reasonable representatives of them in this 

legislature, they decided one had to engage in a fight that had 

no reason and a fight that had no basis.  And that began from 

the day we began discussions with the federal government and 

did not end until the federal government required us to go 

through hoops that no other province has gone through in terms 

of bringing forward changes. 

 

The members opposite last year formulated a program 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

with the federal government and with the other provinces that 

was implemented.  When Alberta and Manitoba instigated 

changes, which cost the federal government, in equivalent 

terms, if it were applied in Saskatchewan, amounts of money 

between 40 and $60 million, those provisions went through 

without a whistle last year in the construction of the program -- 

these special arrangements for Alberta and Manitoba.  Nothing 

for Saskatchewan; Saskatchewan didn't bother with it. 

 

Other provinces asked for changes in the basic program.  And 

as the members opposite, while they have called for common 

programs, one of the great ironies of this exercise is that this is 

the national program that doesn't have two provincial programs 

the same anywhere in Canada.  The members opposite 

participated in the design of that program.  They participated in 

changes.  The federal government facilitated changes for 

everyone.  But when Saskatchewan, after an election win put 

forward changes, then what was the reaction?  The reaction 

was, no, no, you have to go get support from all of the 

provincial governments. 

 

First of all, the recommendations of our GRIP review 

committee, the GRIP review committee appointed by you, that 

those recommendations were believed by the committee to be 

consistent with the federal-provincial agreement.  Four of the 

members on that committee were on the national GRIP 

committee, so they ought to have known, and they were in 

communication with others who knew.  So it was their belief 

that the recommendations they brought forward were within 

the terms of the federal-provincial agreement. 

 

And yet when those recommendations were brought forward to 

the federal minister, for no reason that I can understand, other 

than blatant politics, it was interpreted to be not consistent with 

the federal-provincial agreement.  Not because any of the terms 

and conditions in the Saskatchewan recommendation were 

different than equivalent provisions in other places in Canada, 

but because they weren't in the federal-provincial agreement 

with Saskatchewan's name on them.  So it was an interpretation 

of political convenience to block Saskatchewan's committee's 

attempt to have their recommendations implemented.  Then 

they required the Saskatchewan officials, my deputy minister, 

to go to provinces individually to seek support for our changes; 

an unprecedented move in federal-provincial relations around 

the agriculture table, because it has always been done that the 

federal government has taken forward changes that have been 

proposed within the provinces in these kinds of circumstances. 

 

Nothing but a political agenda, a political timetable, a political 

process that had within it zero rationality and 100 per cent 

politics, and no good sense -- a game played by the members 

opposite and their brothers in Ottawa and their sisters in 

Ottawa to block the attempts of Saskatchewan people to have 

their wish.  Why?  Because they were incensed, I presume. I 

don't know why.  Somebody ought to get that . . . somebody 

ought to ask the federal government that some time when 

you're engaged in some of your political games with them. 

 

The fact is that at the end of that process on March 12 or 

March 13, I think it was March 12, finally when we had our 

provincial support, the federal minister phoned . . . we phoned 

him and let him know that we had the support.  And he said, he 

gave us approval to go ahead as he had promised he would in 

writing earlier, that if we had the required provincial support he 

would support the changes. 

 

(2230) 

 

And then he said, but don't come to me if you've got a drought 

in Saskatchewan.  And I responded to him, I said, you give us 

the $150 million that you're saving as a result of these program 

improvements and you won't hear from me again.  But he was 

neither willing to put the money forward that he was saving -- 

that he recognized as saving -- nor was he willing to facilitate 

any of the changes, in spite of the fact that in other letters he 

has recognized the advisability of it.  Nor has he been willing 

to recognize that the committee has said that there are 

improvements here that ought to be carried forward into other 

places in Canada, and you have joined them in that.  You have 

joined them in an attempt to block change.  I don't know why.  

Maybe because you like this thing that you created last year 

because it was part of your soul, it was part of your 

contribution to the world.  Well the fact is, the producers, when 

they looked at that program, when they spoke to our 

committee, the committee that you appointed, said this is not 

the kind of program we want.  It has major flaws.  And those 

major flaws need to be corrected in these ways.  And I have 

read into the record more than once the recommendations of 

that committee. 

 

Now the members opposite have looked for straws to create a 

political attack in the same fashion that their federal brother 

looked for straws to block the implementation of this program, 

and I find it disturbing that you have no greater interest in this 

exercise, that you have no greater interest in Saskatchewan 

farmers, than to play politics with their programs and to play 

politics with their lives.  The fact is that you'd better join, and 

let's get at the issue that's really bothering farmers, and that's 

their income levels.  And let's get the required amount of 

money for farmers this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The minister makes some interesting 

observations.  I'll just leave it at that.  I just want to ask another 

question, and it goes back to another comment regarding 

comments made by the advisory committee in the Star-Phoenix 

on June 17. 

 

 . . . some members of the GRIP advisory committee warned 

the government about the deadline, but were told it wasn't a 

problem. 

 

Again in the Star-Phoenix: asked by reporters Tuesday if the 

members of his GRIP committee had raised concerns about 

whether changes to GRIP after March 15 had been raised, 

Wiens said that was not the case. 

 

Now one of them is the truth.  Now I want to point out what 

Judge Hunter said in her decision.  It says here: 

 

 Surely the proper legal foundation for such 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

changes should have been undertaken, i.e., amend the 

federal-provincial agreement, pass the necessary legislation 

to effect changes in the 1992 GRIP program.  If the Crown 

and agents of the Crown undertake costly system changes 

before effecting the necessary legal changes, they cannot 

defeat the rights of individuals affected by their conduct on 

the basis of costs which the Crown or its agent has 

voluntarily incurred. 

 

Sir, you are asking the members, or the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan who are farmers, to not have the capacity to 

go to court to see whether there's remedy for the problem that 

they've got.  You are excluding that option. 

 

And yet you have said, as you made earlier references to '91 

GRIP, three cases in the Queen's Bench court there today on 

'91 GRIP.  And yet you are excluding all option on the legal 

action that has been taken against you in Melville against 

farmers who want '91 GRIP.  You're saying that's going to be 

void. 

 

The judge said, put the legal context in first, and then do it 

right.  That's what she told you to do.  She is going on the basis 

that you said that you were going to do it retroactively -- 

deeming -- going back to March 15 on items that you said were 

in fact deemed to have been done. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, the members of the advisory committee 

warned the government about the deadline but were told it 

wasn't a problem.  They also said, you said we can get around it 

somehow.  And we want to know what the truth is.  And I 

believe that the court is the only place where you're going to 

have an independent assessment provided to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And when I stood in the rink in Shaunavon when the minister 

for Crop Insurance was there, and he started telling those 

farmers exactly what you've told us for the last five, six hours, 

they got up and walked out.  That's exactly . . . 3 to 400 of them 

got up and walked out.  That's what they did.  And some of 

your Crop Insurance officials were there and saw it.  They can 

verify that.  And it was on the basis that they said you are 

wrong, Mr. Minister; admit you're wrong. 

 

And the case has to have some justice.  And that's what we're 

trying to provide to the people of Saskatchewan who have had 

their contracts broken.  And March 15 is the date.  That's why 

the member from Arm River asked earlier, if you'd done 

everything right, March 15 would have been the date, we 

would have been done this business.  Because farmers wouldn't 

have had a legal leg to stand on, even though they disagreed 

with your program. 

 

But today, sir, you're denying them access to court -- a 

fundamental right to every person in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You're denying them the access to the court.  

And we want you to understand that the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan, farmers who have contracts, are taking you to 

court for that very reason because you did not follow the 

contract. 

And that, sir, is what we're up against.  And we'd like to have 

your observations about the aspect of providing the legal 

framework and then the process for change, if you're going to 

make those substantive kind of changes in it to reduce the 

volume of benefit.  That's why the farmers are taking you to 

court.  Because they've had a reduction in their benefit on the 

basis of this contract.  And there isn't a farmer around who 

doesn't understand that.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact.  

Because they had their agents explain it to them on the '91 

contract, and they had exactly the same thing explained to them 

on the '92.  And they know they're short that much.  They know 

that.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly why they're taking you 

to court. 

 

My question to you is this: why are you denying them access to 

court?  If you think you're right, why do you deny them access? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite loves to mix up his 

comments about a variety of issues and muddle them into one.  

The members opposite I believe are the only people that 

believe that when someone is told something on March 13 and 

he normally would have until March 15 to respond, that 

somehow when he's told on March 13 and he's given till May 

15 to respond, that he's somehow been disadvantaged by that 

process.  It's a strange and unreasonable contention that the 

member opposite and a few of his cronies believe.  But it is not 

a concern of very many other people. 

 

The question of the legal interpretation is one that can be 

followed, as we have described before, that if the members 

want to continue this action in court, we will introduce the 

evidence of the legislation.  And if the members find that 

unacceptable, they can challenge the legislation.  And if they 

are successful in challenging the legislation, they can go back 

to court.  And if they then win the court case they can sue for 

damages.  The processes of the court continue to be there.  The 

members opposite, I think, are beginning to be ashamed of the 

fact that they've held up this legislature since June 10 on a 

point relative to a deadline that was of no significance to them 

at any time and particularly in the implementation of the new 

program. 

 

The members opposite read from Judge Hunter's decision 

which has been later appealed.  They read from that a comment 

about getting the legal context first.  Well let me tell you about 

how you got the legal context first last year.  When farmers 

seeded their crops last year they had the discussions with the 

crop insurance agents and a piece of paper that they signed on 

which very little information was contained.  That was the legal 

context. 

 

If you believe, if the members opposite believe that the legal 

context ought to have been there first, they wouldn't have 

implemented a program for seeding on the basis of a 

federal-provincial agreement that wasn't signed until 

September 18 when the crop was in the bin.  Give me a break.  

What are you trying to say? 

 

You believe in the legal context first or don't you believe in the 

legal context first?  Or do you just like to make arguments for 

the sake of making arguments.  You ignore 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

the deadline and you say you're in favour of the deadline, and 

you're worried about the deadline, and you think that that's a 

major issue. 

 

You say you talk about legal context, you talk about legal 

context first.  There was no legal context first.  You sent out a 

pamphlet on May 1, that was the first document, had no legal . . 

. it never was included in the legislation that was finally passed, 

and I don't know what date the legislation was finally passed 

but it was later.  I think it was in June. 

 

There never was a legal context for last year's contract.  And 

you talk about there should be legal context first.  It is in the 

nature of the federal-provincial agreement that the members 

opposite signed, that there can be no legal context under the 

circumstances that they find themselves.  Because how can you 

make program changes unless you're going to take 10 years to 

do it when you have to . . . when the federal-provincial 

agreement is never signed until months after the crop is 

planted?  And when the federal-provincial agreement . . . you 

can't make changes in that case if you don't know what the 

federal-provincial agreement's going to say. 

 

Well what's been happening in the practical sense when you 

implemented your program? You ignored the deadline, you 

ignored the legal context, and you said, this is what the 

program's going to be.  And farmers basically believed it, and 

you basically followed your word, and the farmers are basically 

getting the money that was promised to them.  But then you 

also say that the changes in the program cost farmers money. 

 

Well I'll tell you, the 1991 GRIP program cost farmers money.  

And had it been continued, it would have continued to cost 

farmers more money because the compensation level for 

coverage under that program was reduced from $4.15 for wheat 

to three eighty-six, and would have been . . . would have had 

parallel reductions for other commodities. 

 

And you say that there has been some untoward change here.  

The fact is that the federal-provincial agreement that the 

members opposite signed provided for program changes, and it 

provided farmers with the opportunity to opt out of the 

program if they did not want it.  The idea of identifying what 

benefits under this program are, the idea of identifying when 

farmers are disadvantaged by changes, needs to be a longer 

look than looking at the end of your nose.  Because it has been 

observed that the old program would have cost the provincial 

government between 1 and $300 million in program deficits 

annually.  That's the provincial government's share. 

 

Well the federal-provincial agreement that the members 

opposite signed provides that the recovery of those deficits will 

take place substantively within the first three to five years.  

That means that the premiums must be increased to recover 

100 to $300 million a year annually as this program deficit 

accumulates to try and recover it.  Well if you think it's going 

to kill you to watch the price slide from $4.15 to three fifty 

over a few years, you better also realize that it's going to kill 

you if you're going to try and pay off program deficits that 

continue to require premium increases year after year; you're 

pretty soon going to be paying ridiculous premiums for no 

coverage. 

And those are the problems that were in the program as 

designed for the members opposite, aside from all the legal 

carelessness that they engaged in.  So it is with continuing 

concern that I observe the tactics of the members opposite, that 

they make noise for . . . as the press have said, they flap their 

gums endlessly.  They flap their gums for what purpose? 

 

To simply make more noise, not to try and make any points 

because there are a few of them who really care about this 

matter.  The fact that the members opposite better get engaged 

in, is that farmers require stronger support from the federal 

government; they require the support that was guaranteed to 

them when the provinces and the farmers agreed to pay for 

GRIP and NISA.  And I ask the members opposite, when are 

you going to get on side and start working for farmers instead 

of sitting here and flapping your gums? 

 

(2245) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to point out just 

one more item here that I think needs to be addressed, and that 

is the Premier said in the Star-Phoenix on June 23: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walk-out is. 

 

Now, what's the rights that he's talking about?  I would suggest 

that he's talking about going to court, and you're denying 

access to the court.  You're saying it's ruled out. 

 

The only way you can take this to any court, and you're making 

it so difficult for people to do that, that the only way that you 

can justify what you're doing is saying you can go to the 

Appeal court or you can go to the Supreme Court with all of 

the information available.  Well why don't you let them go to 

the Queen's Bench court, have the right to go to the Queen's 

Bench court, which is one of the things that this country has 

been all about all of the time?  The access to the court should 

not be denied by individuals in any case. 

 

You, sir, and your party established in the '70s legal aid so that 

individuals who did not have financing could go to court and 

have representation on their behalf made by individuals who 

could represent them.  And now, sir, you're denying the very 

access to the courts that you were promoting on the one hand -- 

allow the individual to have his right, his day in court with 

representation that was adequate, significant to the individual. 

 

And now, sir, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 

says," I mean, one has certain rights."  And what we see 

happening here is those rights are just denied.  Once, twice, 

three times, at least three times in the safety net Act and at least 

three times in The Crop Insurance Act.  That, Mr. Minister, is 

what we've got.  And I can't read it any other way.  I sat on a 

lot of legislative review committees for a long time and when I 

see extinguishing rights of individuals . . . that's what it says: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted 



August 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

or continued against the Crown or a Crown agent based on 

any cause of action arising from, resulting from or incidental 

to: 

 

What? 

 

  (b) any term, condition, warranty, contract, promise, 

inducement, enticement, representation or other 

understanding that is collateral to or modifies, 

varies, qualifies or amends in any way a revenue 

insurance contract or the combination of a revenue 

insurance contract and a contract of crop insurance; 

 

What does that say, Mr. Minister.  No cause of action.  You 

can't . . . You can't . . . It means a suit, a debt account, demand, 

claim for damage, loss, cost, expense, or interests of any 

nature, whether arising in or imposed by law, equity.  Now 

what does equity mean?  That means you have the opportunity.  

That's denied.  Statute or otherwise includes any judgement or 

order of a court.  The court can order you.  Queen's Bench 

court can order you and determine that that's what's going to 

happen.  And you can say, no we said in this room here it's not 

going to be done. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is wrong.  It's fundamentally wrong 

that you have taken the responsibility and the freedom in this 

Assembly to do that.  That's the point we want to make.  And 

we're going to make it over and over again.  We're going to 

make it all day tomorrow too.  You are absolute wrong.  Your 

Premier . . . The leader of your party says, "I mean, one has 

certain rights."  He went and set up the constitution as a part of 

the mandate that he had in 1981 and '82 to do that.  And comes 

back home and he says, yes you have certain rights. 

 

On June 23 he said, yes you have certain rights.  He's today 

negotiating a reasonable settlement on the constitution.  You 

have a certain right.  What is that right, Mr. Minister?  It's the 

right for access to the court.  Access to the court, Mr. Minister, 

and you're denying it.  Not once, not twice, at least three times 

for every one of those acts.  And that, Mr. Minister, is wrong.  

It's absolutely, totally wrong.  And you stand here and say it's 

because of March 15, '91, that's the problem.  No, it's March 

15, 1992, that's the problem.  That's the problem, Mr. Minister.  

And that's where you're wrong. 

 

Your assessments here all evening have said, oh it's 1991 

March.  No, it's not 1991 March; it's 1992 March.  They're 

taking you to court for 1992 March, not 1991.  No, they're not.  

It's 1992, March 15, for failing to comply with a contract.  You 

said it over and over again.  I've followed you as you've talked 

about it.  1991 is what you're saying, and you're wrong.  

They're taking you to court for March 15 of 1992, and not 

meeting the deadline.  And that is the reason why they're taking 

you to court.  Is it not, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

continues to deny responsibility for the fact that they created a 

hastily constructed conglomeration that no one could define 

last year, when one looked at it legally.  Farmers basically 

understood the program they had.  They 

basically lived with it.  But when it came to the technical, legal 

interpretation, there was no definition of what the program was 

last year because the members opposite did not put it into 

legislation to define it. 

 

How the members opposite then expect others to run 

government, when we want to serve the public interest, when 

there in fact could be 50,000 interpretations of a contract, when 

there in fact could be 50,000 beliefs about what the 

commitment of the government was and therefore there could 

be 50,000 individual interpretations of what the contractual 

obligations of the government were, 50,000 court cases are the 

potential under the mess you created in 1991. 

 

And then they say, there is no need for clarification.  Please.  

Of course there's need for clarification.  The need for 

clarification is the cause for defining the 1991 contract in the 

new legislation.  The need for clarification is the cause for 

saying that there is an inconsistency and an inability to bring 

the two together of a specific time deadline which was brought 

into the program as a result of the crop insurance program and 

the provisions of the federal-provincial agreement under which 

this program is established. 

 

The members opposite surely have to recognize that one cannot 

leave the province legally liable to a conglomerated mess that 

they so hastily constructed last year if one wants to be called 

responsible in government.  I don't know why the members 

opposite continue to deny the fact.  They've not addressed that 

question.  They've not addressed it as I have challenged them 

with it. 

 

They have not addressed the question of why they didn't 

describe the program in any way that could be legally defined.  

They didn't describe for me how they would define notice 

under this obtuse construction that they made last year.  They 

didn't define how they would describe how you would give 

notice on something that really no one knew what it was 

because they wouldn't know what you wanted to say you were 

changing. 

 

So I ask the members opposite to answer to that, to say why, 

why did you not construct a program, why did you not describe 

it legally in your legislation?  Why did you not describe it in 

such a way that a government could reasonably administer?  

Was it because you didn't know how to do anything properly in 

the time that you constructed your government? That virtually 

every effort in which you engaged came apart at the seams and 

turned to mud?  Answer the question about why you 

constructed the program in the way you did last year with no 

legal definition of what a contract was and what really this 

whole thing amounted to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister, one thing is clear -- one thing is 

absolutely clear.  We know what the getting around was, 

because we've got it in our hands now.  The getting around is 

this piece of legislation.  Like the member from Morse said, the 

minister wanted to make some changes.  But the minister 

wanted to make the changes for all the wrong reasons. 

 

It had nothing to do with farmers, didn't have a darn thing 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard August 21, 1992 

to do with farmers.  And that's why the statement was made 

when he was warned, well we'll get around it.  And that's why 

the minister doesn't want to go to court, because he doesn't 

want people on the stand saying, the minister said, we'll get 

around it somehow. 

 

All the wrong reasons for the fact that the Minister of Finance 

had an agenda.  And it was a political agenda to cover up for all 

the irresponsible election promises made last fall.  And that's 

why we're getting around things.  We're getting around things 

for those two items.  It's got nothing to do with farmers. 

 

If it had anything to do with farmers, you wouldn't have 

farmers meeting in Melfort that are dried out.  If it had 

anything to do with farmers, you wouldn't have been in court in 

the first place.  I mean the minister makes a ludicrous statement 

here about 50,000 court cases.  I asked him earlier, how many 

did you have in 1991?  He said, three.  Three out of over 

50,000 contracts.  The minister's own words -- three.  And he 

might even extinguish those three. 

 

So it's absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Minister.  If there's 50,000 

court cases they would have been with you after March 15.  

They wouldn't have been with anybody else -- only with you, 

Mr. Minister; only with a minister that says, we'll get around it 

somehow.  So let's cut the malarkey, Mr. Minister.  It's got 

nothing to do with helping farmers. 

 

I mean it's clear that it's for the guy that grows the good crop.  

It's not for the poor devil that's dried out; it's not for the guy 

that's hailed out; it's not for the guy that the grasshoppers ate 

his crop.  Because the guy down the road that gets the 

50-bushel crop is going to get just as much money as that guy.  

It's got nothing to do with farmers. 

 

It's everything to do with the government's political agenda and 

the irresponsible promises that they made in this House and last 

fall in the election over and over and over.  As the young 

fellow in Humboldt told you the other night, you were the one 

that went out and promised the world.  Now you have to cover 

your tracks up, and part of the covering which you seem to take 

so lightly is the ability to access a court. 

 

You made statements earlier tonight that other people weren't 

fit to judge, other people weren't fit to make that impartial 

judgement.  Only you could make that judgement.  Well I say 

to you, Mr. Minister, your biggest fear in life is that you'd get 

popped into a court room with a judge and 12 of your peers, 

and people would get put on the stand.  That is your biggest 

fear in life.  Nothing else. 

 

And that's why you have gone to such extraordinary lengths to 

take that right away.  That's the only thing you fear, Mr. 

Minister.  I mean to trot out the fact that there wasn't 

regulations -- there's been regulations in crop insurance for 

20-some years. The same regulations that you and I have 

farmed under our entire farming life, those regs have been there 

-- those regs have been there.  And you say, well there was no 

defined regulations.  Stop misleading this House, Mr. Minister, 

stop misleading this House. 

 

This is all about you and not wanting to be somewhere 

where an impartial judgement can be made.  That's all.  And if 

there would have been 50,000 court cases, Mr. Minister, they'd 

have been with you, not 1991.  And you know that for a fact 

and that is why these changes have been made. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister, what you're going to tell those 

farmers on Monday, what you're going to tell those farmers on 

Monday up there when they ask, how come now that I'm dried 

out, that I am only going to get the same revenue insurance as 

the guy over here growing a big crop.  How come I'm only 

going to get the same revenue insurance as the guy over there 

with irrigation.  It's going to grow 60 or 70 bushels to the acre, 

and I'm dried out. 

 

And is the minister going to trot out that same old weak excuse, 

well it's out of my hands, I've got to blame somebody else?  

See the federal government, it's the international wheat prices, 

it's this, it's that, I don't have any responsibility as minister.  I 

don't have any responsibility as a government.  It's somebody 

else's fault.  And when I get boxed up and I get put in a corner, 

I say, well I'll get around it somehow. 

 

And then the getting around, the getting around is dragged into 

here and it's this piece of paper, and you ask each and every 

MLA in here to do the getting around, and the getting around 

means you don't have to go to court . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  It being 11 o'clock, the committee 

will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:02 p.m. 

 


