




















































Hansard: August 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2759 

 August 20, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  

Order. 

 

I would ask the Minister of Agriculture to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, good morning.  I'd like to 

open up the session by introducing the group of officials with 

me.  Mr. Stuart Kramer, on my right, the deputy minister of 

Agriculture and Food.  On his right, Mr. Terry Tangjerd, 

president of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation.  

Behind Mr. Kramer, Hal Cushon, the market analysis . . . the 

manager of the market analysis section, the economics branch, 

Department of Agriculture and Food.  Beside Hal is Mr. Henry 

Schappert, the manager of the planning and development 

division of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation.  

And on my left is Ms. Lorelle Schoenfeld, Crown solicitor to 

the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to 

begin by asking you to, item by item on the whereas's, to 

explain what you mean in each one of them and I will deal with 

them one at a time and there's 10 of them, I believe.  And I 

want you to give me an explanation of each one as we go 

through them, and in that context I'll read the first one.  It says: 

 

 Whereas the Legislative Assembly recognizes that farm 

income insurance programs should encourage good farming 

practices, provide reasonable protection to producers and be 

efficiently administered in the interests of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers; 

 

Would you give me an explanation of that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the first clause is 

reasonably self-explanatory.  It is the intent surely of support 

programs and stabilization programs to encourage good 

farming practices.  That's the assumption that's been made in 

the federal agricultural policy and certainly supported by our 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) review committee, 

that protection be reasonable for producers and that 

administration be efficient.  The members opposite may be 

aware that there were three conclusions drawn by the GRIP 

review committee with respect to changes that needed to be 

made and which have been implemented in the program that is 

described in this legislation. 

One was that we needed to have farmers respond to their 

farming signals and not to program signals that they had 

identified as the problems through their consultation; that there 

needed to be . . . crop selection needed to be guided again by 

market signals and not by program signals, and that there 

needed to be efficiency in administration. 

 

And it was for those reasons that the review committee 

recommended that the program be established as a separate 

revenue and crop insurance program, that it be designed in the 

fashion that it was.  And that because it facilitated all of those 

observations they made and the administrative efficiency was 

dealt with in the model that has been presented and is now 

being implemented by removing the necessity for annual bin 

measurement and the many difficulties that caused. 

 

The Chair: -- Just to remind members that there are far too 

many other conversations going on, all of which combined 

provide somewhat of a distraction for the business of the 

committee.  And therefore I ask you to tone it down. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder, in 

your opinion, whether good farming practices were more 

adequately followed this year versus last year.  Would you give 

me some factual Estimates in relation to that, that could 

demonstrate that you have provided a program that encourages 

far more good farming practices this year versus last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member opposite 

may be aware, last year in the design of the program in 

Saskatchewan some corrections were not made that were made 

in Alberta and Manitoba.  The consequence was that producers 

in Saskatchewan were very unhappy with the program as 

designed last year, and that unhappiness was expressed in the 

collection of farmers in large numbers to identify the 

weaknesses in the program. 

 

The GRIP review committee then met with everyone who was 

interested in presenting their position to them -- in excess of 

300 individuals and organizations -- who collectively made the 

kinds of observations that resulted in change in the end.  The 

observations were, and I think at that point because the 

program was in it's first year, it was the observations of people 

who brought their opinions to the committee, that in fact the 

program had encouraged farmers to use practices that they 

would not ordinarily do.  And in fact it would be a good 

financial management practice to in fact adapt practice the way 

the program last year was designed.  And so the response to 

that was that some changes needed to be implemented. 

 

In Alberta and Manitoba those changes were implemented last 

year through the Jackson offset and the superior management 

index that partially compensated for the problems that were not 

corrected in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Saskatchewan committee observed what went on in 

Alberta and Manitoba.  They looked at what had happened in 

other areas of Canada.  And having observed that, they 

concluded that the program should be designed 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

as it has been designed in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think, while I have not got any factual evidence that has been 

presented to me in a scientifically constructed fashion, several 

weeks ago there was a newspaper article that indicated that 

input use in Saskatchewan had increased by 22 per cent this 

year.  I think, understanding that in our neighbouring province 

to the west the input use increased only by 1 per cent, indicates 

that farmers went back to looking at what they would like to do 

in the penalty of the program.  And many of them made the 

choice to restore their input use to a higher level than it had 

previously been.  Because when they looked at their 

opportunities in the market, that seemed to make sense to them. 

 

So there are those kinds of signals that in fact the program has 

freed farmers to make their own decisions again. 

 

(0915) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that if you're going 

to say that in here, you'd better have factual evidence to 

provide us with so that you can demonstrate to us that you do 

have facts that prove that better farming practices were 

followed last year . . . or this year versus last year. 

 

You said fertilizer sales were up.  I will contend with you, sir, 

that probably in the north-east and the north-west where 

fertilizer was applied, is the reason why they had burn-out on 

their crops this year because they didn't have rain to use up the 

fertilizer, in fact just sufficient to use it up and get extra growth 

that wouldn't be making the volume of production equivalent to 

the rainfall. 

 

And so what in one way seems to say, well maybe I shouldn't 

have applied fertilizer this year because of a shortage of rain -- 

they decided to do it -- was not probably a decision based on 

the program; it was probably a decision based on a traditional 

kind of farming practice.  And so what I wanted to know is: do 

you have facts to prove, facts to prove that encourage good 

farming practices, this program over last year? 

 

I would say, sir, that if you drove from here to where your 

home is and up around through Saskatoon, you would probably 

see only one or two fields that you, sir, as a farmer, would 

realize that there was poor farming practices.  And I didn't see 

any more this year, and I've driven around the province just as 

much this year as I did last year.  And I don't see where you 

have any reason to believe that good farming practices were 

followed this year versus last year.  Unless you can prove that, 

then I raise the question: why do you have it in here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just to correct the comment 

the member opposite made the . . . What I said was that farmers 

chose a higher level of input use this year, not specifically 

fertilizer.  I believe farmers should make their own choices on 

that score.  Some farmers choose not to use fertilizers; some 

farmers choose not to use chemicals.  Those are production 

choices they make according to their values and their economic 

assessments. 

The difficulty with last year's program is that it in fact biased 

those decisions.  The people looked at the program and said: if 

I follow the program, what is my best financial position?  It's a 

reasonable financial management decision to take and look at a 

program and say: how best can I maximize my returns under 

these circumstances? 

 

The committee identified not that farmers had a moral hazard 

but that the program had a moral hazard, that the program put 

biases into farmers' decision making that ought not to be there.  

Those are not my conclusions, Mr. Member from Morse.  

Those are not my conclusions.  Those are the conclusions of a 

10-member committee, even including the members of the . . . 

that wrote a minority report.  Their observations about the 

landscape, about what happened last year were the same. 

 

I think you can go talk to any farmer in any coffee shop in 

Saskatchewan and they will identify that that happened last 

year.  That's not something that they should be ashamed of; 

that's something that those who designed the program should 

be ashamed of, that we designed a program that encouraged the 

farming practices that would not be the normal farming 

practices.  It was recognized by Alberta and Manitoba and they 

at the outset corrected that in part. 

 

And so I think one could look at the evidence, that Alberta and 

Manitoba chose to correct it before the program even began, to 

say that that was a risk.  You can look at the committee who 

said it was in fact a risk.  You can look at the results that said 

last year in Saskatchewan there was a reduction in input use by 

9 per cent and that this year there was an increase of 22 per 

cent.  I think you can put all of those things together and say 

farmers made the decisions this year based on what was good 

for their farms in the normal way that they would make them, 

not biased by the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What was the volume of production in each of 

the crops last year?  In wheat, durum, barley, oats?  Give me 

the volume of production in every one of those crops as not 

only estimated, but as what your department can provide for 

you in a volume of production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the information is not 

immediately available, but it can be within a number of 

minutes, and we can discuss that then. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to provide the volume of 

wheat production as a kind of an estimate, what you had last 

year?  Would you be able to provide that for this committee at 

this point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we will get that 

information and try to present it accurately in a minute. 

 

I want to excuse myself from the proceedings now, to engage 

in another function with respect to my responsibility as 

Highways minister.  And I ask Mr. Cunningham to take over 

for the time that I'll be gone. 

 

I look forward to coming back and continuing the discussion.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would you be able to 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

provide for me an estimated volume of bushels on the wheat 

side so that we can talk about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that number.  We'll 

get it here in a . . . very shortly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm suspecting it's going to be 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 24 or 25 million tonnes, 

metric tons.  That's what I'm speculating.  Your estimate for 

this year is twenty-one and a half. 

 

Now you're going to tell me that last year you had good 

farming . . . or poor farming practices by the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  They had higher yields than this 

year.  And this year you've got 21 million metric tons . . . 

twenty-one and a half million, estimated, and you're going to 

have better farming practices this year than you had last year.  

That's what you're trying to tell me. 

 

And I want to make the point, rain does more for production 

than fertilizer in this province, more than chemicals, more than 

anything else.  And how much rain did we have last year?  We 

had way more rain last year in the province of Saskatchewan 

than we've had in our history.  Places in my constituency had 

30 inches of rain.  And that's significant more than what we 

usually get.  Five is what we got this year, and that's the reason 

why we have a problem. 

 

And I want to know from you and your staff is: how do you 

measure good farming practices in view of your statement 

here?  I'd like to have proof of the fact that you have seen 25 

per cent less people doing things in their fields as they 

normally would have done this year over last year . . . last year 

over this year.  I want to know that.  And I think we . . . You 

made a statement here, and I want you to prove it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll concede that 

rain does help crops grow.  I don't think that's a major 

argument.  I think everybody knows that in Saskatchewan 

yields vary more due to natural conditions than it does to 

farming practices.  However that does not mean that farming 

practices over the long term do not have an influence on the 

yields. 

 

And I think when you try to run a program that gives signals to 

farmers that tells them what farming practices they should use, 

that will never produce in the long term the same kind of good 

farming practices that we will get by letting farmers make their 

own decisions based on the market and based on what their 

estimate of weather and conditions on their farm and their soil 

will do.  And I think that is the essence of the changes that 

were made to the GRIP program. 

 

This is not something that was dreamed up by the Minister of 

Agriculture.  We had a committee that had 300 submissions, 

none of which suggested the program remain as it was, all of 

which were looking at changes.  And it was a judgement of the 

GRIP committee that the program that we had was attempting 

to dictate to farmers how they should farm and how they 

should make management decisions.  And it would be much 

better to have a program that allows farmers to make their own 

decisions based on their farm and their estimate of market 

conditions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, as I understand this Bill, 

what we're going to have and why these whereas's appear, is to 

provide proof that your legislation is required.  Now it says 

here that the program should encourage good farming 

practices, and the statements made by you and others have said 

that this year's program enhances good farming practices. 

 

Now you need to have proof of that, in my opinion. If you're 

going to make a statement of that kind, an observation of that 

nature, you're going to have to have proof of it -- to me, to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And you need to tell 

me what you have for proof of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think some of the proof lies in the 

problems that occurred in Manitoba where lentil acres went 

way out of whack to what the market suggested.  The proof lies 

in the fact that the submissions to the committee, the farmers 

themselves, were telling us that the old program did not 

encourage good farming practices.  I don't think that anybody 

will argue. 

 

I mean if the members opposite are arguing that the 

government programs, that government can decide and make 

decisions for farmers and they will be better than farmers 

making their own decisions, I question that, and I think it's very 

hard to prove in terms of yields. 

 

As the member opposite knows and has pointed out, the yields 

do not depend solely on farming practices.  In fact, they depend 

probably 70, 80, or 90 per cent on weather conditions and on 

natural occurrences.  But the fact that the use of fertilizer went 

up in Saskatchewan this year, the fact that we didn't have the 

same lentil problems that Manitoba had, I think all prove that 

the new program does indeed let farmers make their own 

decisions.  And I think that is ultimately going to be a better 

management decision, having farmers make their own 

decisions rather than being forced to make decisions by 

government programs. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to know -- I see 

you have those figures -- if you would be able to table them for 

me so that we could discuss them to see what Estimates there 

would be in production this year over actual last year, and then 

I'd like to see them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just to prove that Saskatchewan 

alone is not . . . we aren't the only ones that recognize a 

problem with the old program.  This is a report, the future 

program design by the National GRIP Committee and what 

they say about the old program, the individualized price offsets, 

and so on.  It says: 

 

 . . . is in direct conflict with the objective of maximizing the 

level of market responsiveness and minimizing the potential 

for moral hazard and program abuse. 

 

That's from the National GRIP Committee. 

 

(0930) 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Well would the minister be able to tell me 

which country does not have government intervention in the 

market-place?  Which country in the world does not have 

intervention in some way from the taxpayer in the 

market-place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think all countries including 

Canada have intervention in the market-place and in farm 

subsidy programs.  The object of the game is to subsidize 

farmers and keep them on the land without distorting the 

farmers' ability to make decisions. 

 

And some programs . . . I think that's the crux of what all 

countries are trying to move towards in the GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations.  They want to 

decouple support.  They want to have support programs that 

support farmers, that don't dictate that farmers over-produce 

certain grains; that let the market decide which grain should be 

produced and how they should be produced. 

 

And I think that's the objective of this program.  We're still 

supporting farmers but we're doing it in a manner that lets the 

farmers make their own decisions about what to grow and how 

to grow it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister be able to tell me what 

difference the export enhancement has on the Chicago price on 

a variable basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly do not 

support the export enhancement program.  I think that's one of 

the problems that is creating our problems in Saskatchewan 

here.  The world trade war where people are subsidizing 

unfairly is causing world prices to be low.  There's no question 

that's what the problem is. 

 

I don't think we should compound that problem by developing 

a program that sends the wrong signals to our farmers to 

produce in the world conditions that we're in. 

 

We need to support them.  We realize that farmers cannot 

compete on their own in a world market against other 

treasuries.  We are asking for -- and we are doing what we can 

as a province -- we're calling for the national government to do 

more, which is where the export enhancement program comes 

from.  It comes from a national government.  That's where the 

Economic Community gets their support from.  They get it 

from a national government.  And we're calling on our national 

government to do more for our farmers. 

 

But to do more doesn't mean we do it in such a way that 

distorts the market, that floods the market with lentils or floods 

a market with durum and produces less.  We still need to 

produce as efficiently and as . . . we want our farmers working 

as efficiently as possible and producing, making the best 

decisions that they can in the markets that's there.  And then we 

will pick up and support them as best we can from there on. 

 

It doesn't make any sense to have our farmers produce the 

wrong things in the wrong way and then subsidize them, and 

ask the taxpayers to pick up an even bigger load of the subsidy. 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you still haven't come to 

me with a legitimate reason for providing to the province of 

Saskatchewan a change in program based on the fact that 

farming practices were better this year than they were last year.  

You haven't provided me that information. 

 

I want to know whether you have facts to prove that.  That's 

what I want to know.  And if you're going to make this 

statement here to prove what you're going to do for changes in 

the Bill, you better have facts to do it.  Because you have to 

prove what you're doing here.  That's what I want to know.  

And I want to know how much your wheat production last year 

was over this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think the proof that will come 

with the program, the judgement of the changes that were made 

were made by the GRIP committee that we established.  We 

had 10 people on there -- 10 producers.  It was their judgement 

that the changes we would make would encourage good 

farming practices.  And I think they're right. 

 

I think the proof does not come in this year's yield as compared 

to last year's yield.  As everybody knows, it rained a lot more 

last year than it did this year.  But I think the proof comes from 

things like the problem that Manitoba had with lentils.  The 

proof will come over a period of years when we see 

neighbouring provinces, if they are foolish enough to stick with 

the programs that they have, the problems that they will have 

with their program and the problems . . . and the way that our 

program will function, I think you will see this program be 

actuarially sound because it will encourage farmers to grow the 

crops that are most suited for the market. 

 

I think the programs in the neighbouring provinces may well 

not be actuarially sound.  And I think the proof of this program 

will come over a period of years.  And I think the judgement 

that was made that this program would encourage good 

farming practice, which was made by the GRIP committee -- 

they couldn't prove it when they made it.  And I don't know 

how quantitatively you could come to that sort of proof. 

 

I think the proof that I see is that farmers themselves told the 

GRIP committee -- 300 submissions -- that that was . . . that the 

old program was encouraging poor farming practices. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you are the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance.  You have your president 

sitting right here.  You should be able to tell me today whether 

good farming practices were followed or were not followed last 

year as it versus this year, as a comparison.  And let's see 

whether they were.  And I'd like to know that.  You should be 

able to have those facts and figures here to prove to me and to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan that we in fact had 

bad farming practices last year because of the program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think part of the problem that the 

GRIP committee saw and the comments that they made with 

regards to the program is that because of the lateness of the 

program in '91, that there was much less effect in '91 than there 

would have been in '92. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

I think as we approached the winter, last winter, I think the 

potential was there for major shifts in crops that were seeded 

and major changes to farming practices to conform with the 

program -- not because farmers wanted to engage in poor 

farming practice, not because they wanted to rip off a program, 

not because they wanted to take advantage of taxpayers, but 

just simply because economically, based on good, sound 

management with a program that was there, it dictated doing 

things differently than it would if a program were changed, as 

the change that we implemented were made. 

 

Farmers were phoning me, saying, I want to seed what grows 

best on my farm.  I want to do the best job I can of farming, but 

under this program I'm forced to go out and use less inputs, to 

seed lentils or . . . if I want to survive.  Because the program 

discriminates against people who want to seed barley.  And 

that's I think was what would have happened with the program 

in '92. 

 

Now if you want hard facts and numbers, I think it takes . . . 

certainly will shape up over time.  I think farmers will make the 

judgement of whether or not these changes encourage better 

farming practices. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can the minister provide for me a volume of 

acres in 1990, in the various crops, 1991 and 1992?  Would 

you provide that for me so that we can see whether there was 

crop distortions, or whether the good farming practices were 

followed?  Would you provide that for this committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I have some material here that we 

can send over to you.  I'll just quote a few of the things.  I think 

one of the things that you'll notice from '90, durum acres, is 4 

million . . . 4.1 million.  It dropped down in '91 to 3.9 million, 

and that was in response to a rather large discount to spring 

wheat in the market-place.  In normal conditions that those, 

without the GRIP program, probably would have dropped 

substantially more. 

 

Those sorts of distortion cost the program millions of dollars.  

And that was the sort of problem that you have when you have 

a program that does not allow farmers to seek what's best for 

the market.  But the other farmers and the taxpayers and 

everybody picks up the cost of those distortions.  And I will get 

a copy of this information and send it over to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you got the volume of production last 

year on your grains over Estimates this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The '90 and '91 acres and yields are 

in . . . in total production, are in the numbers we're sending 

you.  The estimate for '92 are still just Estimates, but we can 

give you those as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  I'm going to move to the next point 

and when I get that, I'll go back to this one. 

 

It says here:  to provide reasonable protection to producers.  

What kind of protection, in your mind, is reasonable -- number 

one?  And how do you relate that to your stand on cost of 

production that you took during the election?  And you told us 

over and over again that you're 

going to do this and you're going to set it up based on the cost 

of production.  You tell me what you think that that means in 

relation to that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Reasonable coverage is coverage 

that allows the farmer to survive during times of natural 

disaster and during times of international price wars and so on.  

We don't believe that that necessarily means guaranteed 100 

per cent of average income in any particular year or 100 per 

cent of cost of production, although it certainly would be 

something that you would strive toward. 

 

The program as it now exists gives 80 per cent crop insurance 

at market value.  For years in this province we farmed with 70 

per cent of crop insurance at a fixed price, and at average we 

now have 80 per cent coverage of individual average at market 

price.  As production insurance, I think we feel that that is an 

adequate production insurance.  That if a farmer is guaranteed 

80 per cent at his individual average yield at the market price in 

a given year, that is probably adequate protection on the side of 

production insurance. 

 

On the protection from international price wars, we agree that 

the protection is not adequate.  We also agree that the formula 

for arriving at the protection, using a 15-year floating average, 

is a ridiculous way to calculate what the price support level 

should be.  Seventy per cent of a 15-year period, where in at 

least half or two-thirds of those years the price was inadequate 

to live on, and to take 70 per cent of an inadequate price as a 

guarantee for a price, is not adequate.  And we agree with that. 

 

And we would, and are continuing to, pressure the federal 

government to live up to its obligation and either rewrite a 

complete new farm safety net program and to scrap this 

program completely and start over again, or make changes to 

this program based on the cost of production.  We should have 

80 per cent of the average cost of production instead of 70 per 

cent of a 15-year floating price average. 

 

But realizing that we're in a federal-provincial agreement, and 

we do not have the resources nor the power to deliver an 

adequate program from a provincial basis, we have no choice 

but to live with the program that's there and continue to work 

for a better one. 

 

In the meantime we've made changes to the program that were 

there.  They were a great improvement which took out some of 

the problems with the old program, made it more market 

responsive, made it more actuarially sound, which is better for 

the taxpayers and also better, incidentally, for farmers who are 

going to be stuck with the premiums. 

 

If our lentil acreage were to go up four times like it did in 

Manitoba, that could cost the program anywhere up to $200 

million.  And that is going to have to come out of not only 

taxpayer's pockets but also out of farmers' pockets as they pay 

the premiums again next spring. 

 

(0945) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, would you be able to 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

provide me the seeded acres, this year's seeded acres, in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will have that in a few minutes, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you provide for me what your estimate 

of the cost of production . . . what the components in the cost of 

production would be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well as the member opposite 

knows, the cost of production varies considerably across the 

province.  There are different methods of calculating costs of 

production, certainly not something that's an impossibility to 

do.  Cost of production includes cash costs like seed, fertilizer, 

and chemical and so on; it includes taxes and interest and 

machinery investment and labour and so on.  And I think there 

are different ways of working out a formula that would give 

you cost of production.  I think something that would be 

relatively simple, would . . . I think, no more difficult to work 

out a cost-of-production formula than it would be to work out a 

15-year floating average that's now used. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- As I see these numbers here, your average 

yield on seeded acres in '81-90 were 16 million acres of wheat, 

an average yield of 715 kilograms per acre; 1991 went up a 

little bit, went up a little over a million acres.  The production 

actually went up based on average over average from 715 

kilograms per acre to 865 kilograms per acre.  Now was that 

because of poorer farming or better farming? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I suspect, Mr. Chairman, that was 

because of rainfall. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right, Mr. Chairman, that's precisely the 

point.  And going back to your statement in your Bill, you 

better have better reasons than 300 people saying that the 

program is no good . . . than to state in here that farmers 

followed poor farming practices last year in relation to 

management of their farm, to the crops they seeded, or 

whatever.  Then it says here: "encourage good farming 

practices."  And you've got to prove to me that farmers in 1991 

followed poor farming practices. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In the first place, Mr. Chairman, 

the member opposite is calling into question the judgement of 

the members who served on the GRIP committee who did a lot 

of work, who . . . there were 300 submissions, not 300 farmers; 

those submissions from some farm groups represented large 

number of farmers.  I think whether or not farmers followed 

poor farming practices is certainly an argument that can be 

made.  I think that the program encourages farmers to follow 

poor farming practices is an argument that cannot be made, that 

it is obvious that that program was encouraging farmers to 

follow poor farming practices. 

 

If you take a program that says to a farmer: if you grow lentils 

this program will guarantee you $200 an acre, it doesn't matter 

what happens to the price of lentils, it doesn't matter what 

happens to your crop, you're guaranteed $200 an acre if you 

seed lentils; no matter if you put fertilizer or you don't put 

fertilizer . . . That's the program, you're guaranteed $200 an 

acre. 

If you grow barley on the other hand, you're guaranteed $90 an 

acre.  It doesn't matter what happens to the price of barley, it 

doesn't matter what happens to your crop, you're guaranteed 

$90 an acre.  Now, Mr. Farmer, you sit down and decide which 

program you should . . . what good crop to grow.  Now the 

farmer's a logical person; he sits down and makes that decision.  

Now I think a lot of farmers in '91 grew barley anyway because 

they felt that that was what their land was suited for and they 

didn't want to be ripping off taxpayers and they had all kinds of 

problems about following the program. 

 

But to argue that that kind of program doesn't encourage poor 

farming practices is ridiculous.  I mean that sort of program is 

the government telling the farmer what to grow, and that is not 

the kind of program that's going to encourage good farming 

practices or good crop selection in this province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I just want to point out some other 

things that are a little interesting.  Fall rye went down in its 

volume.  You tell me why fall rye when down from '90 at 

600,000 acres to 200,000 acres in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Tell me why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The drop in acres in fall rye 

obviously had nothing to do with the program, being that they 

were seeded before the program came into effect.  I suspect the 

acreage of fall rye again is influenced by weather conditions 

and moisture in the fall and so on, and whether or not it's 

possible to seed it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I just want to point out, Mr. Minister, 

that the production was up on a per-acre basis.  In the province 

of Saskatchewan production was up last year over this year.  

Now you tell me whether you're going to be able to prove that 

the farming practices in 1991 were influenced on production.  

That's what we're talking about because that's what this is 

relating to.  It's based on the volume of production last year, 

over 1990, over this year.  You tell me why you say that there 

were poor farming practices last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it was the 

judgement of the committee that the program encouraged poor 

farming practices.  Now the extent that poor farming practices 

occurred is questionable. 

 

But again I come back to the point that you cannot make the 

argument that this program did not encourage poor farming 

practices.  And eventually farmers left in the atmosphere of that 

program, making decisions based on the program that was 

available, economics of . . . Just hard economics would have 

forced them to start making decisions based on the program 

rather than based on their own instincts and their own abilities. 

 

And therefore poor farming practices would have been the 

result of this program over a period of time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you continue to argue the fact that 

the '91 program was encouraging poor farming practices.  Isn't 

it right, Mr. Minister, that farmers were limited to an increase 

in production or seeded acreage of any specific crop to 10 per 

cent over the long-term 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

average? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, Mr. Chairman, that's not true.  

The only restriction was a restriction on first-time specialty 

crop growers at a 20 per cent limit.  On other crops there were 

no limits whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You're saying there were no limits whatsoever?  

It's my understanding, Mr. Minister, when we were touring the 

province, when farmers were asking this specific question . . . 

you come back, just looking at wheat.  In some cases, for many 

farmers wheat was better for their farming practices and for 

their farm situation; wheat was a better crop to grow. 

 

And if . . . Let's say on a 1,000 acre farm a person normally 

seeds 500 acres, that person would only be allowed -- if I 

understood the program properly -- they would be only allowed 

to add another . . . they could seed the 1,000 acres but they 

could only carry protection up to 550 acres.  They could only 

carry GRIP protection on 550 acres because of the fact that 

they were only allowed an additional 10 per cent production of 

a specific crop. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The restriction was nothing to do 

with specific crops.  You could grow whatever crop you chose.  

The restriction was on 100 per cent of your seeding intensity of 

three-year average.  So in other words if a farmer had an 

average of 1,000 acres over the past three years, he would only 

get coverage for 1,100 acres.  And that again shows, I think, 

the very flaw of the program. 

 

Again we're telling farmers that wants to seed his whole farm 

this year because it rained a lot and he thinks it's a good year to 

seed his whole farm down, he thinks that's a good farming 

practice, we've got a program that says, hey, you shouldn't do 

that or we won't cover you under the program. 

 

I mean that's the kind of thing that this program was leading to 

-- more and more government control of what the farmer put in 

his land and how he farmed.  And I think the few changes that 

we've made freed this program up to farmers to decide for 

himself what he wants to seed, when he wants to seed it, and 

how he wants to produce.  And I think that's the advantage of 

the changes that we made to the program. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what you're telling me and 

what I understood and I know a lot of farmers in our area 

understood from the program, was that it indeed limited the 

specific crops . . . or limited your acreage, the amount of 

acreage you could put into crop.  And because of that I might 

add that the farmers in our area certainly didn't go into large 

production of lentils; they didn't go into large production of 

canola, Mr. Minister.  They continued to farm based on the 

productivity of their farm. 

 

And I don't think it's fair for the minister to . . . well maybe the 

new minister answering the questions will not have the same 

answers and will not take the same political road that was taken 

by the former minister.  But I don't think it's fair to put farmers 

into a large basket and say they abuse the system. 

And I think you would also have to admit that the '91 program . 

. . and as the Minister of Agriculture was arguing the other day, 

where the '91 program set a bottom line, a person, they could 

choose, they guaranteed the insurance they were carrying.  It's 

just like the amount of insurance I would carry on my buildings 

on my farm.  This is the bottom line I receive. 

 

Whereas this program, there's no real guarantee and it is much 

less.  And farmers are trying to survive out there, Mr. Minister.  

And so I would suggest that even with this year's program, 

what we've seen in acres . . . And my colleague raised the 

number of acres that have gone into lentil production this year, 

I don't think is an indication that people were farming the 

program. 

 

I think people were looking at a cash crop to come in because 

you would have, from what I see, the guarantee on lentils 

certainly isn't there to encourage larger production of lentils.  

But what has happened, we see the problem that was created in 

the Manitoba situation, and what Manitoba did and the federal 

government did, they addressed the situation prior to seeding. 

 

And what we had suggested all along, Mr. Minister, was with 

some minor changes, the program could have addressed a 

number of the concerns that have been raised.  And I think the 

other area of concern that's out there is the fact that this coming 

fall the federal government is going to be bringing down their 

changes. 

 

Where are farmers in Saskatchewan going to be?  The fact that 

they've had three major program changes in the last three years, 

the Saskatchewan farmers are on the outside looking in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The circumstance with respect to 

restrictions on last year's program was that farmers were 

restricted to seeding 110 per cent of the previous three-year 

average, as the member's aware.  But there was another 

restriction for new producers of a specialty crop of a 20 per 

cent restriction on what they could seed within that 110 per 

cent limit. 

 

The fact is that Manitoba, and their program design this year to 

overcome the very strong signal early in spring that their lentil 

production would be very, very excessive, intervened by a 

pricing alteration in their structure.  That would be consistent 

with our criticism of the existing plan, that the 15-year rolling 

average price is a very inappropriate signal for this kind of a 

program. 

 

And in fact the circumstance that arose in Manitoba would 

confirm that that's so, because the correction that they then 

made was to approximate closer to a cost-of-production 

indication in their system so people would not be discouraged 

for selecting a crop whose 15-year average distorted its 

attractiveness as a crop beyond what the market-place would 

do. 

 

It's consistent with the language that the National Farmers 

Union used in their minority report that was presented with the 

GRIP report -- that in the ideal world a cost-of-production 

mechanism is a much more positive way of reflecting 

compensation and stability for crops. 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

But the program was not designed that way initially.  So the 

fact that in doing the fix they've gone back to that kind of a 

signal is interesting, because the federal government supported 

that fix based on that kind of a contention. 

 

(1000) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So that what you've said, Mr. Minister, confirms 

the fact that actually the '91 program did have some checks and 

balances to it.  The fact that as a . . . the example I had a minute 

ago about 1,000 seeded acres, and your guarantee was only if 

your normal seeding pattern over the last number of years was 

an average of 500 acres; at 10 per cent more, the volume that 

GRIP would protect you for would be 550. 

 

If you put 1,000 acres in, you could only carry GRIP on 550 

acres.  Also if you didn't seed lentils, you were limited to 20 

per cent of the seeded acreage, if I understand.  To me that's 

provided some checks and balances so that a person wouldn't 

just take their total farm and, because lentils was the crop that 

had the best guarantee, to turn around and all of a sudden seed 

1,000 acres of lentils when maybe you hadn't seeded it before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, you very accurately describe last 

year's program, that in fact it did have checks and balances -- 

the kind of checks and balances that farmers get absolutely 

distraught about because they don't like living in a world where 

they have to go read the rule book before they go see what they 

seed.  They would like to figure out what they think the 

market's doing and recognize what their own practices are on 

their farm. 

 

They know what grows well over on those hills or over on that 

flat piece of land or over in another corner of the farm.  They 

know what they grew there last year.  They know what makes 

sense.  When they now have to start reading a rule book and 

saying, well now if I do X, then I can only do a little bit of it 

and if I do Y, I can only do that much, and to survive this year 

I'm going to have do it this way, this is very, very frustrating 

for farmers.  It's frustrating for them in those kinds of 

programs.  It's frustrating for them in the NISA (net income 

stabilization account) program.  As you know, the extension on 

NISA has been extended already twice this year and they're 

still only at 25 or 30 per cent sign-up. 

 

Farmers would like to just get on with the business of farming 

and have a very simple program that they can function from so 

they can produce as they know best, into a market-place that 

they're happy to deal with along with those supports they have, 

like the Canadian Wheat Board, and farm and stop all this 

insane paperwork. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I agree with you regarding the insane 

paperwork and yet your government is just creating more by 

bringing in purple gas and the applications for refunds on fuel. 

But let's . . . or purple diesel. 

 

But getting back to the questions we have on the GRIP 

program and the fact that, as you indicated, well the checks and 

balances were there.  What you've done this year is you've gone 

from 100 per cent average production down to 70 or 80 per 

cent, whatever the person would choose. 

You'd say farmers will then make the decision based on the 

ability of their specific land they dwell on, to produce.   And I 

want to indicate to you, as I indicated to the former minister, 

that if you take a look in the area I come from, there weren't 

any major shifts in seeding patterns because farmers looked, 

they looked at the program.  Most of the farmers signed up for 

the program, if not all of the framers in our area.  They signed 

up for the program.  But they didn't sign up on it because they 

were going to say: well boy, this program isn't all that bad; I'm 

going to put this crop in because this is the best area and I can 

reap a pretty good return on it. 

 

They continue to farm their land based on their long-time 

farming practices.  And if there were one or two or a few, and 

which I'm not aware of any and certainly in our area, the fact 

remained, Mr. Minister, that from what I observed and from 

what many people observed, and one of the concerns people 

have had over the past winter, is the fact that we continually 

throw out the idea of the poor farming practices of a number of 

individuals. 

 

And I think the area . . . the concern raised out in the rural 

community is the fact that when we continue to throw these 

ideas or these suggestions out, is the urban centre just continues 

to look at the rural community as living off that urban base. 

 

And I don't think that's fair, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact 

that farmers across this country . . . our average, I think it's less 

than 3 per cent of the total population of Canada -- is in the 

agriculture production factor.  We are producing five times as 

much product as we can consume in this country.  And yes, 

farmers would like a fair price, but we're living in a 

market-place that we have very little control over. 

 

And I think what the program '91 did and what you've done is 

you've taken . . . Farmers will like to know that when they sign 

a contract that the government or whoever they're signing the 

contract with is going to honour that contract, and also live by 

the rules of that contract.  And that is the biggest question out 

there right now, is the fact that the government could make 

major changes rather than accepting the fact that all the 

discussion last spring said, you can expect some minor changes 

as we sit down and try and revamp or look at the program, 

refine the programs to make them more responsive to market 

needs, to working with farm groups and farm communities. 

 

And it also . . . If I'm not mistaken, Mr. Minister, many of the 

farm groups or the groups that were involved and presented 

this last study that you're basing all your facts on -- many of the 

groups in reviewing it -- we haven't talked to any that agree 

that the type of changes that were made were the right ones at 

this time.  And I think many would have suggested would have 

been more appropriate if they would have . . . if you would 

have made a few minor adjustments, and sit down with the 

federal government, and come up with the changes we know 

will be taking place for the 1993 crop year.  So that the whole 

farm community and the business community would have had 

more than enough time to adjust to changes and offer 

suggestions. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

The other idea you . . . and we continue to hear, and I certainly 

have coming across my office and desk too, is the fact of cost 

to production.  Cost to production can vary from farm to farm.  

And I'm not sure how the department or how you as a minister 

are going to try and iron out what cost to production is; what 

the cost to production from my farm will be compared to my 

neighbour down the road, as different people have different 

farming practices; demand different types of inputs and 

expense factors, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I would suggest that many farmers still are concerned out 

there as to what is taking place.  And yes, no one wants to be 

dictated to by government.  They want to have the ability to sit 

down, throw some ideas together . . . and at the end of the day 

we're not going to come up with the program.  I don't care 

which government it is, I don't care how many farm groups you 

get together, you're still going to find that there'll be someone 

unhappy. 

 

But I think what we need to do is look at designing a long-term 

program that farmers can sit down with, that even the 

small-business community will be happy to see.  Because 

you've got your bulk dealers, you've got your fertilizer dealers, 

you've got your chemical dealers.  All these businesses are 

relying on . . . relying . . . their stability.  And the fact that they 

continue to exist depends on that individual farmer deriving 

enough from his inputs and from his farming practices and 

from his farm to pay the bills that he has incurred. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we've covered a fair bit of 

space.  I'll begin at the end to say that in fact the Act that we 

are now reviewing does provide for a committee to look at 

farm support programs.  And that's exactly our intent, to look at 

the farm support programs in the absence of the constraints that 

the present federal-provincial agreement puts on the discussion. 

 

The issue the member opposite raises with respect to cost to 

production; it was one of the issues raised by last year's 

committee that said they did not have time to address.  It was 

an issue raised in the minority report.  The issue of elevator 

delivery of the program, the issue of whether or not spot-loss 

hail could be reintroduced -- those were all themes that were 

identified by the committee as something they could not 

address within the time frames that were available between 

when we took over in government and when the report had to 

be in, which was February 15.  So they worked very hard and 

consulted broadly in the period of time that was available to 

them to bring forward this report. 

 

And it's our intention now to set up a committee that is going to 

look very broadly.  They will continue to look at the programs 

that are in place, but they will also look to alternatives to say: if 

we were designing our program, how would we run it?  And I 

think they're clearly from the producer reactions . . . is 

significant feeling amongst farmers that GRIP '91 or GRIP '92 

are based on some pretty flawed principles and need to be 

replaced by something more appropriate.  And we will work 

with farmers to look at that. 

 

One of the very serious design flaws in the program, as it 

continues to be, is that the support level dwindles.  This year 

the support level would have dwindled to $3.86 on wheat had 

the provinces not come in and said, we want to support it.  The 

federal government should in fact have provided that additional 

money, but the provinces came in and said: we will support this 

move to 4.07 because the federal government did not.  So the 

3.86 was where the price was going. 

 

On a 15-year average, when you look at the prices declining, 

the support price for farmers continues to disappear while 

farmers' costs continue to rise on the long haul.  And that's an 

absolutely fundamental design flaw. 

 

The reality was that the federal government was supposed to 

put in third line of defence funding that would take that over.  

Well if the federal government will trigger that, then we make 

well that problem in the second-line funding.  The federal 

governments said they would pay for . . . as this declining 

support level disables farmers, the federal government initially 

said that we will provide third line of defence which will make 

this whole.  But the federal government has been using 

language recently that says they don't intend to do that. 

 

Well we're going to keep pushing them to do it, because it was 

their commitment when Saskatchewan joined in this program; 

because without that this program absolutely guarantees 

disaster for Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, a couple of areas that you've 

covered in your response: first of all regarding the committee, 

and I raise this and I point this out right now.  There are many 

farmers that I have talked to who feel that even with our 

government, when we asked a number of farm groups to 

appoint representatives to sit on the committee looking at farm 

income support programs, we found, what I found, Mr. 

Minister, is the fact that many farmers out there just feel that 

the individuals who ended up sitting on the committee making 

the recommendations were individuals who were more 

interested in supporting their organization and speaking on the 

basis of an organization versus the real impact of the farm and 

the farm that they represent. 

 

And what I would suggest to the minister is that the minister 

and the department look very seriously at allowing some 

producer input on the committee from individuals whose total 

interest in any kind of mechanism or program is based on the 

fact that they're totally involved in their farming operation. 

 

And it would appear to me that many farm groups and many 

farmers themselves just felt that the person at the bottom of the 

rung, the person actually out doing the farming, wasn't really 

making the decisions.  It was based on, if you happen to be a 

member of the pulse growers, well then your interests were 

centred around what your organization was standing for.  If you 

happen to be a member of the wheat growers, then it was the 

arguments that your representative would be making would be 

based on what the wheat growers were standing for. 

 

So regarding a committee, I trust that when a committee is 

struck . . . and I'm not sure, if we're just going to start 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

striking a committee again. If I understand correctly, the 

federal government already had a team addressing or 

reassessing the support programs so that they could bring in 

recommendations this fall.  And I think if we're just starting to 

put together a committee, I would like to know if indeed what 

consultations have taken place with the federal government 

regarding changes to the proposed program for the 1993 

program. 

 

A second thing, Mr. Minister, you continually go back to a 

third line of defence.  And if there's one thing that many 

farmers do not like, and I think you raised it just a moment ago 

as well, is a third line of defence doesn't help in laying out a 

budget.  You never know whether or not you're going to get a 

third line of defence.  You never know what the amount will 

work out to, Mr. Minister.  And in doing that, how do you 

budget for your farming operation?  How do you plan for 

tomorrow? 

 

As well, Mr. Minister, every time there's a government pay-out, 

then it sends, in my opinion, the wrong signals to the consumer 

out there.  The consumer continually believes that the farmers 

can only exist as long as the government, through the 

consumers' tax dollar, is throwing money into the pot. 

 

I would suggest to you the best thing for the farming industry is 

to design a program that farmers, if they choose, can carry; that 

will give them protection.  It's an insurance program that they 

can carry and it's insurance that they're carrying on their 

farming operation.  If they choose not to, they're working 

within whatever the market-place has to offer.  And I'm not 

sure that the '92 program offers that, but certainly those are 

some things I think we need to take a serious look at as we look 

into the 1993 crop year.  And I trust, Mr. Minister, that you will 

indeed when it comes to the committee, take a very broad look 

at trying to involve farmers from different areas of the province 

whose strict business is farming, not involved with many of the 

different groups around this province who then get involved in 

specific interests. 

 

(1015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

opportunity to respond to these points.  There are really two the 

member opposite raises.  One has to do with the committee 

structure, and the other has to do with the nature of 

programming and farm support. 

 

With respect to the committee's structure, I just want to lay out 

at the outset that the committee that was in place was appointed 

by the government of the members opposite in July of 1991. 

 

In the time allowed for bringing forward a report, it would not 

have been possible to reconstruct that committee.  Because if 

the members opposite have ever tried to construct a committee, 

they are aware that it takes several months to get agreement on 

structure and names and those kinds of things. 

 

So what we did was contacted the organizations who had 

representation on the committee, and asked them to confirm or 

change their membership, because that was the committee that 

was in place.  And that was then what 

was done.  It was the committee of the government opposite 

that was asked to continue with the examination of the program 

as provided for in the legislation passed by the members 

opposite. 
 

What I did change on the committee was added the National 

Farmers' Union, who had been deliberately and methodically 

removed from every area of consultation by the members 

opposite in their term in office.  And I added them back into 

the consultative process, and they've made a very positive 

contribution. 
 

And in response to the comment of the member opposite with 

respect to having ordinary farmers on the committee who did 

not have an organizational attachment, I appointed two 

members at large to the committee who were ordinary farmers 

-- Nettie Wiebe and Lloyd Johns. 
 

So that in fact the organizational representatives were there and 

there were also farmers at large. 
 

Now as often happens in the construction of committees, and 

obviously happened when the members opposite constructed 

theirs, that the result of that kind of committee construction 

does not guarantee regional balance in the committee 

construction.  And that issue was raised, and I appreciate that.  

It's an issue that we need to address in the new committee, and 

we will. 
 

But on another matter with respect to the members opposite, 

they have liked to take two kinds of shots at the committee.  

And I want to pay my respects to the committee.  The 

committee went out and consulted broadly within the time 

frame they had; a time frame not set by them, a time frame not 

set by us. 
 

They began to work after the election.  They had until February 

15, as designed in the legislation by the members opposite, to 

deliver their report.  So in that time period they consulted 

broadly and they brought forward a report resulting from their 

consultations and from their deliberations. 
 

But the members opposite continue to take two kinds of shots 

at the committee.  One is that as an organization that they 

weren't individuals, that they weren't farmers. 
 

Well the members opposite ought to know that the members on 

the committee are farmers.  Barry Senft is a farmer, Brian 

Perkins is a farmer, Roy Piper is a farmer, Lloyd Johns is a 

farmer, Brett Meinert is a farmer, Gordon Cresswell is a 

farmer.  I believe Hartley Furtan, while he's an economist, is 

also a farmer.  I don't know if Keith Hayward is a farmer.  But 

Leonard Kehrig is a farmer and Sinclair Harrison is a farmer. 
 

These are farmers that cover the political spectrum, that are 

dedicated to the organizations they serve, but they are members 

of their organizations because they are farmers.  That's what 

they do for a living.  So they work through their organizations 

to bring forward thoughts. 
 

On the other hand, the members opposite say, well these 

individuals are too interested in their organizations and not as 

individuals, that somehow they don't represent the opinion of 

their organizations. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

Well, Mr. Chairman, do they represent the opinion of their 

organizations or don't they represent the opinions of the 

organizations?  My reading is that they are people whose 

names are approved by their organizations and who in this kind 

of consultative process speak for their organizations.  And it's 

my intention to continue to use broad-based groups where 

legitimate farmers who are interested in the future of 

Saskatchewan and good programming for Saskatchewan will 

consult with us and will direct government policy. 

 

I have most recently announced that we will do that with 

respect to the red meat sector, something never done by the 

members opposite in terms of establishing a good, broad-based 

discussion with the industry.  It's my belief that that's how good 

policy is developed. 

 

We did it with respect to the farm debt crisis.  We had a very 

broad-based group put together to look at that issue.  That's 

how good farm policy is developed.  Certainly as the member 

opposite says, there are sometimes disagreements.  But they are 

disagreements that arise from the best possible consultation and 

that represent the industry as well as it can be represented.  And 

then some people will disagree, and that's apparent. 

 

Now with respect to the other issue, which is the whole issue 

that you raised with respect to third line of defence and saying 

that governments shouldn't be putting money into the hands of 

farmers, Mr. Chairman, there was a deal made between the 

federal government and the provinces that said this was the 

way farm support would be delivered.  There was a deal. 

 

Now it was a deal that put much more weight on farmers and 

the provinces than happens anywhere else.  It was a deal that 

didn't recognize the fact that in the European Community and 

in the United States of America, their federal government 

provides their export subsidies and their program 

enhancements. 

 

In Canada the provinces made a deal with the federal 

government.  And I agree, it would be a lot simpler if the 

federal government would just do what our competitors do; in 

other words, provide the support to farmers that they require 

because of international trade problems.  It is a national 

responsibility.  The American government recognizes that, the 

European Community recognizes that, and I wish our Canadian 

government would recognize that.  And I wish you would work 

to encourage your brothers in Ottawa to recognize that. 

 

But the deal was struck to say no, in Canada 60 per cent of the 

bill for the international trade dilemma, based on pricing, 

would be borne by farmers in the province.  So we signed a 

deal.  Bad as it was, the members opposite signed this deal with 

Ottawa, ignoring the fact that that 100 per cent paid by the 

federal governments in our major competitors and those who 

disable us through their trade strategies . . . And the members 

opposite then need to recognize that their government signed 

this kind of a bad deal that puts 60 per cent of the bill for this 

on the provinces and the farmers. 

 

Now the members opposite are suggesting that not only 

should that 60 per cent be paid, but we should pay even more.  

We should pay the federal commitment yet.  Well that's not 

good enough, I'm sorry.  Saskatchewan farmers have paid as 

much as they can pay.  The Saskatchewan economy is based in 

the farmers and the businesses based on farming in the 

province.  And you can't expect somebody who's bleeding to 

death to give themselves a blood transfusion.  It's just very, 

very difficult and impossible. 

 

So the fact is that we've got a deal.  I appreciate what the 

member opposite is saying.  It would make much more sense if 

the federal government would cut the paperwork and provide 

the support the way the European Community does and the 

way the United States of America does. But that's not the case.  

So in the mean time, let's at least demand that the federal 

government pay the share of the bill that they agreed to pay 

when you guys signed this very bad agreement with the feds. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, a couple of comments, and I 

think the comments we've been trying to bring out all along.  

First, number one, Mr. Minister, you said that there was such a 

short time frame for this committee to operate in.  And no one 

will disagree with that.  That's one of the arguments we've been 

presenting from day one, is the fact that you made substantial 

changes to a program when even committee members realized 

they didn't have, wouldn't have, the proper time to be able to 

review and reassess the program.  And even on the basis of the 

contract and the commitment made by the participants last 

year, Mr. Minister, the commitment was made to continue to 

review the program and, over a period of time, redesign it to 

work out the flaws in the program. 

 

But what you have done is you've changed the program 

substantially when you knew in fact, even committee members 

acknowledged, that they wouldn't have the proper and adequate 

time to address the problems within the program. 

 

Mr. Minister, you also talked of a number of groups submitting 

recommendations.  And I'm not sure whether they submitted 

them verbally, whether they submitted them through letter.  I'd 

like to have a list of all the organizations, groups, or individuals 

who submitted proposals to the committee or the 

recommendations that they were making to the committee 

regarding changes they saw or thought would be adequate to 

address the needs of this program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the department could 

compile that list.  It's not compiled in list form.  If the members 

opposite would wish it, I would ask them to do that, of people 

who contributed their point of view to the committee, both 

through hearings and through letters to the committee or to the 

ministers of the government. 

 

I just want to comment though on the question of time and the 

timeliness for change.  Until the day we changed the program I 

was getting letters that said, the biggest mistake I ever made 

was joining GRIP.  Those letters began when I became the 

minister and they never ceased until the day we changed the 

program.  There were clear indications from the farmers of 

Saskatchewan that GRIP '91 did not meet their needs. 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

Now I want to say with respect to the committee: the 

committee met, the committee respected the concerns that the 

member opposite talks about with respect to time, but then 

made these recommendations.  And I need to make it very clear 

that the advisory committee, based on those organizations 

which broadly represent farmers across the province -- and 

appreciate the shortcomings in the structure, and those will be 

addressed for future review. They're shortcomings that were a 

result of the design of the structure by the members opposite 

when they created the legislation and the first committee, one 

that we carried forward . . . and those will be addressed in the 

future review. 

 

But the committee made these recommendations.  GRIP should 

be provided a separate crop insurance and revenue insurance 

programs. They didn't say, we don't have time to tell you that.  

They said, GRIP should be provided a separate crop insurance 

and revenue insurance programs.  That's the majority report.  If 

you read the minority report they say the same thing.  GRIP 

should be provided as two separate programs. 

 

There was disagreement about the model for the delivery of the 

revenue insurance, but the principle that they should be 

provided as separate programs was consistent between the 

minority and the majority report. 

 

The crop insurance program should operate as it was prior to 

1991, and that the crop insurance price be set at the same level 

as the market price used in the revenue insurance program.  

They didn't say, we don't have time to make this decision.  

They said, we recommend that the crop insurance program 

should operate as it was prior to 1991. 

 

They said, the revenue insurance program should operate more 

as a deficiency-payment type program.  They didn't say, we 

don't have time to think about this.  They said, after what we 

have heard, we think and we recommend that the revenue 

insurance program should operate more as a 

deficiency-payment type program.  They said that no offsets 

between price and yield should be included in the revenue 

insurance program.  They did not say, we don't have time to 

think about this.  They said, having heard the evidence for the 

time that we very intensely worked on this from the people 

who've spoken to us and from our consultation with those who 

came together with us in discussion and from our collective 

observations of those presentations to us, they said, no offsets 

between price and yield should be included in the revenue 

insurance program. 

 

They said that both crop insurance and revenue insurance 

should reflect the management ability of individual farmers in 

determining coverage and payments.  They didn't say, we don't 

have time to think about this.  They said, having thought about 

it, this is our recommendation. 

 

They said that only the revised program be offered to farmers 

in 1992.  The members opposite have repeatedly talked about 

offering another option.  The option of '91 and '92 being 

offered concurrently was examined by the committee and 

rejected by the committee as an impractical impossibility.  

They said that before they 

delivered the report. 

 

The members opposite have contended through May and June 

and July and August that we should offer programs side by 

side.  Well, members opposite, the committee considered that 

possibility prior to March 15 and said, no, it should not be. 

 

You must remember also that that happened after some 

associations sat down with us and said, we've got concerns.  

But they said, in spite of that . . .  They didn't say, go back to 

1991, or we don't have time to think about this.  They said, 

having considered the evidence, we say that only the revised 

program be offered to farmers in 1992, i.e., current GRIP 

should not be continued as an option for farmers.  That is the 

direct language of the report. 

 

Now I don't know how we can say that the committee didn't 

make those recommendations.  They considered the input they 

had, they knew the time frames they were working in, and they 

said . . . They didn't say, no, we haven't had time to consider 

this; we think we should continue for another year and review 

it next year.  They said, we should not continue to offer 1991 

GRIP. 

 

With respect to the legislation of the federal-provincial 

agreement, the intent by the federal government when the 

program was begun was that after the first year of operation the 

program should be reviewed, which is why the members 

opposite very appropriately put into their legislation a review 

process.  Because it was the intent of the federal-provincial 

agreement that there should be a review after one year. 

 

(1030) 

 

Well Saskatchewan engaged in its review.  It was begun by you 

and it was continued by us.  And this was the result of the 

review.  The fact that the federal government did not carry 

forward with its broad review was not our breaking of the 

agreement; it was their breaking of the intent of the agreement. 

 

So now we are going to continue to review it again and we will 

continue to review it again.  It is obvious that a program that 

begins with as many flaws as this one began with, that it will 

be a long time before it meets the needs of farmers.  We'll 

continue to work with farmers.  We want to be advised by 

them.  And we will set up processes that are as broad and 

consultative as time and circumstances allows, and we will 

have the opinions of farmers for every future change.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it would appear to me that 

you can take one point out of the committee report -- and I 

think there were a number of . . . I think if we took the time to 

speak to the organizations that were involved, we may find, as 

we find with the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) . . . representative from SARM and SARM 

itself, one of the major organizations in this province, the fact 

that on April 27 that a letter went out because of the confusion 

regarding the '91-92 GRIP program; and because of the fact 

that SARM had a number of concerns, five in particular, 

regarding the program and changes. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

These concerns were: time limitations, trying to get the 

information out adequately to farmers; the bankability of the 

program, which people are running into; the federal-provincial 

agreement; lack of broad-based producer input; and significant 

change violating contract.  The report was then signed by 

SARM as a participant and submitted to the minister. 

 

But the SARM representative also indicated that due to a 

number of these factors, he didn't feel -- and that was Mr. 

Harrison -- didn't feel that there was the appropriate time 

necessary to go out and explain the program and give 

producers the time that was needed to sit down and make a 

sound business decision. 

 

And therefore SARM recommended that the review committee 

put over and not bring in the total changes for the 1992 

program.  They suggested that you wait a year and work 

together with the federal government as well, and work 

together as an organization, Mr. Minister. 

 

And what you've just given us, the diatribe you've just gone 

through, it looks to me, it would appear to me, Mr. Minister, 

that all you've done is succumbed to the Minister of Finance 

and to your colleagues on the front benches; and that you're 

going to continually put the blame at the feet of somebody else 

rather than accepting the fact that if you would have made a 

few minor changes as were indicated last year, and allow the 

process to develop, we wouldn't be in the pickle we are in 

today. 

 

And I again would like to quote a final paragraph from a letter 

addressed by the executive director of SARM which says: 

 

 The SARM hopes that the short summary points out very 

clearly what the SARM position was and still remains.  To 

conclude we will quote a paragraph that was a concluding 

paragraph in a letter to the minister on February 10th, "With 

the aforementioned points in mind (the five concerns I've just 

mentioned) we feel that it is imperative that the proposed 

changes be deferred a year until the committee and producers 

have had the chance to study them more carefully.  To 

significantly change the GRIP program at this point would 

only be the source of additional confusion and stress for 

producers." 

 

And there's no doubt about the fact that making those type of 

changes at the time when you did, Mr. Minister, and 

continually falling upon the . . . making the argument that this 

province was in debt when in fact your Finance minister went 

and added to last year's debt by just taking a lot of money out 

of Crown corporations and writing off debt, as the Provincial 

Auditor has already indicated he has difficulty with; and you 

have used that platform to revisit and just totally destroy a 

program simply because the former Conservative government 

went and talked to the federal government and tried to devise 

an insurance program that would give farmers a better ability 

of understanding where they stood and how they could make a 

qualified business decision regarding the operation of their 

farm. 

 

So what you're saying today, you're saying that you've 

consulted.  At the same time, Mr. Minister, what we're saying 

is you didn't heed the advice of many of the members on that 

committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the members 

opposite ought to pay more attention to the facts in this regard.  

I had to sit and tie myself into my seat as members opposite 

made speeches over the last couple of weeks and over the last 

couple of months, paying absolutely zero respect to the facts. 

 

The contention that this committee was given any direction 

with respect to program design from Finance is an absolute 

disrespect to the truth, however strongly that can be stated 

without being booted out of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I have heard your leader, I have heard other members of your 

delegation, repeatedly say that the committee was directed.  If 

you can find one shred of evidence that the committee was 

directed with respect to finances in that regard, I would like to 

see it because it did not come from me. 

 

The fact was the committee brought forward their 

recommendations.  The committee brought forward their 

recommendations.  If the committee ever had any frustrations, 

it is that I did not dictate to them what the result of the program 

should be.  It was they who brought the recommendations to 

me, as I believe it should be. 

 

They are the ones that represent the organizations and the 

farmers of the province.  They are the ones that live out on 

their farms and in their communities.  It's they who know that.  

So any contention that there was direction given in that regard 

is an absolute disrespect of the truth. 

 

I will talk later about adjustments that were made by us to other 

programs when we had this program as recommended to us as 

an alternative.  But that was our decision at a point after the 

program was designed and offered to us.  There was never 

direction given to the committee, never direction given to the 

committee around the kind of program they should bring 

forward.  There was never direction in that regard. 

 

Now with respect to the consultation process, it's my belief, 

and I hope it's the belief of others who work in bodies that have 

integrity, that when you commit yourself to a discussion, you 

commit yourself to the results of that discussion.  I can see if 

somebody's left out of a discussion, I can see them saying, look 

I didn't have my say; I disagree. 

 

The members that sat on this committee independently 

consulted with the public, independently considered what they 

heard, and independently brought recommendations forward to 

me on February 11 with their signatures, including the 

signature of their representative of SARM, to do the things I 

just read into the record several minutes ago. 

 

The point the members opposite have repeatedly made is that 

we should always make changes by March 15.  Well, members 

opposite, we did make changes by March 15.  And we 

announced them on March 13. 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

But now the members opposite are suggesting, having made 

those changes by March 15, we should then make some other 

changes on April 27.  Well which way do you want it?  Do you 

want to make changes in April and May and June and July and 

August or do you want to make changes before March 15?  

Well we made changes before March 15.  So please be 

consistent in your expectations. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about integrity.  You 

talk about presenting the facts.  I didn't accuse the committee of 

having accepted the recommendations of Finance.  I suggested, 

Mr. Minister, that what you have done is listened to the 

Minister of Finance rather than to . . . You've looked at a 

number of the recommendations of the committee.  But one of 

the strong suggestions that even, as I indicated, SARM had 

indicated, postpone major changes to the program because of 

the confusion it's going to create. 

 

I didn't suggest that the committee were dictated to by your 

office.  And I don't think that was fair, Mr. Minister.  What I 

suggested, Mr. Minister, was that in fact out of your office and 

as minister that you were indeed listening closer to the Minister 

of Finance than you were listening to the committee, the 

all-producer committee that you had out there, and accepting 

the fact that the tight guidelines that they were working under 

didn't give them the ability to . . . They could make some sound 

decisions.  But as SARM indicated, the process . . . there wasn't 

enough time to make the major changes, and therefore, Mr. 

Minister, the confusion that we face today. 

 

And I think the confusion could have been all alleviated by 

leaving the '91 program in place, with some minor changes, 

and indeed, as we've indicated, taking the time to talk to 

producers.  And I don't think . . . we talked about the fact that 

there wasn't enough time to really get out there. 

 

We asked . . . I asked a minute ago, Mr. Minister, for you to 

submit the names and the organizations.  And we'd also like to 

see the written submissions or the submissions that came in.  

And would the minister also take the time to forward the letters 

that came to his office indicating that changes must be made to 

the program, that people were not happy with the '91 program?  

Would the minister commit to present . . . list those names, the 

submissions, and the list of the letters that came from 

individual producers to your office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of comments.  

First of all, just to clarify that with respect to the member 

opposite's response to my last response on the recommendation 

of the committee, I want to reiterate that the committee signed 

the report understanding the time frames that were in place, 

believing that we had time after February 15 to implement the 

report. 

 

Now they, I suspect, were not contemplating the kind of 

interference from the federal government because they had 

been in contact.  Four of these members of this committee were 

on the National GRIP Committee, had been on the National 

GRIP Committee. They understood the context of the 

federal-provincial agreement.  They brought their 

recommendations forward in the belief that 

this would flow relatively freely. They were not of the belief 

that the federal government would spend a month blockading 

the exercise. 

 

So if there was any concern about time, it may have grown 

over time, as the federal government began to play its game 

with their parallel members here in the province. 

 

But the fact is that the committee brought forward and we 

announced the program on March 13, with respect to timing.  

Farmers had up until, originally, April 30, then May 15 -- 

which is more time than they had last year -- to consider their 

discussions, to consider the program.  They in the end had 

choices extended by circumstance to July 20. 

 

But they had adequate time to understand the program and I 

want to give credit to the crop insurance system that went out 

and delivered information and gave farmers access to 

information. 

 

And I want to give credit to the agrologists that worked for 

Rural Development who went out and had public meetings -- 

not public political meetings like the members opposite 

scheduled last year where they had these great things.  We sent 

the professionals.  After the program was designed by public 

consultation, we sent the professional, the agrology 

professionals out into the field to discuss with farmers the 

program. 

 

We didn't have a parade of politicians running around trying to 

do that job; that's not their job.  Our job is to hear, and the 

system's job is to deliver.  And at the time when the program 

was delivered, after having heard, we sent the agrologists out 

into the field and the crop insurance agents out into the field, 

and I want to give them credit for the way in which they 

delivered the information to the farmers of this province. 

 

Now with respect to . . . Now was there another point that you 

had wanted us to address? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I've asked -- and it's the second time -- asked for a 

list of all the people who made submissions and the 

submissions that were presented, as well as a copy of the letters 

that came to your office demanding changes to the program. 

 

(1045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, appreciate that.  This discussion has 

been held between Justice and Agriculture relative to what's 

appropriate to release with respect to the confidentiality of 

letters to the minister, and because some of those were letters 

to the minister where people expect them to be letters to the 

minister and not necessarily made public. 

 

The understanding we have is that we can provide a list of 

those who submitted their opinions to the minister and to 

others, and that we can provide the documentation of what they 

said with the identification removed of who it was that said it.  

But we will take that matter up with Justice with respect to 

what's appropriate in that regard, and we will provide it in the 

form that's acceptable legally, respecting the rights of those 

who expressed their 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

opinions to the minister. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I want to go back to this 

encouraging good farming practices.  This spring when we 

were making the decision on what to seed, we visited with our 

neighbour who does the seeding for us and his observation was 

this.  Based on the program and understanding the program, it 

would be best for individuals, because of the least amount of 

influence in the area coverage, that you should seed feed grains 

and particularly oats. 

 

We asked him why.  And he said, because you're not going to 

influence the overall production in wheat which is going to 

carry you in your revenue insurance and your volume in the 

revenue insurance. You will be able to transfer that into your 

coverage on your revenue side on your wheat . . . on your feed 

grains.  And therefore, Mr. Minister, I am suggesting to you 

that on the basis of information that I have received right here, 

that oats went up from 550,000 acres to 1.1 million acres. 

 

Now you're saying that the program in 1991 was flawed.  And I 

agree there were flaws in it, but not to the extent that you're 

talking about.  You said there were good farming practices in 

1992 and no good farming practices in 1991.  Production is up 

last year over this year.  In fact production in 1991 is up in 

every area on a per-acre basis in every crop seeded in the last 

10 years.  There isn't one crop on this paper that is less than the 

average in 1991. 

 

And the point I want to make is what the farmers in Melfort are 

going to tell you on Monday and what Harley Furtan told us as 

a caucus: you have to have something in there to measure the 

impact of drought in relation to the program.  And what you 

have done, sir, is taken that out of there.  Because now you 

don't get covered for 100 per cent, you get covered for 80 per 

cent.  That, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking about. 

 

And I would suggest to you there's just as much moral hazard 

in what you're doing here in allowing everyone to get a benefit.  

Even though they get 100 per cent of production, they will get 

an additional benefit in their revenue insurance over what they 

normally would get.  And the drought guys in Melfort, Tisdale, 

St. Walburg, and west of North Battleford, what are they going 

to get?  They're going to get a kick, Mr. Minister, because they 

don't get the difference of 80 to 100 per cent on the volume.  

They don't get that.  They won't get it in those places. 

 

And so you want to talk about a moral hazard, you talk about 

that for a while.  And then say to me, oh we got to make all of 

these big changes because we had so much moral hazard in 

1991.  The program was not negatively impacted in any single 

crop in 1991 that it would not have been normally.  In fact, Mr. 

Minister, the production in every one of those crops is higher in 

1991 than it was in 1990 -- the volume of production.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

And so what you're telling the world is that moral hazard drove 

the cost of the program up last year.  It didn't, sir.  In fact the 

volume of production reduced the liability of the Government 

of Saskatchewan by a considerable amount 

and by Crop Insurance.  And that, sir, is a fact. 

 

I'll tell you why you got a problem with this.  If you go back to 

the very centre of this book that Agriculture Saskatchewan put 

out last year, you will find why your Finance department is so 

scared of this.  You'll find it.  Because farmers after 1977 and 

1992 -- the 15-year coverage -- in 1977 it's going to start going 

up in price.  And that is the reason why that Minister of 

Finance wouldn't be able to stomach it.  And you, sir, knuckled 

under to that.  That's the whole essence of this discussion. 

 

You said, we will abide by reducing the volume of payment to 

farmers when they are in the position to receive the highest 

benefit from the program.  And you, sir, wanted to have cost of 

production on top of that.  Cost of production, Mr. Minister, 

you would've bankrupted this whole province in one year on 

that basis. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why this "whereas" should be struck.  

Because you, sir, don't have the facts, hard-core statistical facts 

to prove that you are saying that last year there was a moral 

hazard in the farming practices that were followed.  You don't 

have the statistical proof.  I've asked you three or four times, 

and all I get is 300 letters and submissions. 

 

That's not hard facts, Mr. Minister.  This is a political 

statement.  It's a political statement and it's not based on fact.  

And you tell me . . . I am willing to sit here and listen until you 

tell me that you have proof that in 1991 farmers farmed 

terribly.  And you only have one single item that you identify, 

and that's fertilizer.  Fertilizer sales were down in '90-91, but 

we had a higher crop production.  Tell me why. 

 

It's a political statement.  It isn't a statement of fact.  It's a 

political statement that you're making there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

makes broad-ranging comments.  It may take me a minute to 

respond to them. 

 

The idea of statistical proof, of great treatises on analysis that 

the member opposite knows have difficulty being collected to 

the degree that they have, it takes economics' departments 

some time to accumulate those kinds of things in a wide variety 

of areas.  They clearly have the analysis with much more 

integrity than the members opposite ever engaged in. 

 

To think of all of a sudden the members opposite having gained 

respect for statistical analysis when they systematically 

bankrupted the province for 10 years is absolutely curious. 

 

The misinterpretation of comment is also not only curious but 

infuriating.  I have never said, and the member opposite is 

aware that I have never said, that Saskatchewan farmers are 

bad farmers.  I have never said that there is only one measure 

of the quality of farming.  I have said exactly the opposite -- 

that farmers make their judgements on their farming practices 

based on their belief system.  And some farmers believe they 

should not use artificial crop inputs at all -- no chemicals, no 

fertilizers. 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

That doesn't mean they don't have input costs into farming.  It 

doesn't mean they don't control their weeds in their own way, 

and their pests in their own way, and that they don't look after 

their land in their own way.  They do. 

 

The contention that has been made by the committee and 

brought forward to you and that you wish to struggle with, is 

that the program dictated what farmers' practices should be.  

That's what the committee said.  And they said, that's a moral 

hazard.  Farmers are not a moral hazard.  Farmers are the finest 

people in Saskatchewan.  They are hard-working, adaptive 

people who struggle with reality, who respond to it, who wish 

the best for their families and their communities, who wish the 

best for agriculture, and do an excellent job of what they do. 

 

The members opposite continue to want to degrade that 

impression by pretending that somebody has said something 

different.  Well they have not.  The fact is that farmers are good 

farmers, and farmers in Saskatchewan will continue to be good 

farmers.  But when a program begins to cause farmers to do 

things that they would not do in the absence of the program, 

then the program has a problem. 

 

The member opposite talked briefly about income shortfall . . . 

or about the program with respect to drought.  The problem for 

farmers, as the member opposite well knows, is income 

shortfall.  And the members opposite seem to be on this track.  

And as the member previously asking questions suggested, the 

federal government shouldn't be giving us . . . shouldn't be 

providing money to support farmers. 

 

Well that's saying that the Saskatchewan farmer should fight 

independently the the trade battles with the European 

Community and the United States, or it is alternatively saying 

that they should give up.  Because farmers without help cannot 

fight the treasuries of the United States of America, and they 

cannot fight the treasury of the European Community.  So I 

don't know what it is that the members are saying in that regard 

when they say the federal government should not meet their 

commitment. 

 

The fact is that farmers are experiencing an income shortfall, 

an income shortfall that the federal government agreed to cover 

when the provinces agreed to picking up 60 per cent of the cost 

of farm programming to cover these very dire circumstances in 

agriculture.  And that money ought to be delivered.  That's the 

fact. 

 

Now the member opposite made comments about the program.  

The program as recommended by the committee, including Mr. 

Furtan and including others that the member opposite has 

quoted, said only 1992 GRIP should be offered in 1992.  That 

doesn't mean farmers won't have income problems.  Because 

the GRIP program as designed originally, is designed to leave 

farmers with income problems. 

 

But they said in the context that farmers are farming and in the 

financial context that's there, the 1992 program better used the 

available resources than the 1991 program did.  They didn't say 

that would relieve financial stress for 

farmers.  They said that's the best way of designing the 

program. 

 

So we've called on the federal government to meet their 

commitment of third line of defence.  And we've called on the 

federal government to implement the disaster-relief program 

that's appropriate, and we will continue to do that.  And we will 

continue to try to improve the program to the extent that we 

can within the context of the federal-provincial agreement.  But 

we will alternatively ask our committee to ask farmers what 

kind of a program they would really like, because it isn't GRIP. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, farmers have told us over 

and over again, and we have reiterated over and over again, 

when they saw what '92 was about, they don't want '92; they 

want to go back. 

 

So what did they use as a bench-mark?  They didn't have 

anything as a bench-mark in '90-91 except the program as it 

was outlined. 

 

Now you put in a 1992 GRIP and they say, oh my goodness 

sakes, I don't want to have any part of that.  And you now . . . 

you're going to provide a list of all these people who have said, 

'92 is what I want to have. 

 

Now you tell me how many letters and phone calls you have 

had in your office telling you that I don't want '92, I want '91 

GRIP.  You give me a list of the numbers of phone calls to 

your office that have been made saying, I want '91 GRIP back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I will tell you the number of concerns we 

have expressed is far fewer than the 7,000 to 10,000 people that 

gathered last fall to say that they found the existing level of 

support and the existing program inadequate.  The farmers 

have said that the GRIP program designed by you is woefully 

inadequate. 

 

I don't know if the member opposite is challenging the wisdom 

of the people he appointed to the review committee.  I don't 

know if the member opposite is doing that.  It seems like he is. 

 

He seems on one day to want to challenge them and say that 

they made a foolish recommendation.  It seems on the other he 

wants to say, no, that they didn't make a foolish 

recommendation.  Well the member opposite better decide 

whether he believes that the review committee that he 

originally struck was well struck and that these are people with 

integrity who brought forward the recommendations and that 

their recommendations result from their integrity or whether 

they don't. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the point is that SARM told 

you, SARM told you they didn't like it.  SARM told you over 

and over again.  Now they're non-political.  They told you over 

and over and over again. 

 

They told you at the meeting at the Agridome.  They told you 

in a letter.  And they signed the item, the paper as a participant, 

not as a supporter.  They said, there's five items that we have a 

problem with.  They wrote you a 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

letter about them.  On February 13 they wrote you a letter -- we 

don't want that.  Give us a year to really have some input and 

then we'll tell you what we want. 

 

And we have asked you over and over again to do exactly that, 

but you have not responded.  You're just hard bent, like a train 

going down the track without a driver.  It says here, the report 

was then signed by the SARM as a participant and submitted to 

the minister.  They didn't tell you they supported it.  They were 

involved in the discussions and if they would have said, we're 

not prepared to deal with it in any way except '91 or except '92 

or except '93, they would have been excluded from the 

discussion.  And what would that have done?  They wanted to 

be a participant.  And they wanted to tell you.  That's why they 

were appointed. 

 

And now, as you go around . . . I would hazard a guess, that 

you go around now and ask those same people what their 

position is on this.  And they would have probably wished that 

they had discussed this on the basis of a participant and not a 

supporter.  You go ask them now.  And I'm going to, sir, I'm 

going to ask them.  And when we hear the final word from the 

canola growers, from other members of the committee, we're 

going to find out that they've signed it probably more on the 

view of a participant with the restriction from the Department 

of Finance. 

 

And I believe that that is the overpowering, underlying strategy 

of yourself and the committee, to say that Finance was the 

reason that drove them to make those decisions.  Because I 

know that next year in wheat alone, the payments made to the 

producers in the province of Saskatchewan would have been 

significantly higher because of the way the impact of the IMAP 

(indexed moving average price) price on the program . . . and 

because the highest costing years are coming into play. 

 

That's why the Department of Finance didn't want to become 

involved.  Because they knew for the first time the farmers 

were going to get the benefit.  And the farmers understand that 

too, sir.  They understand it just as well as you do. 

 

There were five things that SARM didn't want about this thing, 

didn't like about it -- five things.  They wrote you this letter.  

Why aren't you standing here and tell them: yes, we should 

maybe make changes, postpone it for a year, make the decision 

on the basis of what farmers want to have. 

 

They said, the concerns were time limitations.  Fine.  Your 

review committee now is going to have some serious time 

limitations on it too in order to be involved with the '93 

discussions that the federal government want to have. 

 

Bankability of the program -- there's no bankability in this 

thing, none at all.  Crop insurance . . . Well I should say, not 

none at all.  But crop insurance traditionally was the bankable 

part.  That's all they got in this one.  That's all they got in this 

one.  Because you, sir, don't know what to tell them prior to 

them seeding. 

 

As a matter of fact, when the native community came in to see 

me a few weeks ago, they said, this isn't bankable. 

The bank laughed at them.  When the native farmers went to 

them and told them, I want to have some operating capital on 

this basis, the native community couldn't get it.  Why?  

Because they can't use their land as security; they can't at all.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chairman, is the reason -- 

bankability is gone. 
 

There were concerns on the federal-provincial agreement they 

were concerned about.  They were concerned about the lack of 

broad-based producer input. 
 

Now you're talking about 300 people or organizations.  Well it 

might have been a political meeting that your staff were at last 

year when they went through the program.  But I would say to 

you, sir, that wasn't political.  In fact I had compliments on how 

the meetings were run by the fact that it didn't become political.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 
 

I want to point out the other thing that SARM told you. It 

violates the contract.  They told you that.  And, Mr. Minister, 

those are the points we want to make to you.  This isn't a matter 

of a policy change to make the program better.  It's a policy 

change made to make the Finance department pay less.  And 

the producers get less, and producers get significantly less.  

And that's the reason why . . . your motivation for doing all 

this. 
 

And I say it flies in the face of all that you said when you were 

campaigning. Give me the cost of production, give me the cost 

of production, give me the cost of production. That's what you 

said.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what causes us a great deal of 

concern on this side of the House. 
 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Prince Albert Carlton on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Could I have leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, in your gallery we have a 

guest who is well-known to many citizens in Saskatchewan -- 

former Senator Davey Steuart of Prince Albert, and now better 

known as one of the old-timers on the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) morning show.  I would ask all 

members, give Dave a good, hearty welcome back to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I to, Mr. Speaker, would join with my 

colleague from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton in welcoming 

Senator Steuart to the Assembly today.  It's significant, Mr. 

Senator, that today I have the opportunity to represent the same 

constituency that the premier of the province of Saskatchewan 

had in the Liberal times.  And I want to just say that I've treated 

that with a certain degree of awe and respect over the years.  

And I just want to acknowledge his presence here today and 

thank him for coming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I begin my 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

response to the previous question I would also express my 

welcome to the Senator and look forward to any debating 

advice he may wish to give me as an old pro himself. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I have some difficulty standing here and 

listening to the member opposite -- who I believe has integrity 

-- disrespect facts to a phenomenal degree.  I just do not know 

what the purpose is in the member opposite now contending 

something that one of his other members a few minutes ago, 

when I challenged him on it, said: no, no, I didn't mean to do 

that -- that somehow this exercise was driven by Finance. 

 

The member opposite appointed this committee.  We adjusted 

it mildly when we came in, considering the time frames.  And 

the committee brought forward their report.  And if the member 

opposite, as I said earlier, can find someone who would say 

that this committee was directed to bring forward a report 

within some kind of governmental direction on finance, I don't 

know who it's going to be because it wasn't said.  And any 

contention by the member opposite that that is so, is absolutely 

wrong.  That's the fact.  And I wish the member opposite would 

begin to respect his own integrity in responding to this issue in 

that regard. 

 

The fact remains, with respect to how consultation is done . . . 

And it's in my view, it's in my view that when participants 

participate in a process, they commit themselves to the process.  

Some mealy-mouthed attempt by you to distinguish between 

someone who sits on a committee as a participant or as 

something else . . . I don't know what you are when you're on a 

committee that's been set to give recommendations, other than 

a participant.  And in my view, when you sit at a table, you buy 

into the group.  And I want to say that SARM did that. 

 

I want you to understand, I want the members opposite to 

understand, that SARM signed the report, expressed the 

concerns as the member opposite said, met with us, and still 

signed the report after their concerns were noted in the report. 

 

And for the member opposite or anyone else to contend that 

this document is not signed and that these recommendations are 

somehow inconsistent with the representative of the . . . with 

the participation of the representative of SARM, is not true 

because that discussion that you describe was held and then 

they continued to sign the report.  And in this report is says all 

of the things that are the base points for the program as 

designed.  And I want to give credit to those organizations for 

doing that and for standing behind their recommendations 

when members opposite have been trying to mislead farmers 

with respect to what the report and what the program really 

does. 

 

The fact is that the member opposite continues to say that 

farmers have a 20 per cent less return from this program.  Well 

that's not true.  There is a very narrow, almost infinitesimally 

probable situation where that could be true.  If the prices of all 

commodities rise exactly to the IMAP and if you have a full 

crop failure, then that could be true.  You could have that kind 

of an income shortfall. 

 

But it couldn't be true, it couldn't be true relative to the old 

program.  Because already, as a result of the greater efficiency 

of this program, Saskatchewan increased their contribution to 

the IMAP to raising crop prices for wheat from 3.86 to 4.07.  

The 1991 program that the member opposite crows so much 

about, had wheat priced at $3.86.  We raised that from 3.86 to 

4.07.  It would not have been 4.07 if we had not had the new 

program. 

 

And the fact is that farmers, if they have a drought, yes, they 

can experience lower incomes.  Nobody's denying that under 

this program.  But the fact is that the committee recognized that 

you could not run a program where you've got the same return 

for a 5-bushel crop as you do for a 40-bushel crop.  The 

members opposite know that.  The members opposite know 

that Alberta and Manitoba knew it.  Alberta and Manitoba 

made adjustments to their programs so that fact could not 

continue.  The members opposite did not have the wisdom to 

make that change. 

 

And when the committee they appointed and that we put back 

into place re-examined the program, they said, we're not going 

to use the Manitoba or the Alberta solution to recommend to 

the minister. We're going to recommend this solution.  And 

signing on to this solution, after all of those consultations, are 

nine other board members plus Sinclair Harrison from the 

SARM.  Those are the simple facts of consultation and advice.  

And that's the way I believe it should be. 

 

When we structure bodies, we want to advise government, 

that's how I want them to be.  I want them to tell me what they 

think, and I expect to listen to them.  If I took the advice of the 

member opposite, I suppose your advice would be, when 

somebody tells you something, you ignore it.  Well it's not the 

way I intend to be.  I intend to run in my ministry a sound 

consultation process and respect the results of the consultation.  

And if the member opposite would like to do it differently, 

that's his prerogative.  But it's not the way I would. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we've 

sat here this morning and listened to you time after time after 

time, talk about the integrity of other folks and how no one has 

integrity but yourself.  And you stand up and your button's 

popping off of your jacket, suggesting that you are just 

brimming with integrity about how you implemented this 

program. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, you brought the program in incorrectly.  

And I don't think anyone disputes that fact.  You brought it in 

March 13 and yet the contract clearly shows, the contract 

clearly shows that the people are supposed to have notice given 

to them in written form in the mail by March 15.  And you had 

all of the resources of government at your disposal to do that -- 

all of the resources at your disposal to do that -- and yet you 

wouldn't take that upon yourself to do it. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

You only had to live up to two parts of the thing -- give notice 

and provide a letter to the farmers.  That's all you had to do and 

the entire argument, entire legal argument would have been 

erased.  And yet you wouldn't do it.  You said to the committee 

you'd get around it somehow.  They pointed out to you time 

and time again and yet you said, we'll get around it somehow. 

 

Well we're into that getting around it stage now, Mr. Minister.  

And when you didn't have the ability, I guess, or integrity if 

you want to call it that, to do the notice of changes properly, 

now we come forward with a Bill that is oh so thorough, isn't it, 

Mr. Minister?  Completely thorough.  You made a wonderful 

job of this and the people advising you made a wonderful job 

of this, Mr. Minister, right from start to finish. 

 

It takes away the rights of anyone to challenge you in court in 

the future or ongoing cases.  You made sure of that.  You knew 

very well there was an ongoing case.  But you made absolutely 

clear . . . You took care of that little possibility.  You made 

absolutely sure the farmers couldn't deal with you in court. 

 

But you forgot one little thing, Mr. Minister.  You forgot one 

little thing.  You don't have the highest authority in this 

country.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where I suggest the final 

battle will be fought on this GRIP legislation. 

 

You've taken away the rights to opposition.  We'll only be able 

to speak on this for another day or so. 

 

(1115) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Marvellous. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the minister says, marvellous.  I know, it's 

absolutely marvellous in a democracy that the Minister of 

Agriculture should be able to shut up any opposition that is out 

there.  He doesn't want the farmers of Saskatchewan or anyone 

else to suggest that this program of his has some flaws and was 

done illegally.  He doesn't want anyone to suggest that. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the farmers believe that you did it 

incorrectly, and that's why they're in court.  Why didn't you 

give them the opportunity to continue with their court case?  

The reason I think you didn't want them to continue with their 

court case is you'd have been found to be wrong, sir, and you 

know it.  And then you talk about the level of integrity of other 

people. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you also made broad, sweeping comments 

here a few moments ago about there being small, little 

infinitesimal differences between '91 and '92 GRIP.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, once again you're wrong. 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, your small, little, infinitesimal 

changes that you talk about, or infinitesimal differences 

between the '91 and '92 program with respect to income 

shortfall, let's just go through some examples of those small, 

little, infinitesimal differences. 

 

To begin with, the courts have suggested that the difference is 

$27.20 an acre in Melville -- the judge suggested that -- 31 

million acres, just short of $900 

million.  Just short of $900 million.  And I want to bring it 

down though, I want to bring it down to an individual farm 

circumstance.  And we'll examine those small, little, 

infinitesimal differences, Mr. Minister. 

 

Let's review the situation with respect to the '91 versus '92 

GRIP with a durum crop.  Now I have the computer print-outs 

of a farm for '91, and I have the computer print-outs for a farm 

for '92 in this province. 

 

Now I'd like to . . . if we could spend a little time and go 

through that with you, Mr. Minister, to find out the differences.  

And these are your own . . . the crop insurance information, 

and I have them right here with me. 

 

We'll deal with commercial durum.  And this producer's 

customer average yield is 35.5 bushels to the acre in 1991.  

That was what the crop insurance official suggested his 

individual yield was -- 35.5.  Now the program in '91 called 

for, on durum, commercial durum, the price would be $4.52 a 

bushel, for a total revenue program insurance, GRIP program 

insurance of $160.52 an acre -- $160.52 an acre. 

 

Now we deduct from that, obviously the premiums associated 

with it.  The revenue side premium here is $16.75 -- takes it 

down to 143.77.  Crop insurance, the premium on that is $3.51 

-- for a net return to the producer, of $140.26 after all 

premiums have been deducted for the '91 program. 

 

Now the '92 program, let's examine the statistics on that.  Same 

yield -- 35.5 bushels per acre.  And the crop insurance 

component of that, because it's reduced to 80 per cent, and the 

individual coverage then would be 28 bushels to the acre -- 

35.5 times 80 per cent; 28 bushels to the acre brings this 

person's coverage to $73.56. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, of course there's the revenue side 

component to it.  And I have the form that you provided 

farmers with in the spring to make their calculations.  And the 

crop insurance agent made those calculations on behalf of the 

corporation. 

 

So in this case, the durum on C land would be . . . Because his 

production is higher than the individual, or the area average, he 

would times it by 1.258 to come up -- and the area average 

indemnity is 33.29 -- to come with a figure of $41.88 for that 

producer.  That was what his revenue payment would be, 

assuming that everything works out the way that you've told 

the farmers that it's going to. 

 

So when we come up with those differences, and then you start 

deducting the premiums off of '92, as we did in the '91 

program, the revenue side premium is $9.95 as your officials 

suggest.  That backs it off to 105.49.  And then you take off the 

crop insurance component of it -- which I have here as well -- 

is $5.17 an acre.  So in the end, we come up with $100.32 for 

the '92 program, net.  And the '91 program, this producer's net 

was $140.26, for a difference of $39.94. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I recognize, as you are probably going to 

stand up and say, yes, but you'd have to make some 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

changes in the '91 program to bring them into context with the 

'92 program, had there not been any changes made in the GRIP 

formula.  And we'll go through that example now. 

 

The '91 program, if you're changing it, calculating it into the 

'92 program, if no changes were made, we'll do that calculation 

now.  The $4.52 per bushel, we'll have to times that . . . we'll 

have to change that figure to reflect the differences in the 

IMAP formula.  And it was suggested by officials of the 

Department of Agriculture that the average would be about 7 

per cent decrease in there.  So that would be 32 cents a bushel.  

That takes it down to $4.20 for the durum example.  Now we'll 

times it again by the producer's individual yield -- same as what 

you did in '92 -- 35.5.  That brings it to $149.10 an acre.  Now 

of course, there's the premiums we've got to deduct out of that. 

 

In the first example that I used on the GRIP one, the first 

example of '92, I did not, when I quoted you the figure of 

$16.75 an acre, I did not deduct the 25 per cent off the revenue 

side that the federal government contributed -- did not deduct 

that off of there.  So that full amount was in there in that 

calculation that we came up with first of all.  So I'm using -- 

and we can dispute this if you want -- but I'm using that same 

figure, $16.75 an acre, on the revenue side.  That's 25 per cent 

higher than it was last year, because the deduction the federal 

government made on the revenue side. 

 

So we'll use -- you know, that's a debatable point -- but we can 

use that if you like, $16.75.  Now we have to deduct off the 

crop insurance component of it, and that's still . . . I use the '92 

calculation on that that you use, the same calculation for the 

premium on the crop insurance component of $5.45 an acre.  

So in the bottom line I come down to . . . and this is the point 

of this exercise, Mr. Minister, is the differences between '91 

and '92 with the program changes -- $126.90 an acre for this 

individual farm situation versus the $100.32 an acre, for a 

difference of $26.58. 

 

And I would like the minister to stand up and tell me in these 

calculations where I'm wrong or where this individual farm 

situation is wrong, and if he considers $26.58 difference in 

programs between '91 and '92 to be, as he termed it, 

infinitesimal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite has demonstrated, I 

think, why there may have been a problem with he and other 

members of his government in previous times.  I said the 

probability of the 80 per cent reduction in an individual's return 

was infinitesimal, not that any particular piece of calculation 

was infinitesimal.  There has to be the circumstance where 

every crop rises up to exactly the index-moving average price 

and one has to at the same time have a crop failure in order for 

that circumstance to exist.  But let's leave that point. 

 

The member opposite began by talking the contracts.  Well it is 

very curious that the members opposite held up the legislature 

since June 10 when we attempted to introduce these changes to 

the program and legislation, has held them up since June 10  -- 

what is that? two and a half months -- on the basis of a deadline 

that they 

somehow all of a sudden have found to be sacrosanct, that they 

ignored annually in recent years.  And I haven't had the 

department look back beyond five years -- that they ignored 

annually in the implementation of the programs with which the 

March 15 deadline was attached.  All of a sudden the members 

opposite have developed a great respect for something that they 

absolutely ignored for five years.  I don't understand it. 

 

And in the last year, there were a list of changes.  And as I've 

said before in answer to questions in question period, when I 

went to my farmer meeting with the political crew you sent 

around, that day when I talked to the staff at the desk they were 

chuckling.  They were chuckling, saying now we're making . . . 

today we may change number 94 and change number 95.  This 

was your staff saying while you guys were on your political 

parade. 

 

Well let me tell you what happened with us.  We announced 

the changes on March 13, the absolute earliest day we could 

announce the changes, because of the games played by the 

members' opposite friends in Ottawa. 

 

But let me tell you what the contract does say about program 

changes.  Members opposite have said that these program 

changes are inappropriate.  It's not so.  The federal-provincial 

agreement that the members opposite signed said, and I read 

from the pamphlet you call your contract, said -- that you left 

out in the post offices for farmers to pick up . . . yes, these 

contracts: 

 

 In accordance with the federal-provincial agreement, the 

terms and conditions of this contract may be changed from 

year to year. 

 

The federal-provincial agreement provided that there was a 

mechanism for change.  And the provision for change, I could 

go into the detail of it, but people are probably not interested in 

the detail of the provision for change.  But the 

federal-provincial agreement provided that the agreement could 

be changed. 
 

And the reason that we have changed the language around 

notice in the new Bill is because the provisions of the 

federal-provincial agreement are inconsistent with the 

expectations of the very definite time line that was provided in 

the original crop insurance program which was just rolled into 

this agreement in the hurry the members opposite had in 

implementing this program. 
 

Well when the member opposite starts talking about the detail 

of the program, I have to ask first, are you saying that the 

members who listened to the farmers, who listened to those 

who brought information forward, listened incorrectly?  Are 

you saying that these people lack integrity?  Are you saying 

that these people had no rationale for making those 

recommendations to the minister?  What are you saying about 

these people? 
 

These are people that represent every major farm organization 

in Saskatchewan.  These are people who are farmers first, and 

farmers who are also committing a lot of their volunteer time to 

working for an organization as their farm organization.  Are 

you saying these people were coming out of thin air with their 

recommendations?  Or 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

what are you saying? 

 

The fact is that this committee met and brought forward its 

recommendations as the result of a process that had integrity.  

Are you saying they're wrong?  They weren't wrong.  They 

made observations about the program.  They made correct 

observations about the program, and they said they had to 

change.  And they recommended a mechanism by which they 

change.  And we accepted those recommendations. 

 

The question that you're raising is do farmers still have an 

income crisis.  Well yes, farmers have a very serious income 

crisis in spite of these programs.  That remains a fact.  Farmers 

have a serious income crisis because we continue to have these 

very devastating trade games going on.  And we continue to 

have a national circumstance where the Canadian national 

government expects the farmers to help fight that war, not like 

their other neighbours that are fighting . . . where the 

Americans are fighting the war for the farmers and the 

European community is fighting their war for the farmers. 

 

(1130) 

 

So farmers do continue to have an income crisis.  They 

continue to have an income crisis, not because the province of 

Saskatchewan has reneged on their commitment in this joint 

program between farmers and the federal government; it's not 

because the farmers have reneged on their commitment to this 

joint program; and it's not because the provinces reneged on 

their commitment to this joint program.  It's because the federal 

government has not contributed the third line of defence. 

 

And the member opposite said that's not a reliable basis of 

support.  No, it's not a reliable basis of support, the way the 

federal government has treated it.  But their own committee, 

their committee on third line has been trying to establish a third 

line triggering device since the agreement was signed.  The 

people that the federal government appointed to their 

committee, if they would listen to their committee the way we 

listen to ours, they would have already fixed this problem. 

 

But no, the federal government is a lot like their Conservative 

brothers in Saskatchewan before them, and sisters.  The federal 

government likes to play political games with farm programs.  

They don't want predictability and triggers and things the 

farmers can count on; they want to see if they can't get close 

enough to an election campaign before they announce any 

particular piece of help.  That's the kind of problem we have 

with respect to income crises for farmers. 

 

Now if you would get onside and push the federal government, 

as their third line of defence committee is -- the federal 

government's committee made up of farmers, where 

Saskatchewan has representation -- those people are saying, 

give us a triggering mechanism to meet your commitment.  The 

federal government has not yet come forward with such a 

triggering mechanism. 

 

Yes, in that circumstance that's unreliable help, and I would 

expect you to help us try and make it reliable.  Because the 

federal government made the commitment, 

and we need to hold them to it.  Because we've kept our deal 

and the farmers of Saskatchewan have kept their deal; the 

federal government has not. 

 

Now with respect to the example, the very specific example 

you gave with respect to numbers.  You make my point.  You 

make the point of the committee in the example you give 

because you describe the exact circumstance that the 

committee tried to address. 

 

The example you use has a farmer growing durum.  The 

program price on durum was $4.52 a bushel.  That's the 15-year 

rolling average -- $4.52.  Circumstance has it, not any 

reasonable fact, but circumstance has it that the rolling average 

for wheat is $4.15 a bushel.  What's the difference -- 37 cents? 

 

Last spring, had we continued with the 1991 program, I'm told 

by my officials that the difference in market price between hard 

red spring and durum wheat was in excess of 50 cents a bushel 

-- durum lower than wheat.  So the program is saying, grow 

durum at $4.52 a bushel; the market is saying, don't grow 

durum because it's 50 cents less than wheat. 

 

You're giving me an example that exactly describes why the 

committee said you can't have that.  You can't have the farmers 

and the public paying for that kind of a wrong signal.  You 

have to fix that kind of a wrong signal which is why they 

designed the revenue pay-out mechanism as they designed it. 

 

And the fact is that the revenue mechanism payment as they've 

designed it is now crop neutral, so that the farmers can go back 

to doing what they always did before.  They now say: well if 

durum is worth 50 cents less than wheat on the market, and I 

would think it's going to stay there, maybe I'm not going to 

grow it. 

 

And the farmers then say, well what do I grow?  Well maybe . . 

. I grew wheat before, but maybe I'd like to grow a little bit of 

lentils or a little bit of canary seed or a little bit of borage or a 

little bit of something else.  That's the way farmers want to 

farm, and that's what these program changes allow them to do. 

 

And that's why I believe the committee ought to be respected 

for what they do.  And I think you need to stop your diatribes 

that attack the recommendations of the committee. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, so you're saying to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan -- the farmers that put in slightly over 

2 million acres of durum -- that they made a wrong decision.  Is 

that what he's saying?  Is that what you're saying, Mr. 

Minister?  That the farmers of Saskatchewan, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan that seeded in 1989 . . . the farmers in this 

province seeded 6.4 million acres of durum.  In 1990 they 

seeded 5.2 million acres of durum. 

 

And you're suggesting that 1991 led farmers to believe that the 

best thing that they could do to work the program was to grow 

more durum, and yet they seeded less.  They seeded 4.9 million 

acres.  The acreage went down 300,000 acres and the minister 

stands up and says the only reason they seeded durum was 

because the price 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

was . . . the GRIP program guaranteed them a higher return 

than it would on wheat.  And yet the acreage went down -- the 

acreage went down. 

 

And it went down again this year, Mr. Minister.  The acreage 

this year, for the member, from 3.7 . . . pardon me; 

Saskatchewan, it's 3 million acres according to Agriweek -- 3 

million acres of durum wheat in 1992. 

 

Every year, every year the acreage went down, and the minister 

says the reason they grew this is because they're trying to work 

the program.  Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to use, if you 

want to use wheat, I'll use wheat in my examples. 

 

You're suggesting that the farmers that grow durum, they don't 

know what the heck they're doing; the only reason they grew it 

was because they'd get a higher return.  Well, Mr. Minister, the 

farmers that grew durum in a lot of cases find that they get a 

higher yield than spring wheat, and that's the reason they grow 

durum.  It has very little to do with what you're suggesting, that 

they're trying to work the program. 

 

But if you want, we can go through those very specific 

examples on wheat and we'll come up with something very 

similar to those numbers -- very, very similar.  And I have it 

right before me if you want to go through all of those, and we 

can take the time if you like to go through a specific example 

on an on-farm situation, using your records, your government's, 

your department's, the Crop Insurance and the GRIP 

committee's recommendations, and all of their examples.  We 

can work through that if you like, Mr. Minister, and the net 

result is still something very, very similar to that $26.58 an acre 

that I used in the durum example. 

 

And yet you stand up and say the program difference is really 

insignificant; there wouldn't be much difference on an average 

farm.  Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to stand up in this 

legislature and work through these numbers with us, work 

through the numbers for the benefit of the Saskatchewan 

farmers, and show us in whichever crop you like, whichever 

crop you choose, where the farmer of Saskatchewan is going to 

get a higher return in the '92 program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite again 

either intentionally or unintentionally misconstrues my 

comments.  It is the members opposite who repeatedly refer to 

farmers as abusers, and I do not believe farmers are abusers.  I 

have lived in a rural community.  I'm living on the farm that 

my father began . . . my father farmed on and my great-uncle 

before me.  And I know farmers.  And I believe in their 

integrity and I believe in their making appropriate decisions.  

And I know how they think.  I am one.  The farmers -- if the 

member opposite . . . I'm sure he recognizes it as well -- do not 

like all the interference that they get from programs. 

 

Now the observation I was making, relative to the member 

opposite's analysis, is that in fact the program . . . example he 

used is a good example of why the committee made its 

recommendations.  That's all I said, that the program example 

says that durum is given a $4.52 price on the program as 

opposed to $4.15 wheat price on the 

program when the market had durum 50 cents or more below 

wheat.  The program says a 37 cent plus signal for durum; the 

market says a 50 cent negative signal for durum.  That's simply 

not a good program.  Some farmers will respond to that and 

some farmers will not. 

 

But if it makes sense for my farm to raise durum under those 

circumstances where it would not normally, I'm not an abuser; 

I'm making a sound financial decision with respect to how I'm 

living.  My responsibility now, and your responsibility as a 

legislator, is to make sure programs don't do that, make sure 

programs don't give those kinds of signals.  That's all we're 

saying.  That's all the committee was saying, that a committee 

should be market neutral, that a program should allow farmers 

to make the decisions that are best for their operations. 

 

With respect to your contention that I am pretending that there 

isn't an opportunity, under some circumstances, for farmers to 

experience a 20 per cent income shortfall to this program. I am 

not saying that that's not so.  Of course it's so.  I said it's a very 

narrow band of circumstance when that extreme loss is there.  

There are circumstances for farmers, if it were all absolutely 

right, where the shortfall from last year to this year could be 

greater than that because of the crops they selected, either 

intentionally because of the program, or otherwise. 

 

Because the new program, in an attempt not to bias the kinds of 

crops that are produced, blends the crops in the area to say, 

here is the general level of support that agriculture in this area 

requires in order to boost the prices from the market price to 

the IMAP, however adequate or inadequate the IMAP is. 

 

So the new program simply removes the bias from crop 

selection so that individuals can select crops according to what 

they want to produce.  Well if I happened to select a group of 

crops last year that received very high compensation, my loss 

in coverage this year could be more than 20 per cent. 

 

But it was the intent of the committee to make it so -- not to 

hurt farmers -- it was the intent of committee to make it so, so 

that farmers could again choose their crops according to the 

market and their circumstances on their farm. 

 

The point about the 20 per cent potential reduction which is the 

result of separating crop insurance from revenue insurance, 

that's a crop insurance issue.  We've had crop insurance in 

Saskatchewan since 1962.  And farmers lived and struggled 

with crop insurance at 70 per cent of their area yields for that 

period of time. 

 

The increase, now that we've separated those programs, goes 

up to 80 per cent.  Yes, it's not 100 per cent, as was provided 

by the offsets last year.  But the offsets last year guaranteed 

that no matter how much effort you put into farming, you 

could, with very great difficulty, exceed the average return.  So 

if you think that doesn't influence a farmer who wants to do 

better, to say that no matter what I do, I can't do better, 

virtually can't do better, you don't understand farmers.  The fact 

is farmers have to have the opportunity to make their decisions 

about their farm, believing they're going to be compensated for 

it. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

So if I put more effort into my farming, it's a legitimate choice.  

I don't think that's a qualitative judgement.  If I choose to use 

Avadex and hopefully control my wild oats to a degree because 

I believe it makes sense for me this year, I should as a result be 

able to capitalize on the fact that I get a little better yield.  If I 

don't, I'm saving my 11 or $12 an acre -- whatever it is -- and 

I'm prepared to take a little less yield.  But surely I ought to 

have the right to expect that if I make the decision to use that 

practice and add the money to the system, that I can get a little 

bit of compensation for it; otherwise, why would I use it? 

 

It's those kinds of observations that the committee made, that a 

farmer ought to have the ability to make their farming 

decisions and be able to get reasonable returns for having made 

them.  And that was not possible under the old program. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you don't want to use 

durum, let's use wheat.  You're saying durum, we can't use that 

example because it's distorted, because it's 50 cents a bushel 

higher than the market in '91. 

 

Well in '92, sir, if you followed the markets the last little while, 

the asking price for durum for the last six weeks has been 

higher than wheat.  For the last six weeks the Canadian Wheat 

Board asking price for durum has been higher than wheat.  And 

I have the figures here to back up that contention, if you like.  

So I'm not so sure you're right in your judgement that the 

durum is going to be of less value than wheat.  And that's a 

debatable point because there isn't anyone, including you, sir, 

that knows that's going to be the case -- including you, sir. 

 

So you're saying to the farmers of Saskatchewan that even 

though this program gives them 20 per cent less than last year's 

program, it's better for them.  Is that what you're saying, sir? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite raises 

the question about the nature of the program and the nature of 

the market.  It may well be so that the durum price changes.  

But the fact is you've introduced one more variable into the 

equation by saying, farmers, no matter what the market does, 

under the old program durum will be worth $4.52 a bushel.  

The market can disappear, it can be worth $1 a bushel, but to 

you it's still worth $4.52 a bushel.  And somebody has to pay 

for that.  If it goes down to $1 and the program delivers $4.52, 

somebody has to find $3.52. 

 

Well there are no money trees in this world, much as your 

previous government believed they might some day grow.  

There are none.  The $3.52 would have to come from the 

pocket of the farmer and from the pocket of the other 

taxpayers.  That is the only source for those dollars, and is that 

issue the committee addressed in their report. 

 

Yes, the fact is that some farmers will experience . . . could 

experience with short crops, returns 20 per cent less than they 

would have experienced last year.  But the fact is, no matter 

what happened between 1991 and 1992, with the 1991 GRIP 

design the farmers would experience a drop 

from $4.15 wheat to $3.86 wheat.  That was in the program 

design.  No matter what happened the premium increases 

would have been greater than they have already been -- and we 

know they have been excessive -- under the old program. 

 

And no matter what happened Saskatchewan farmers and 

taxpayers would have had a program deficit between 100 

million and $300 million on an annual basis under the old 

program.  That was a fairly distinct likelihood.  Because last 

year . . . you talked about the crop last year, how everybody 

actually . . . or your partner, your desk partner, suggested that 

last year every crop there was higher production. 

 

Of course there was higher production last year.  We had a 

marvellous year last year.  And in spite of that marvelous year, 

this very record year in Saskatchewan, the program deficit that 

Saskatchewan farmers and taxpayers have to pick up -- this is 

not the total for Saskatchewan; the total program deficit for 

Saskatchewan is in excess of $200 million -- the part that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and farmers have to pick up is $76 

million. 

 

That $76 million loss for Saskatchewan and the $200 million 

program loss for Saskatchewan, results in higher premiums 

because the premium methodology says that you're going to 

gradually, over a short period of time -- three to five years -- 

pick up most of that $200 million in increased premium. 

 

So if you do that this year and you add another $100 million or 

$200 million next year to the deficit and another 100 or $200 

million next year to the deficit, watch your premiums ratchet it 

up.  And watch the 15-year IMAP slide -- 4.15, 3.86, 3.70; 

where does it go?  That's the old design. 

 

Now that's completely inadequate and we haven't fixed all of 

that.  The slide's still there but we have, I believe the committee 

has, fixed the potential risk to the province in terms of the 

deficit.  There could be small program deficits under some 

circumstances.  And they've done it by a design that does not 

encourage production of crops different from the market 

signals.  They've done it by designing a program that has less 

administrative complexity.  We now don't need the bin police, 

as the Minister of Rural Development so aptly named them 

several months ago.  We don't need this army of people 

running around measuring things constantly. 

 

And the program isn't put at risk by inaccurate measurements.  

Because I don't care how good you are at measuring a 

3,300-bushel Westeel Rosco bin, and I don't care how many 

times you measure it, when they measure it they're going to get 

the wrong answer.  And if that's the number . . . Because you're 

never going to guess it right.  And you don't have to be out very 

many bushels on every 3,300-bushel bin in Saskatchewan 

before you have costs that amount of 50 and $60 million to the 

program.  Those are costs that somebody has to pay.  There's 

no money tree.  Somebody's got to pay the cost for that 

inaccuracy.  So the program has corrected those kinds of 

things. 

 

The question I asked before and I asked the members to 

answer: do farmers still have an income crisis?  Of course 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

they still have an income crisis.  And we need to address that 

income crisis, and we're negotiating with the federal 

government with respect to a disaster-relief package.  But we 

desperately need a change in your attitude so that you demand 

that the federal government pick up their responsibility.  The 

farmers of Saskatchewan have kept their deal, the province of 

Saskatchewan has kept their deal, and you better work with us 

to make sure your brothers in Ottawa keep theirs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, you haven't 

kept your deal.  You haven't kept your deal.  You broke my 

contract, you broke other farmers' contract, you broke your 

own contract, you broke all of the members that are farmers 

contracts; and yet you say you've kept your deal.  Well I don't 

think you have, sir. 

 

And I sincerely hope the farmers of this province drag you 

kicking and screaming into the Supreme Court and we'll see 

whether or not you kept your deal.  Why, Mr. Minister, did you 

have to come forward with legislation like this to strip away the 

rights of farmers to their action in court, if you don't think that 

you had a problem keeping your deal with farmers?  Well why 

did you have to come forward with legislation like that if you 

kept the deal with farmers? 

 

Well I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, the reason why you 

came forward with this kind of legislation, the reason why you 

had to come forward with legislation as strong as this kind of 

legislation is because you know very well you didn't keep your 

deal with farmers.  You know very well you didn't keep your 

deal with farmers. 

 

And the reason that this is done -- and you just finished saying 

a few minutes ago -- is to reduce the provincial exposure, 

reduce the provincial risk.  Well, well, well, there is a financial 

component as far as the provincial government is concerned 

here.  It is financially driven.  The Minister of Agriculture all 

morning long has suggested that no, no, this had nothing to do 

with any . . . nothing whatsoever to do with financial exposure 

as far as the provincial government is concerned.  And just a 

moment ago though, he said it has reduced the provincial risk. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, yes, it may have certainly reduced the 

provincial risk all right, but it sure has increased the risk to 

every farmer in this province.  Every farmer in this province 

has sat down, I would suggest to you, sir, and they have looked 

through their differences in their program and they see $20 to 

$30 to $40 an acre difference in the program.  And they're 

saying to you, I wish, I wish, sir, you would get off of this idea 

that well, even though there is a program difference, we'll just 

point our finger east towards Ottawa and say, make it up.  Well 

that's what you're saying to them, sir. 

 

The last article of . . . and the program changes that you've 

come forward with, sir, if we look at the last issue of 

Agriweek, August 17, '92: 

 

 No provincial regime in memory has pulled as many farm 

policy blunders in such a short time.  What the NDP failed to 

grasp about GRIP is that 

many farmers, probably the majority, see it as a source of 

additional crop income, not merely insurance.  Cost cutting 

such support in a tough year would be unpopular even if it 

was done right. 

 

Even if it was done right. But it wasn't done right.  It wasn't 

done right and the evidence is right before us.  The reason why 

the evidence . . . the reason why the program was changed and 

the reason why you had to come forward with this Bill is 

because it wasn't done right.  And that's why, that's why you 

have to have a team of lawyers following you around on this 

thing, because you know very well it wasn't done right. 

 

It wasn't done right.  And the reason that you've had to 

extinguish the right to farmers is because you know very well 

that a court of law in this province would have said they agree 

it wasn't done right.  They agree it wasn't done right.  And 

that's why the judge suggested that there's going to be a hurt, a 

hurt associated with this program, of $27.20 an acre.  An 

identifiable hurt. 

 

And I've laid out two clear examples to you today, sir, of that 

hurt -- 36 bucks an acre in the situation of durum and 

approximately $27 an acre in the situation of wheat on this 

farm, this real life farm. 

 

And you hold it up and say, well so what?  Maybe there is a 

little bit of difference.  Maybe it is a small, little, infinitesimal 

difference.  Well on a thousand acre farm, an average farm in 

Saskatchewan, roughly 25, 30,000, $35,000.  Ah what the 

heck, it's only their living.  It's only their entire amount of 

income that would be generated from this program that they're 

going to live on.  Well they're just going to have to get by, 

aren't they?  Get by the best they know how. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, the reason why farmers don't agree with 

you on this, sir, is because they see a substantial difference in 

the program, a substantial return difference on their farm.  And 

also, they see a program that's been changed by a government 

that's had to bring forward probably the strongest legislation 

this province has ever seen -- probably the strongest legislation 

the province has ever seen -- extinguishing rights of people, 

extinguishing the rights of people to go to court, extinguishing 

the rights of ongoing court cases. 

 

All of those things are in this Bill, Mr. Minister.  And in order 

to try, in order to try and hold it together, so you wouldn't have 

a constitutional challenge on your hands, you've had to put in 

10 whereas clauses into the Bill to try and hold off a challenge 

on the constitutional grounds.  That's what's in it. 

 

And that's why farmers are saying, why did this government 

have to go to such extremes?  All you had to do, Mr. Minister, 

in this program, was offer '91 or '92 GRIP to farmers, if you're 

so sure '92 is better, or take it to the appeal court and find out 

whether you're right.  Find out whether that team of lawyers 

that you have behind you is correct.  Find out, sir, whether the 

farmers have a case.  Find out whether it's $27.20 an acre 

difference.  That's all you had to do.  We've asked you time and 

time and time again in this legislature. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

But, I think, Mr. Minister, your stubbornness has held you back 

on this.  You know you're wrong, but you say . . . And I can 

just imagine what goes on in your caucus.  There's about four 

or five of you stand up and say, we're going to ram this through 

no matter what it takes.  No matter what it takes, we're going to 

ram this thing through.  And that band of 10 Conservatives 

over there, if they don't like it, too bad.  We'll change the rules 

of this legislature if necessary.  We'll make it so that they can't 

talk.  We'll make . . . we'll get around it somehow.  Exactly. 

 

Mr. Minister, they've had to put closure on it so that we can't 

dispute it any longer than a couple more days . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . and good move -- they're all yelling, good 

move.  Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a real, real fine example of 

New Democrats.  Real fine example of New Democrats, Mr. 

Chairman.  Real fine example of the people in this legislature, 

the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly).  They all 

think they're above the law. 

 

Well we'll find out.  We'll find out whether you're above the 

law.  We'll find out when it gets to the Supreme Court whether 

you're above the law or not.  That's when we'll find out whether 

that team of lawyers that you have that helped draft this Bill is 

correct or not.  That's when we'll find out.  We'll find out for 

sure whether you're correct, Mr. Minister, in your program 

changes. 

 

And you can talk all you like about what's gone on in the past.  

But the fact remains, you're the one that's in court, not anyone 

else.  You're the one that's in court, not anyone else, sir.  Five 

farmers believe you're wrong.  And in spite of having to bring 

in legislation like this, we'll find out, won't we? 

 

I sincerely hope the farmers of this province have enough 

money left to be able to take you to court.  Why, sir, would you 

not send this to the appeal court?  It could have been done 

quickly -- very, very quickly.  And you know it could have 

been done very quickly, sir.  The same thing that was done on 

the electoral boundaries thing.  It went rapidly through the 

courts, because it was a matter of importance.  And this is an 

example, a similar example of extreme importance.  And it 

could have went through very fast, and you know it. 

 

And I suggest that the team of lawyers that you have, they also 

know it could have gone through the courts very quickly.  But 

they're hoping, they're hoping that this kind of strong 

legislation will hold off that challenge.  The same kind of 

advice that was given to you -- why not slap a little bond on 

these farmers with this little court case; put a $750,000 barrier 

in front of them and see if they got the guts to take it on then. 

 

Well they did have it, didn't they, Mr. Minister?  They had the 

guts to take you on.  And they will continue to take you on, I 

predict.  They will continue to take you on until we get to the 

Supreme Court on this thing.  And it might be a couple of years 

-- it might be a couple of years, but hopefully they'll continue 

fighting you, sir. 

 

The Chair: -- Pursuant to a special order of the Assembly, this 

committee will recess until this afternoon's routine proceedings 

are concluded. 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 

 


