




















































Hansard: July 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1767 

 July 27, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

now that you've had the dinner hour to go back and confer with 

your deputy and others, have you got a list of individuals, 

groups, companies, anyone at all that you could inform this 

Assembly about that asked that these changes be made to the 

particular Act in question? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, there 

are a number of changes that have an impact on a number of 

different areas.  We haven't got a list of the groups or people, 

individuals, in any specific area.  As I said before, we have 

consulted with numerous people who have indicated that the 

public has a concern with protecting the environment.  The 

amendments we have here today speaks to that concern.  And 

that's the list that we have, is the public in general. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I realize that the 

environment is on the public's agenda, but your deputy and the 

people under him are in conversation on a day-by-day basis 

with people all through our society on environmental issues.  

The things that are being asked for in this Bill are of significant 

change, and all we would like from your staff, Madam 

Minister, are individuals in our society or groups or companies 

that have said that because of such and such circumstances, we 

think that the Bill should be changed; we think that Madam 

Minister should have the power to designate a person to enter 

with any machinery, equipment, or materials that the minister, 

environment officers, or designated persons, considers 

necessary to carry out the purposes of the entry. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that can go anywhere from a key to a 

bulldozer.  And I think before this Assembly should grant you 

that kind of power to go on to my property that I pay the taxes 

on, that I should have some knowledge of who might be 

interested in entering that property and using a bulldozer to 

knock down my door.  If someone in your department thinks 

that entry should be gained, that's all we're asking. 

 

Now your deputy must have an idea from someone out there 

who envisages a situation like that of occurring.  We're just 

simply asking you to put it on the record in here, who would 

ask for that kind of a measure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials within the 

Department of Environment have encountered circumstances 

where they needed to go on property in order to make a 

determination whether there was activities that were polluting 

the environment taking place.  Without these provisions they 

were not allowed entry onto that property until a much later 

date through the acquisition of a warrant.  Therefore in the 

public's interest, to show leadership as a commitment to 

protecting the environment, this provision on right of 

entry is important. 

 

There are circumstances where, if the officials from the 

department do not take immediate action, then the evidence has 

been taken away.  There is no way that we can prove who was 

doing the contaminating.  This is not an amendment that is 

going to be abused but it is one that is necessary.  It is in the 

interest of all the public of Saskatchewan.  We do not believe, 

as the member opposite does, that there is chance for abuse 

here.  We believe it's a responsible duty of the province of 

Saskatchewan to protect the environment, and in circumstances 

where individuals are abusing their right, then the government, 

the officials, have to take action immediately. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's fine if you 

subscribe to the view that government is always without sin.  

But I remind you, Madam Minister, it was one of your 

colleagues that covered over the biggest PCB (polychlorinated 

biphenyl) spill this province has ever seen with several feet of 

concrete. 

 

Now maybe you're going to need a bulldozer to go in and 

remove that concrete cap from the Federal Pioneer lot in 

downtown Regina.  I don't know.  But I'm just saying that 

government isn't the be-all and the end-all, that governments 

can abuse as well as individuals and companies. 

 

And, Madam Minister, you may not always be the Minister of 

Environment.  It may be somebody else, either in your 

government or in a future government.  Ministers with that 

kind of power, quite frankly, scare people. Because as I pointed 

out to you earlier, government is very difficult to sue.  I as an 

individual have a limited amount of cash to put into a legal 

action.  You as a minister of the Crown have got every 

taxpayer in this province behind you to take someone through 

the court process.  That is very difficult to do. 

 

Madam Minister, if this has been brought to your officials' 

attention in the past, where a circumstance came up that 

demanded these kind of powers, would you enlighten the 

Assembly as to what that circumstance was.  Give us an 

example of where it would be absolutely necessary to force 

entry at all costs even if you had to bulldoze down somebody's 

door to get there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There is one circumstance that was 

through the courts recently and that was with the Nestor 

Romaniuk trial where he was dumping sulphuric acid out of 

batteries.  Had that been able to penetrate into the water system 

there would have been a great deal of damage.  And there is 

now still to the soil the contamination of the area. 

 

I guess the best assurance that I can give to the hon. minister is 

the fact that . . . or the hon. member is that he is sitting over 

there.  And the way democracy works is, if there is abuse by 

the government there is no doubt that the members opposite 

would find out about it and bring it to the attention of at least 

the media and most likely most people in Saskatchewan. 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

So you are the counterpoint to the fact that there may be abuse 

in the system.  And it's part of the way our system works as far 

as if the court system is too expensive or too cumbersome, 

certainly there is a political avenue and no minister would want 

to try to ignore the pressure or the condemnation of the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, if that is supposed to 

give us a feeling of comfort then I can only point out that the 

only government in Saskatchewan history that's unilaterally 

changed the rules of this House for its own ends sits right over 

there. 

 

Now if I'm supposed to take comfort in the fact that a 

government that would do that isn't going to fool around with 

my rights as an individual to sort of use the Big Brother 

approach to the environment, then you haven't given me a 

whole lot to feel secure about.  Because that majority doesn't 

hesitate to roll over the opposition when it feels the need to do 

so.  I'm sure that 10 of us aren't going to be able to follow all of 

your environmental policemen around as they sort of do their 

thing in society.  And that's why I want you . . . and I think it's 

very important that people in this province know, on the 

record, who in our society has been demanding these changes. 

 

And I can't for a minute, Madam Minister, believe that your 

deputy hasn't kept a list of individuals that would be 

demanding these kind of changes.  There must be somebody 

that you can tell this Assembly that wants these kinds of 

changes, and I think you should put it on the record. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, once again to the hon. 

member opposite, the public has demanded -- if you want to 

use the word demanded -- that the environment be protected, 

that public safety be protected.  There are instances, there are 

examples, all across Canada and in the world, where public 

safety has not been protected, and there have been instances 

where companies and corporations have illegally pursued 

activities that are very difficult for any government or any 

official to be on top of unless there is instant access to the 

property. 

 

Once again I'll point out to you a circumstance. If someone is 

pouring gasoline or solvent into our sewer system, you cannot 

try to pursue that through a warrant because by the time you 

get to the individual who is dumping the liquid into the sewer, 

it's too late, and you have to concentrate your activity on trying 

to get it out.  If the sewer system explodes in a small town, you 

will have devastation and you will have death and you will 

have circumstances that go far beyond the ramifications of the 

right of any official to enter a property and to take action 

immediately.  It is in the public's best interest that this 

provision be in this amendment at this time.  And it is a 

responsible thing to do.  Many jurisdictions across Canada 

have similar provisions and others Acts do as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, in all due respect 

Canada -- and Saskatchewan in particular -- isn't Mexico.  I can 

appreciate the problem.  And we all saw on television what 

happened when somebody put gasoline in the sewer system.  

But I think that we have 

evolved as a society a little bit further down the road than 

someone intentionally doing that. 

 

And what you're getting at I gather, is you're saying that this is 

whistle-blower legislation -- I think I've heard you use those 

words to describe what's going on here.  Obviously someone 

would have had to see someone dump the gasoline into the 

drain in the service station.  That someone then runs to your 

department and says, Madam Minister, so and so dumped 

gasoline down the drain. I want you to send one of your people 

in there to confirm that. 

 

Now I suspect by then, Madam Minister, the gasoline will be 

several miles down the drain, but even given that situation 

that's what you're anticipating.  That all members of the public 

are going to become sort of environmental policemen, is that 

where we're sort of getting at here, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The whistle-blower legislation is under 

the environmental rights and responsibilities charter.  It is not 

part of this.  But there are circumstances where responsible 

citizens will want to report illegal activities and obviously it is 

in the best interest of the public that they do so. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, for every example 

that you've given me someone obviously has to inform your 

department.  You can't possibly hire enough people to have 

them sitting at the gate of every factory and manufacturing 

process and whatever in this town or in this province in 

anticipation that something might happen.  Obviously someone 

is going to have to be reporting infractions to you for you to 

send your people in.  And I would say, Madam Minister, that is 

some type of whistle-blower legislation.  Because you can't 

possibly ferret all of this wrongdoing out on your own. 

 

And I'm saying to you, Madam Minister, somebody must be on 

the record with your department demanding this.  And I want 

you to put it on the record of the Assembly of who that is.  

Which groups in society are saying -- is it the Sierra Club? -- 

who is it that's saying that we need this type of legislative 

change to give Madam Minister this kind of power to enter 

premises without a warrant, with whatever tools she needs at 

her disposal.  Who is it, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

people in Saskatchewan have a desire to keep this environment 

clean and healthy.  People in Saskatchewan want their 

industries and businesses to operate in a manner that respects 

the environment and obeys the environmental laws of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the member opposite, I am at a loss to try to explain to you 

why this is as important . . . if you don't inherently see the 

importance of it, then it's difficult for me to try to understand 

where you feel the threat.  There are so many businesses and so 

many companies in Saskatchewan that don't feel threatened by 

this.  In fact they understand the cost of clean-ups.  They 

understand the horrendous cost associated with contaminations.  

And they feel that there is not a problem with the right for an 

environmental officer to access a premise if they feel that there 

is a 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

concern or there is a contravention of the law taking place. 

 

(1915) 

 

I don't understand your concerns.  If you respect the 

environment and if you are in step and in tune with the public 

of Saskatchewan, you would endorse this amendment as 

progressive legislation.  I do not understand how you feel 

threatened by it.  It only is a threat to people who have 

something to hide.  I don't think the member opposite has 

anything to hide. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You're absolutely right, Madam Minister.  I 

don't have anything to hide.  I'll put my environmental record 

up against yours any day, as a citizen in our province, and 

stand quite well, I think.  But that isn't the point.  The point is is 

that you have seen to change the Act to give an individual in 

our society, a minister of the Crown, significant powers, 

powers that if they are abused -- and I say if, Madam Minister 

-- I think would have a significant effect on my ability as a 

citizen of this province to carry on my everyday life.  These are 

very wide-ranging powers, and how good an environmental 

record I have as an individual, Madam Minister, and what I 

think of it, isn't what we're discussing here. 

 

You have brought forward amendments to the Act giving you 

and your department officials expanded powers.  What I'm 

asking you is, who is it in our society that demanded that you 

do that?  You're saying the public demands it.  Fair ball.  Who 

in the public has demanded it?  I understand the drafting 

process of Bills, Madam Minister, and how they evolve and 

where they come from.  Are you telling me that your deputy 

minister thought all of these changes up all by himself?  I don't 

believe that for a minute.  Someone had to be talking to him 

and saying, I think we need changes because of this, this, and 

this.  And, Madam Minister, I think it's important, before we 

grant you those kind of powers, that you let citizens in this 

province know who is requesting those kind of changes, 

because it has to come from groups and individuals.  I 

understand government.  I understand pressure groups.  I don't 

think your deputy and his folks did this all in isolation by 

themselves. 

 

Madam Minister, please inform the public of Saskatchewan 

who was pressuring you to change this law and amend it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As I have said before to the hon. member 

opposite, we have talked to many groups across Saskatchewan 

in many different circumstances and we have got a very loud 

and clear message from all of the people that they do not want 

to see contaminated sites; they do not want contaminated 

water; they want to make sure that people who have emissions 

coming out of smoke-stacks are regulated and that they're 

obeying the laws of Saskatchewan.  We've talked to many 

people.  They have endorsed more stringent laws for 

Saskatchewan as far as right of protecting the public interest. 

 

What we have here -- I believe is what you're getting at -- is a 

right to protect society as a right of an individual to 

have his own private interest protected.  It's a balance between 

the protection of society against the balance of a protection of 

an individual.  And there has to be a balance.  And I agree with 

you about that. 

 

The point is that there is a balance.  We have a balance and 

there is remedy through the courts.  If we on government or 

officials within government abuse a right given to them under 

this legislation, there is access through the courts; secondly, 

there is political access to any minister or to any individual.  

And it is important that we understand that after many 

examples that can be cited, not only in Canada but across the 

world, that we take seriously the right to protect the 

environment.  It is a very, very serious concern in the public's 

mind that there is contamination going on and there is no 

regulation, there is no right of governments to try to control the 

contamination.  And we have to take that matter very seriously. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, from what I 

remember of the old Act -- and because it impacted on the oil 

and gas industry and the mining industry in a big way, I did 

know it fairly well -- government had very wide-ranging 

powers.  As a matter of fact, I as the minister of Energy and 

Mines had the ability, under permitting, to shut down all sorts 

of operations in this province for environmental reasons.  It 

didn't even have to go to the minister of Environment.  I could 

refuse to issue a permit on a given oil or gas well or a mining 

operation without the Department of the Environment even 

becoming involved.  Okay? 

 

Very wide-ranging powers; the power of fine -- tens of millions 

of dollars if one wanted to push things to its extreme.  I mean 

when you look at what you can do by halting production for a 

given period of time and what the costs are to someone in the 

business sector, it can be absolutely significant.  And you can 

do that at present.  You can shut down all sorts of people and 

they will lose production, they will lose income, and they're 

still liable for taxes and royalties and all sorts of things.  Okay? 

 

So the heavy hand of government can be used right now.  What 

we're talking about here . . . And I would never have 

envisioned of having the power . . . And that clause, Madam 

Minister, quite frankly, really bothers me.  Why you would 

insist on . . . Maybe what you need to do is give me a definition 

on what you think of machinery, equipment, or materials that 

the minister may want to do to enter a premise.  Give me a list 

of what people have demanded from you in the way of 

equipment to break into some place. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I will say once again that we believe that 

there is a need for immediate response in order to avoid 

disaster.  The circumstances may be limited but there are times 

when there is a need for the department or the government to 

take immediate response in some circumstances.  The ones that 

you cited as the authority of the Minister of Energy and Mines 

are far more Draconian than what we're proposing here, in 

some people's minds. 

 

When we're talking about machinery, we're talking about the 

type of equipment that would be necessary in order to get . . . 

either to clean up the contaminated site 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

immediately, to remove the danger of contamination for the 

public welfare, or to take samples for evidence.  It is not a 

bulldozer that would go through somebody's fence or 

somebody's door.  It is machinery that could be used in order to 

make sure that contamination does not continue if it's 

immediate and present at the time that there is access to the 

property. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- In all due respect, Madam Minister, then the 

legal beagles in drafting have wishy-washed you around 

because it says "to carry out the purposes of the entry."  It 

doesn't say anything about digging up the slop afterwards.  It 

says "to carry out the purposes of the entry."  Entry means, in 

my view, in the circumstances where you're using the 

bulldozer, that is breaking down something, Madam Minister.  

You obviously feel you need to carry out the purpose of entry 

at all costs, and I want to know why you feel that?  What type 

of machinery you envision to use to carry out entry, you know?  

What type of things would you do to enter a premises that you 

have to have machinery, equipment, or materials?  Do 

materials include dynamite?  I mean, what are we doing here, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well it may include a variety of things.  It 

may include building a road up to the site where the pollution 

is occurring, where you would have to have some machinery to 

do that.  There are many things that one could think about that 

you would have to have some machinery in order to get to the 

point where the pollution is taking place -- a ladder. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, what you're saying is 

you might need machinery to get up to the edge of my property 

line.  That's fair ball.  I suppose you can do that, but after that 

you've got to enter my property.  And I'm wondering why you 

need to have legislation this open-ended to enter my property.  

That's what we're asking, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The terminology of entry means the 

process of accessing the problem, finding a way of getting to 

where the problem is occurring. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I perfectly understand that, Madam Minister.  

But the problem is your folks may perceive that I have a 

problem.  And I have maybe told you I don't have a problem 

and you've decided that I do have a problem.  Therefore you're 

going to enter my premise and you don't have a warrant or 

anything.  And maybe I've taken precautions to make sure 

people don't enter my premise for one reason or another.  And 

now you're saying is, that you're going to come up and you're 

going to enter and you're going to use whatever is at your 

disposal to enter my property without a warrant, and you've got 

it in legislation that you can do darn near anything here short of 

use a napalm bomb.  Now I just want to know why you think 

you have to have that type of power, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well we cannot foresee every 

circumstance where pollution may be occurring, and there are 

circumstances where they will need to have a certain amount of 

equipment or machinery in order to get to where the pollution 

is taking place.  The types of pollution that can be occurring 

can be as varied as your 

very vivid imagination will allow it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you even go a little 

bit further.  In section 5 it says: 

 

 (5) No person shall obstruct a person authorized to make an 

entry pursuant to this section. 

 

So no matter what you come along with to break into my 

property with, I had better not stand in the road, whether you 

want to drive over, or go under, or blow it up.  Whatever you 

happen to have in mind, you've got it all covered here.  And I'm 

just wondering why you think you need that kind of power. 

 

Madam Minister, if no one in our society has come and begged 

you to put these powers in the Act, and you won't give me any 

examples of where you need this kind of Draconian measure, I 

would say, Madam Minister, that we have a right to be 

suspicious.  I mean, you haven't hesitated as a government to 

walk over the rules of this Assembly for the first time since 

Confederation.  With these types of rules in place, Madam 

Minister, we naturally have to be suspicious.  You allude to it 

in more than one section where you have that kind of power, 

and I want you to give me some examples.  Give me some 

names of individuals that have requested that you have that 

kind of power. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the purpose of good 

environmental laws is to protect the environment, to prevent 

contamination, to make sure that public safety is paramount.  

This is simply a way of protecting the environment and 

protecting people when there are no other avenues that an 

environmental officer has to him or her. 

 

If we went through and got a warrant, the result would be the 

same.  You would have access to the property.  But there are 

circumstances where you need immediate access because 

pollution, once it's let loose, cannot be contained again.  If it's 

let loose into a water stream, if it's let loose into the air we have 

to be there immediately in order to shut it down.  And we 

cannot wait for the process of going to find a judge and getting 

a warrant.  That is all that we're speaking to. 

 

There are issues where you have to go there immediately and 

shut it down.  Bhopal, there are contamination sites all over the 

world where people have lost property and they've lost their 

lives because no one had access to the property in order to stop 

the contamination immediately.  That is all that we're talking 

about -- the right to enter the property to stop the pollution 

process before it harms the public or the environment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But, Madam Minister, we're not disagreeing 

with you.  It is on the public agenda.  The public wants to see 

the environment protected.  People all over our society are 

thinking of new ways to do it.  I mean you've got soup to nuts 

in recycling these days and it's going to get even bigger.  

People are concerned. 

 

(1930) 

 

What people are concerned about though, Madam 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

Minister, is your Premier 10 years ago as a deputy premier of 

this province fundamentally changed the constitution of our 

country.  Okay?  Fundamentally.  They brought home the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, you know, and it's there.  And 

everybody has their day in court.  It's a different ball game.  

Just as much as we're all concerned, Madam Minister, about 

our environment, we now have the concern on our hands of 

protecting the rights of individuals in our society. 

 

And I think the opposition would be remiss when the minister 

has to have the powers outlined in section 2.3(3).  She 

reinforces it in 2.3(5).  We can go over to section (10)(d): 

 

 obstruct or interfere with the minister, environment officer or 

designated person. 

 

I mean it's reinforced all the way through this Act, section after 

section, where it wasn't before with these kind of powers. 

 

And, Madam Minister, when requesting these kind of powers, 

you should be able to come to this Assembly and say we have 

been approached by X, Y, Z.  And they had concerns 1, 2, 3, 4, 

where we've had a big problem and we need you, Madam 

Minister, to rectify that problem because . . . 

 

And I think you should be prepared to tell this Assembly who 

those groups, individuals, companies were and the 

circumstances where you, as minister in reviewing that 

consultation, felt it was necessary to instruct your department 

to change the regulations in such a way that Madam Minister 

would have this kind of power.  Now you should be able to 

bring that to this legislature, Madam Minister, when asking for 

these kind of powers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again this is progressive legislation.  

It is protecting the environment.  It is protecting the public 

interest.  There is a balance between the right to protect the 

public and the right of the individual.  If this is challenged 

under the Charter of Rights, we'll soon know about it.  It can be 

challenged.  If an individual feels there is a challenge here, then 

I would encourage them to take a look at it.  But at this point in 

time, the public interest is paramount.  The right to protect the 

environment is a very important issue in the public mind.  

There are circumstances where it is necessary, absolutely vital, 

for the public interest, to act immediately. 

 

We cannot wait until there is a severe contamination and public 

health has been endangered.  We have to act.  And in those 

circumstances we have to have the right of entry to make sure 

that we shut down whatever the cause of pollution is.  It is 

happening.  It will continue to happen.  And this government is 

responsible in this legislation in taking the course of action that 

they are taking now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Madam Minister, it appears that . . . 

And you've been asked the question at least a half a dozen 

times and there is no response, and I can only assume from that 

that the orders to change the legislation either came from 

Madam Minister herself and her duties as minister or they 

came by  cabinet directive.  Because 

you have no other indication to this Assembly that it was any 

group, company, persons, society, that requested these changes.  

There were no circumstance to back it up by those groups or 

society. 

 

And I can only gather from that, Madam Minister, that you 

either personally gave the order to change this Act to have 

these measures put in here, or it was a directive of cabinet.  

Because you have been not able to indicate to this Assembly in 

any shape or form anyone else's involvement in it.  You keep 

saying, the public. That simply isn't good enough.  We can only 

gather from that that it's not the public, Madam Minister; it's 

part of a political agenda by this NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government.  That's the only thing you leave people in this 

Assembly left to confirm. 

 

Now if that's not the case, then enlighten us on who the other 

players are that would ask for these kind of powers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, I believe that 

our government was elected on a very strong environmental 

policy.  This is in keeping with the principles of the New 

Democratic government.  We have no problem saying that we 

support this, that not only does it come from the department but 

it is definitely in step with the principles of environmental 

stewardship that the New Democrats have talked about for 

many years. 

 

I feel nothing to apologize for, although the member opposite 

feels suspicious. I would suggest that it's only those people who 

have something to hide that feel threatened by this legislation.  

If there are circumstances where the public good is being 

threatened, it is incumbent upon a government to take action 

immediately to stop the pollution from taking place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe our 

concern is not in those circumstances or those individuals 

where pollution is taking place, but rather it's in those cases 

where your department batters down somebody's door and 

nothing is happening.  That's where the concern lies. 

 

I'd like to read to you that portion of the Act that is currently in 

place so it's on the record for the public to hear.  This is section 

2.3(1). 

 

 The minister, an environment officer or any person 

designated by the minister may, at any reasonable time and 

with the consent of the owner (I thinks that's very important 

-- with the consent of the owner) or occupant, enter on any 

land, premises or other place with any personnel, machinery, 

equipment or materials that he considers necessary for the 

purpose of: 

 

  (a)  exercising the minister's powers or duties pursuant to, 

or enforcing, this Act or any other Act administered 

by the minister or any regulations or orders made 

pursuant to this Act or those Acts; or 

 

  (b)  securing data and obtaining information respecting the 

environment or any pollutant that he reasonably 

believes is present on the 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

land, premises or other place, whether or not the pollutant 

is present in circumstances that are harmful or potentially 

harmful to the environment. 

 

 (2) No person shall obstruct a person authorized to make 

any entry pursuant to this section. 

 

 (3) Where entry pursuant to subsection (1) is refused, the 

minister may apply ex parte to a judge of Her 

Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan 

and, where the judge is satisfied that: 

 

  (a)  there are reasonable grounds to believe that evidence 

of a contravention of this Act, any other Act 

administered by the minister or any regulations or 

orders made pursuant to this Act or those Acts is 

present on those lands or premises or at that place; 

or 

 

  (b)  data or information respecting the environment or any 

pollutant is present on those lands or premises or at 

that place; 

 

 he may issue an order authorizing the minister, an 

environment officer or a person designated by the minister to 

enter the land, premises or other place, as the case may be, 

for the purpose of securing that evidence, data or 

information. 

 

 (4) Where an order is issued pursuant to subsection (3), the 

minister, an environment officer or any person 

designated by the minister may take any step or 

employ any assistance that is reasonably necessary 

to accomplish what is authorized by the order. 

 

 (5) Every police officer or peace officer is under a duty to 

assist the minister, an environment officer or any 

person designated by the minister to enforce an 

order pursuant to subsection (3). 1988. 

 

In that section it gives the minister the power to enter, but only 

after a warrant.  She can enter prior to that with the permission 

of the owner or the occupant. 

 

Further on, Madam Minister, in the same Act, you stated that 

your officials were not immune from prosecutions if they were 

to enter into a property and then subsequently be sued by the 

owner or the occupant.  Yet section 40(1) in this Act, reads, 

 

 Neither Her Majesty the Queen in right of Saskatchewan nor 

any member of the Executive Council nor any person acting 

pursuant to the authority of this Act, any other Act 

administered by the minister or any regulations or orders 

made pursuant to this Act or those Acts is in any way liable . 

. . 

 

I'll read that again: 

 

 ". . . is in any way liable, except in the case of negligence, for 

any loss or damage suffered by any 

person for anything done in good faith or omitted to be done 

pursuant to the authority or supposed authority of this Act or 

those Acts or the regulations or orders made pursuant to this 

Act or those Acts.  1988. 

 

Madam Minister, you're taking out the fact that your officials 

have to go before a judge and provide some reasonable reason 

why they need to have this entry before a judge, a Queen's 

court judge.  The old Act says you have to do that and then it 

provides the immunity.  Will your officials, under the amended 

Act, still be protected under clause 40.1? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, a few comments to the 

hon. member opposite in regard to the last comment he made.  

What it says is that you're not liable except for negligence.  In 

circumstances where there is justification then there is no 

remedy by the individual because in those circumstances 

obviously the environmental officer was working in the public 

interest.  So in that circumstance there is no immunity if there 

is negligence on the part of the environmental officer. 

 

In regard to the changes, there are two important aspects that 

you have overlooked.  One is the need to immediately stop 

pollution or contamination from taking place in order to protect 

the public health and welfare.  The second point is that if there 

is not immediate access to the premise or the property then the 

evidence can be tampered or hidden or removed, in which case 

there is nothing that the department can do further. 

 

So there are two things we're talking about: the need to stop the 

contamination from taking place any further, immediately, in 

order to prevent any problems that will endanger the lives of 

individuals.  The second is the fact that we need the evidence in 

order to pursue it through the courts.  And furthermore, I guess 

what we want to stress is this provision in this Act is very 

similar to The Occupational Health and Safety Act.  And there 

has not been any abuse by the government in that regard, and 

we do not anticipate any abuse by the government in this Act 

either. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you speak of, 

this is in the case of negligence only, then you carried on.  This 

exemption is only for the case of negligence.  If you're acting in 

good faith then you're protected.  What happens in those cases 

where your officials break down somebody's door, go into the 

property, supposedly in good faith; they're still protected.  Who 

pays?  Nothing happened.  There was nothing there.  Who pays 

for it?  Are you just going to turn around and walk away with 

somebody's Quonset door pushed in? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The intent here is to, I think, protect . . . 

and I understand what you're getting at.  The intent is to protect 

the individuals from irresponsible acts by government officials.  

And I don't know how we can word that.  I appreciate what 

you're saying.  We looked at that.  Negligence may not cover 

entirely the situation that you're talking about.  But in this point 

in time we have anticipated that there were avenues, remedies 

through the court system, if an individual wanted to pursue it. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

But as far as providing a remedy because of irresponsible 

actions by government officials, that is something that perhaps 

we should discuss. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if your officials are 

going to act in good faith and be reasonable, then perhaps the 

thing to do is remove clause 40.1.  They have no need for the 

protection if they act properly in good faith. 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, 40.1 is a clause 

that is needed in order to protect individuals that are carrying 

out their duty in good faith.  The clause, except in case of 

negligence, is as I'm told, broad enough to be interpreted to 

cover such instances where it might be irresponsible actions as 

well.  Negligence can be interpreted very broadly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm glad to hear that the minister 

would entertain that type of an idea of broadening it.  Because 

I'm going to present an amendment to do exactly that when it 

comes up to the reading of the Bill and approval, to provide 

some protection for individuals and to ensure that the officials 

from your department are acting in a reasonable fashion in 

good faith to provide some protection for the general public at 

large, that they know that they're not going to have their doors 

battered down with the officials having immunity, if there's no 

reason to have done so. 

 

Madam Minister, a little further on in section 2.3, you have 

included justices of the peace in here.  I'm wondering why? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's in there to provide reasonable access 

by the environmental officer where there isn't access to a judge 

in smaller centres. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well do you feel that the government 

doesn't have enough access yet to warrants by going through a 

Queen's court judge? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, this is a 

normally accepted approach to dealing with these types of 

issues either through the provincial court or through the justice 

of the peace. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, this is a change 

though and I'm just wondering why you felt it was necessary to 

have justice of the peace included?  Prior to this it was judges 

of the provincial court that were allowed to issue warrants to 

search a person's private home, their dwelling.  And yet now 

you're going to open it up to a justice of the peace and I'm just 

wondering what precipitated this, why did you feel it was 

necessary? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, the Justice 

officials felt that this was necessary to include this in this 

clause in order to give them reasonable access to the property 

in times of emergency when the dwelling was barred from 

entry by the officials. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In section 

2.3(8)(c) "there is data or information respecting 

the environment . . ."  Now I'm sure that all of us have 

information respecting the environment in our homes or in our 

places of dwelling.  I find that term to be rather broad.  What 

was the purpose of leaving it so broad?  What were you aiming 

at?  The ability to enter into anybody's home if you so desired? 

 

If you had said data or information respecting environmental 

pollution, that's a different matter.  But you've left it pretty 

broad.  Any newspaper you pick up has some information 

dealing with the environment in it.  So any home, any office, 

any place, you could use the provisions of this Act for entry.  

What was your intent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I believe the intent perhaps be a little bit 

broad here and if you have an amendment that you're proposing 

we're certainly agreeable to looking at it.  Here there are 

circumstances where processes have been developed by certain 

industries or certain businesses that will include in that process 

data that respects the environment.  That process may not be 

illegal within our environmental laws, so this implies there is a 

broader terminology than maybe that should be, and we're 

willing to look at . . . If you have an amendment to that we're 

quite willing to look at it.  But the intent is to talk about those 

processes that have data and the data specifically talks about its 

impact on the environment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I don't understand, Madam 

Minister, how somebody, a company having information on 

how something would impact the environment, would be 

illegal and therefore necessitate that you have a warrant to go 

and search their premises.  If they have some data that would 

indicate something is potentially harmful to the environment 

that's their business, providing they are not using that substance 

to in fact pollute the environment.  If it's only data dealing with 

a substance, then what makes it illegal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This pertains to circumstances where 

there is a process, where there is information on emissions or 

something that's going on within an industry, and that 

information may be held at another premise or another piece of 

property.  This gives the right of the official to obtain entry to 

get that information that has a report that respects the impact on 

the environment by that process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, since we seem to have an agreement here on section 

2.3(8) that an amendment might be in order on section (c), 

would it be possible for the committee to rise and report 

progress to get an amendment drafted by the Law Clerk? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, if they want to 

continue with the questions, we will have our legislative officer 

draft that amendment and send it over for your perusal.  If you 

have suggestions, we're quite happy to take them and try to 

work them into the amendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I think if we had a 

chance to work on it, to sit down, it would be better rather than 

doing it sort of haphazardly. 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we're trying to find a 

process that would accommodate the wishes of the member 

opposite.  If they have suggestions for the amendment, they can 

forward them over to our officials and we will include them, if 

that would be appropriate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, if Madam Minister would 

like to draft the amendment, send it over here for us to take a 

look at and to consider it, we can carry on. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, that's agreeable to us. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Then we'll 

move on to section 35.1, where it states the nature . . . This is if 

an applicant presents information to the minister concerning a 

possible pollution taking place. 

 

 (2) An application for an investigation under this section 

shall be accompanied by a solemn or statutory 

declaration that: 

 

  (a)  states the name and address of the applicant; 

 

  (b)  states the nature of the alleged offence and the name 

of each person alleged to be involved in the 

commission of the offence; 

 

Madam Minister, once this application has been reviewed and 

either agreed that it should go forward or is rejected, does the 

person being investigated receive any information at the end?  

They may have had their premises entered without any 

knowledge of why the minister or her agents are there.  Will 

the person being investigated find out about it after the fact if 

there is nothing there, and will they find out who the applicant 

was that was asking that the investigation be carried out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, yes, the person 

who owns the property would receive that information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Who makes the decision, Madam 

Minister, whether or not to proceed with the application to do 

an investigation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, the minister 

makes the final determination. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The final determination is made by 

yourself personally, or just under your authority? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Under the authority of the minister. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So in actual fact then, Madam Minister, 

somewhere in the bureaucracy the decision will be made.  Is 

there a level at which this decision has to rise to to be taken, or 

can an agent in the field make that decision? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Normally these types of decisions are 

made by the deputy minister. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'm glad to know that the decisions will 

be made at high levels.  There are some other comments that 

you can make about decisions made at high levels but I won't 

make them. 

 

In section 38(1)(j) it prescribes a requirement -- the payments 

of any fees and charges.  What are these fees and charges going 

to be? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

we're doing a very comprehensive consultation process at this 

point in time, looking at the whole area of fees and charges.  

They will be brought in under regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it's always glad 

to hear that a minister of the Crown is consulting.  Who are you 

consulting with though, before making these determinations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we will be consulting with 

all the stakeholders, including the industries, the business, the 

public, the environmental network, anyone who has a concern 

with the operation of the environmental protection Act and its 

application to the public and to business. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Do you have any names of any 

individuals or corporations or groups that you are meeting with 

in discussing this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This is done through an interdepartmental 

approach.  They have already sent letters, messages, to all the 

stakeholders inviting them to meetings later on.  And this is an 

ongoing process.  We have just begun it at this point in time 

and we haven't got the names, but they will be, in due course, 

released to all the people who have an interest in them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well surely, Madam Minister, if you've 

sent out notices and invitations to consult, you must have sent 

them to somebody.  What we're getting here is the nebulous 

"them".  We're talking with them, but we never find out who 

"them" is.  We're never us, it's always them.  So who are this 

nebulous "them" that you're holding your consultations with? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, we have 

advised the Canadian Federation of Independent Businesses; 

we have advised all the major industry associations.  They have 

been give notice that the regulations are under review, and they 

will be consulted for their point of view. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- As a member of the opposition, it's my 

duty to find out everything that I can and let the public know 

what's going on.  You've mentioned the independent business 

federation.  Who else?  There must be . . . Are you talking with 

the oil industry?  Who in the oil industry?  Are you talking with 

the retail industry in agriculture?  The farm chemical dealers?  

Who are you talking with? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Everyone publicly has been assured that 

they'll be involved in the process.  We haven't finalized the list 

of people that will be given notice and 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

will be invited for comments.  Their comments will be listened 

to.  We're just starting the process at this time.  The regulations 

are simply in the embryonic stage, and we're simply compiling 

a list of people who are stakeholders now and we'll be talking 

to them about these changes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well can you give us in the opposition, 

rather than "them" and the general public, an assurance that 

there will be public hearings held throughout the province to 

give people the chance to have input?  Or is it going to be that 

select group of "them" that have a chance to make comments 

on your regulations? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the Minister of Education on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with leave, for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 

two guests present in the Speaker's gallery tonight.  One is the 

new president elect of the university board of governors, 

Marcel de la Gorgendiere.  And just in the front seat is Ken 

Dillen, a constituent and friend of mine.  Would the Assembly 

join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, as he is aware, 

we have just introduced an amendment to this Act making 

public consultations on the regulations compulsory.  So it's 

already in the Act.  It is an obligation by the government to 

proceed with public consultations by the terms referenced in 

this Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, when you say the 

consultations will be mandatory, are you envisioning one 

meeting say perhaps in the seat of power in Regina or will it be 

around the province in areas that will be affected?  If you're 

looking at uranium, it will be more in northern Saskatchewan. 

If you're looking at oil, it will be in the south and the west side.  

Are you looking at a broad cross-section for the public hearings 

or in a centralized location? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The public consultations will take part in 

the area where the people are impacted, with the stakeholders 

who have direct input into and direct . . . this Act impacts upon 

them directly.  The consultations will take place with that 

group of stakeholders in public consultations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 

the assurance, because I think it is important that the 

people who are to be impacted by the decisions actually have 

an opportunity to participate and that it be in their area, rather 

than forcing them to drive some place else out of the area.  It 

leaves a lot less officials to do the touring than there are public. 

 

In part (ii) of the section where it says: 

 

 any other action that the minister, an environment officer of 

any certification board established pursuant to the regulations 

is required or authorized to take pursuant to this Act or the 

regulations 

 

And this is dealing again with any fees or charges.  What kind 

of actions are you contemplating here, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

would he repeat the question, please? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'm wondering under 

subsection 38(1)(j)(ii) what actions you were contemplating 

when it considers the fees and charges connected with such 

actions, such approvals by the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The actions we're talking about is where 

we have authority to conduct inspections and in circumstances 

that may change we would prefer to charge for those 

inspections. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, what you're saying 

is you're going to a user-pay system here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, polluter-pay or user-pay.  There will 

be charges levied on people who access the various regulations 

and various inspections needed by the Department of 

Environment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I think perhaps we 

should be clear that there is a difference here under this Act 

between user-pay and polluter-pay.  Because a user of this Act 

and the services provided by the Department of the 

Environment may not necessarily be a polluter. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You are right in that statement.  We do 

now, under Public Safety, charge for inspections, electrical 

inspections or gas inspections.  This is simply an extension of 

that concept. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under the 

same subsection but (hh.1) where it says: 

 

 . . . regulating, controlling and requiring ministerial approval 

for the construction, operation, abandonment and 

decommissioning of facilities that store, process or handle 

hazardous substances, including facilities that were 

constructed and operated prior to the coming into force of 

any regulations made under this clause; 

 

I'm wondering, what kind of fees and charges are currently 

being levied for that kind of construction and control? 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, this is not a 

section that deals with fees and charges.  This has to do with 

setting of regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Are there any fees or charges in place 

for the ministerial approval necessary to carry out this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, there are not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And there will not be under the 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are no regulations . . . there are no 

fees or charges under this set of amendments at this point in 

time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Do you foresee any charges or fees 

coming into place dealing with this, with ministerial approvals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes we do. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- On what basis will these fees and 

charges be levied? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That will be part of the consultation 

process that we're undertaking at the point in time.  We can't 

give you any definitive answer as to the amount or the way 

they're levied at this point in time, until we've done the 

consultations. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, if you're going 

to charge fees or levies against an operation for construction, I 

think it would be incumbent on you to take into consideration 

what impact those fees and charges will have on that operation. 

 

If it's a large, multi-million dollar operation, then a smaller fee, 

relative to that cost, won't be prohibitive.  But if you charge a 

fee to a small operation of a few hundreds or thousands of 

dollars -- not hundreds of thousands but hundred or thousands 

-- and you charge the same fee to a multi-million dollar 

operation, you may be harming the small operation. 

 

So I think it's incumbent that there be some respect given to the 

size of the operation and the amount of pollution that could 

entail.  Can you give us that assurance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, absolutely.  You're right that we 

have to be aware that there are . . . we have to be sensitive to 

the economic circumstances of the company or industry that 

we're regulating. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Again we agree, Madam Minister.  In 

part (hh.5) on the same page, respecting the training  and 

qualifications of persons installing, what kind of standards will 

be in place for this?  What kinds of qualifications will those 

people have to have? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This is done in consultation with 

industry.  What we're talking about here is setting up 

regulations regarding the qualifications for people servicing, 

and the qualifications and training for people who are 

installing.  We're setting up the regulations for the 

qualifications. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would assume 

that because we do have a large number of facilities for 

storage, etc., in place, there are already a number of qualified 

people out there who do this kind of work.  Surely you must 

have an idea what kind of standards you're looking at -- pipe 

fitters, etc.  They already have their professional standards and 

I would think that if you were to look in those kind of 

industries, there are standards already in place.  Now are you 

going to be changing that or will it carry on from where it is 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, we are taking 

the national standards for the qualifications for people working 

in this area.  We have offered four training programs to this 

date and pretty well everybody who is qualified has already 

received their certification. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So you already have the qualifications in 

place that you want to have to meet the requirements of this 

Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well then, Madam Minister, why are 

you still consulting about it if the standards are already in 

place?  You stated earlier that you were consulting about the 

setting up of the standards for the qualifications necessary, and 

then you turn around and say that you already have decided to 

use the national standards.  So either you have a set of 

standards in place or you're consulting about them.  So I'm to 

understand now that you actually do have a set of standards in 

place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I was under the understanding you were 

talking about the fees and charges that we're talking about for 

regulations.  I apologize for giving a wrong answer to the 

wrong section of your question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Sorry, Madam Minister. I'll try to make 

myself clearer next time.  I was talking about the training and 

the qualifications necessary for those persons who will be 

doing the work. 

 

Am I to take it that this entire section of double h's will all be 

reviewed or the answers will be supplied under regulation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, they will all be done through 

regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- How do you see section (hh.9) working 

under regulation?  And this is . . . I'll read it so that the public 

can know: 

 

 requiring owners, operators and persons installing, servicing, 

testing and decommissioning storage tanks, containers or 

facilities for hazardous substances to obtain insurance or 

performance bonds, to deposit funds in any financial 

institution approved by the minister and 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

in any amounts the minister may consider necessary, to 

establish trust funds or to provide proof to the minister of 

financial soundness to cover possible contamination or 

pollution as a result of the operation, installation, servicing, 

testing or decommissioning of the storage facility or as a 

result of the abandonment of a storage tank, container or 

facility; 

 

What are you looking at in regulation concerning this section 

of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, this is simply 

enabling legislation.  The next process would be to decide 

which bonds would apply, the terms of the bonds, and how 

much the bonds would be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it says the 

"amounts the minister may consider necessary."  What will you 

base that determination on? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Through consultations with the industry 

that . . . The amount will be relative to the possibility or the 

size of contamination that could be created and the amount of 

expense that would be needed to clean it up.  It's relative to the 

industry and to the impact that industry has on the environment 

due to pollution or contamination. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I can see that someone in the oil 

patch would have some serious concerns about that, because if 

there was a major oil leak on TransCanada Pipelines . . . or I 

should use IPL (Interprovincial Pipe Line Co.) -- 

TransCanada's gas -- they could have a major leak.  But it is 

possible to clean that up and at the end of the day not have 

some major pollution. 

 

And yet if you look at hauling radioactive material for hospitals 

for their X-ray machines, you could have some major pollution 

there with a very small amount of product.  So how do you 

determine where is the major pollutant? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well this applies to storage tanks, 

containers, and facilities for hazardous substances.  I don't 

think the TransCanada pipeline falls under that.  And what we 

would do is talk to the industry and decide what is a fair and 

reasonable compensation for the eventuality of a contamination 

taking place.  And the bonds that would be required would be 

relative to that degree of risk that is in that activity. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you're the 

Minister of the Environment so I'm not going to question . . . 

well I guess I am going to question whether or not oil is a 

pollutant substance that would be covered under this Act. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- What we're talking about in this section 

of the Act is storage tanks, containers, or facilities for 

hazardous substances. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If oil spills on the ground, if you have 50 

barrels of oil laying on the ground, crude oil, is that or is it not 

a hazardous substance? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, if oil spilled out of a tank.  What 

we're talking about here is the company providing a bond that 

would provide the clean-up for that kind of a spill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's what I'm asking, Madam Minister.  

If IPL has a major spill then you have a large environmental 

hazard there, hazardous material.  But the long-term effects -- 

it's possible to clean that up with very few long-term effects.  

But if you have a spill of radioactive material, you may not 

have the ability to make a good clean-up on that. 

 

So that's what I'm wondering.  When you charge the fees, how 

are you going to determine what to charge?  If you spill 100 

barrels of oil in a lake, you have one set of circumstances, one 

set of costs.  But if you spill some radioactive material in 

downtown Regina, you have another set of hazards.  So how do 

you determine how you set the fees? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- What we're dealing with here is enabling 

legislation that will set these regulations that you're talking 

about now.  Through discussions with people in the industry, 

we'll determine the amount that the bonds will cover through 

appropriate discussions with the people who are the 

stakeholders. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I hope that's 

true, because once this Act passes it's going to be very difficult 

for those stakeholders to have any serious effect on the amount 

that you wish to levy, because it says, the "amounts the 

minister may consider necessary."  So once this is in place, you 

have the right to set the price, whatever it may be.  They may 

argue about it, but it's a fait accompli. 

 

On the obtaining of insurance or performance bonds, you're 

talking here of the people owning the facilities, the people 

operating the facilities, and the persons installing, servicing, 

testing, or decommissioning the storage tanks, containers, or 

facilities.  Now I mentioned IPL.  If somebody's digging a 

pipeline for IPL and they find some hazardous material in the 

ground, which may have been there for a number of years and 

may have had nothing to do with IPL at all, but yet they're 

going to be responsible for it, either as an owner or an operator 

or a person installing.  So where are they supposed to get these 

performance bonds from?  And why should someone who is 

simply working for another individual be held responsible? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, the bond that 

we're talking about only applies to the pollution that is 

controlled by the operator or the owner of the bond.  It's not 

meant to apply to environmental liability that might be incurred 

in the past by some other company.  With respect to the 

comment you made before the last question, I think it's 

important to again point out that regulations will be developed 

through public consultation.  And that amendment is in this Act 

and it's a commitment made by this government to consult with 

the stakeholders before any regulations are developed and 

passed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I believe this 

type of insurance and bond is already in place in 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

British Columbia, yet in discussion with people in the 

construction industry dealing in British Columbia, they say it's 

very, very difficult to get that kind of a bond because when you 

go on to a location, the operator, the person doing the work, 

may not necessarily know what they're going to run into.  And 

so the people who are supplying these bonds are very reluctant 

to provide a bond.  So I think there needs to be some kind of an 

assurance given that the person who is doing the work and 

finds some pollutant there . . . I mean if he causes it that's 

another matter, but if he finds some pollutant on the location, 

that he is not responsible for it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I agree.  That bond we're talking 

about here applies to the people who have the possibility or risk 

of contamination within their company.  What you're talking 

about is another section entirely.  It doesn't pertain to what 

we're talking about at this point in time, but you're absolutely 

right. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, how can we give some assurance 

then to those people who will be in fact doing the work, that 

they will not be held responsible for something that they didn't 

do? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, it's very clear 

that this Act pertains to the person or to the company that 

caused the pollution not to the person or the company that finds 

it.  It is the people or the company that have ownership on the 

substance that has caused the pollution that the bond applies to, 

not to the company or the corporation that finds the pollution. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I can't find that 

assurance in this section. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You will find that assurance through the 

regulations when we develop the regulations.  You will see 

how this applies to the company or to the group or to the 

individual that owns a contamination not to the individuals that 

find it.  It will be specific in the regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister can I count on 

your assurance that that will indeed be the case? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, the member opposite can. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In the last 

part of that section (hh.10) it calls for environmental 

assessments.  I'm just wondering, you talk here of storage 

facilities and connected premises: will this have any effect on 

agriculture? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, in so far that 

this section applies to underground storage tanks, it would have 

an impact on agriculture. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you're talking 

underground storage tanks as in gasoline tanks and diesel fuel, 

etc.  What impact is this going to have on the whole 

service-station industry, this Act dealing with underground 

storage tanks? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite to that question: 

the hazardous substances regulations that are in place now deal 

with the question that he asked and there is an impact on 

people who have old storage tanks -- service stations and so 

forth in small communities.  We are talking with them and we 

are working through that.  But this Act that we are dealing with 

today does not impact on that sector of our commercial retail 

environment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'm actually glad that 

you brought up the underground fuel storage tanks because it 

had slipped my mind.  And I know that it is a concern in a large 

number of communities because they face the possibility of 

perhaps losing their only service station because of the costs 

associated with the removal or the reconditioning of 

underground storage tanks.  What is the minister doing or 

prepared to do, to assist along that line for those small 

installations that need to be investigated? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point in time we're discussing the 

situation with small operators and stakeholders.  We're looking 

to provide some financial assistance to those people who need 

their underground tanks certified and do not have the resources 

to do it.  We're at the beginning of a process and I can give you 

my assurance that we're aware of the problem.  We're working 

with the industry to try to solve it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  What 

manner do you use at the present time to determine whether or 

not a tank should be dug up or reconditioned or certified?  

What's the procedure right now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The department has new standards that 

apply to underground tanks.  It's up to the individual who owns 

the tanks to determine whether his tanks comply with those 

standards. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- When did these new standards 

come into effect, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Those standards came into effect April of 

1989. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What's the 

procedure presently if a tank has to be removed?  What steps 

do you go through and what happens? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The individual or company that owns a 

tank has to have it replaced with a tank that meets the 

standards. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, they can simply 

say, well my tank has reached a certain age limit, or whatever 

the requirements are, and then proceed to remove the tank and 

install another one, can they? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's true. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What type of inspection or certification 

do they need after that or during the process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the installation has to 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

be done by a certified installer and the premise has to be 

licensed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So they would do the inspection after the 

installation was already in place?  The department officials 

really have nothing to do with the process until such time as the 

tank is put back into the ground? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, there is a 

reporting requirement that the company has to give to the 

department to indicate the extent of contamination within the 

soil and how much soil is going to be removed and how it's 

going to be cleaned up. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, if I can understand, 

the person involved with the service station, say, digs up his 

tank, takes some samples perhaps, and submits them to the 

Environment for inspection, and then he can replace that tank 

and then get it inspected, and he's free and clear to go back into 

business again. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I've received 

some calls and some complaints that during the removal phase 

of this tank that they have to have an agent from your 

department standing on site at all times at $30 an hour.  And 

these people are wondering, why do they have to have an 

inspector from the Department of the Environment there while 

these tanks are being removed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, you must be 

receiving erroneous information because the department does 

not, at this point in time, charge for anything.  And this process 

that you described is not happening. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad to hear 

that they're not being charged, so I will look into it further and 

just ascertain what is going on there. 

 

On section 40.2: 

 

 (1) The minister may delegate to any officer or employee of 

the department the exercise of any of the minister's 

powers . . . 

 

I'm just wondering how are these employees chosen and what 

are their qualifications. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It depends on what is taking place.  The 

delegation can be to the deputy minister or to other technical 

experts who work within the department who have the 

expertise to make that evaluation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So these employees will be department 

people chosen for their qualifications, and those qualifications 

could be checked on at some point if we wished. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's right. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister.  

That's it for my questions.  I have some amendments to make 

but I'll make those as we go through 

the amendments in the Act. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I didn't want you to get too far ahead of 

me here while I'm trying to keep track of it.  Okay, I'm . . . 

 

Clause 3 

 

The Chair: -- I believe there's an amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. Do you want me to 

read the amendment? 

 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by striking out "Section (2)" and substituting "Section 

2" (by removing the brackets); 

 

 (b) by striking out "Dangerous Goods Transportation 

Regulations (Canada), being SOR 85-77" wherever 

it occurs in the proposed clause 2(cc.1) and in each 

case substituting "Transportation of Dangerous 

Goods Regulations (Canada), being SOR 85-77". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On section 3(i), are you going to provide . . . 

Madam Minister, on some of the items there you have, waste 

dangerous goods means a substance that "is no longer used for 

its original purpose or is intended for reuse", and then it's got a 

list of them.  That's fairly extensively broad in my view, 

Madam Minister. 

 

The original purpose of a lot of items, perhaps in a chemical 

world, is legitimate to say that.  But there are a lot of things 

that could perhaps be environmentally unfriendly that deal with 

. . . I could use, for example, something that was a detriment to 

me is the city of Swift Current's lagoon.  Now the purpose of 

storage and the purpose of providing a waste disposal and then 

having the Department of Environment provide a permit to 

have them let that lagoon flow down into the creek in my view 

really would be a negative.  Now that wouldn't be a negative to 

the city of Swift Current, and we had some problems with that 

and your deputy will remember that. 

 

And I don't think that . . . I think you need a clear definition.  If 

you're going to put some of those definitions of what you mean 

in each one of those cases into your regulations, then we could 

see what they were.  Then the public could see what they are.  

But if you're just going to cover this whole area with that kind 

of broad-ranging identity, then you don't know where you're at.  

And I would raise it from that perspective, that we really need 

to consider a definition in these areas, to say to the officers that 

are going to come and do this investigation, that that in fact is 

something that is identifiable by either regulation or someone 

knowing what it's about. 

 

What you're doing is leaving it up to the discretion of the 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

individual who is doing the investigation on an item like that to 

deal with what he considers a waste dangerous good.  And 

could you identify what you intend to do there or how you 

intend to handle it?  That's under section (3), item (i) there. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

after it talks about, and "is no longer used for its original 

purpose or intended for reuse, recovery, recycling, treatment or 

disposal", and then it says "and is", and it must be on the list of 

either (A), (B), or (C).  So it has to be on the list as well.  So it 

is narrowed down sufficiently. 

 

I understand your concerns but it is also required to be on that 

list. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So what you're telling me is that not only does 

it have to be identified here, it has to identified under the 

dangerous goods for transportation and also the Food and 

Drugs Act or the Feed Act. 

 

Okay, now let's deal with the item that I raised about lagoon or 

effluent -- that sort of thing -- spill or items like that.  Are they 

covered in this, in the dangerous goods transportation Canada?  

They probably wouldn't be.  What about those kinds of items? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, no, those types 

of substances are not included in this. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well may I make a suggestion to you, Madam 

Minister, that you'd need to probably put into place those items 

that could cause an environmental concern to individuals who 

are going to be affected by not only the transportation of 

dangerous goods, either a chemical or a substance that is 

artificially made, but it could be something like effluent from a 

lagoon spilling or I could use as an example a person in a 

feedlot has also got the same kind of a problem.  Now in an 

environmentally unfriendly circumstance, that individual could 

be held accountable for a whole lot, and that concerns me in 

relation to this. 

 

And the question I guess I have is, would you be prepared to 

itemize those things that you're prepared to move on in relation 

to that, that could be either urban-related or rural?  And the 

other thing I want to point out is, how many of these places and 

items . . . Oil is another example, used oil in various kinds of 

places.  It's not likely identified under transportation of goods; 

however it could be creating a serious problem.  And I know it 

could in a lot of these pits that they hold that oil in, could create 

a very serious problem. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, oil or some of 

the substances that you were talking about -- the member 

opposite -- are included on those lists.  In circumstances where 

there is a dangerous good that's not on those lists, it can be 

designated through regulations. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does your department have a basic list of 

those already established?  Would you be prepared to send that 

over to us so that we could take a look at it? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, that list is 

available.  It's amended to the hazardous substance regulation 

list that's in effect at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you also, if that is not too difficult, 

would you send the dangerous goods transportation 

regulations, those others in the other three parts of that . . . oh, 

it's quite substantial?  Well that might be of interest, reading on 

a quiet evening at home some time.  So if you wouldn't mind 

sending it over, I would appreciate that too. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we'll send it over. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I was just sitting there visiting for a few minutes with some 

folks and we were discussing this Bill.  And the scenario sort of 

came by us that in section 4 under section (10) where it says 

that: 

 

 Every police officer and peace officer is under a duty to assist 

the minister, an environmental officer or designated person in 

enforcing a warrant issued pursuant to this section. 

 

Now supposing that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) decides that they suspect that some individual has some 

marijuana, perhaps, growing in their Quonset or in their shed, 

and they would like to get in there.  But the judge is giving 

them perhaps a little bit of a hard time to give them a warrant 

because they haven't got reasonable cause or something like 

that. 

 

And the thought crosses their minds that, here we've got an 

environmental protection Act that is compelling them to assist 

in all kinds of environmental situations.  So then could they 

possibly phone up the environmental officer in charge and say 

to him, we believe that there is a substance in that building or 

on that premises that would be detrimental to the environment? 

 

And they say, well yes, we'll check it out; we'll go over there 

and we'll break in and check it out.  And then the RCMP says, 

well look, you know, we've got reason to suspect that this 

fellow might be a little violent, perhaps, or he might at least 

show some resistance.  Is it possible then they might offer their 

assistance under this clause no. 10 here of section 4, and say 

that it is our responsibility to come along and protect you and 

see that no harm comes, because the minister said we should. 

 

And wouldn't it be ironic if, after they kicked the door in, they 

didn't find any chemicals or any obnoxious substances that 

were going to bother the environment but, lo and behold, they 

found a couple of marijuana plants.  Then wouldn't it be 

incumbent upon them then to write a ticket for the substance?  

And then haven't we in this Bill circumvented every democratic 

right that any individual has in our country; every right that we 

have protected in this nation of democracy of ours, for people 

to be proven guilty, to go through at least some kind of a 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

process before you can have that time-honoured tradition of 

having your home and your property to be your castle, your 

domain, your right to some enjoyment of privacy -- all of that 

is gone -- isn't all this possible, Madam Minister?  I think I'd 

better have a comment out of you on that before I go on, 

because there's a little more to this yet. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The right-of-entry provision is only used 

for the purposes under this Act.  It cannot be used for the 

purposes under any other Act.  If you read, it says, "for the 

purpose of administering and enforcing this Act." 

 

The tale that you have just gone through sounds a little bit 

more like Grimm's Fairy-Tales than they do about anything 

relative to this Act.  This right-of-entry provision applies to 

circumstances surrounding this Act and no other Act. 

 

The Chair: -- Can I just remind the members that the business 

is Bill 3 and to just observe decorum? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, the environment.  The point is though, 

that this Bill can be abused, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister.  And I think the scenario I just passed by you must 

have bounced straight off your head.  You never even 

contemplated what's going on here.  The reality . . . Wake up 

and smell the coffee; you're living in the real world here.  If the 

police want to get into a place and find out if there's something 

there, they will use this Bill to get there if they think that it will 

serve their purpose.  We're not living in Alice in Wonderland 

here where everybody's nicey-nicey to everybody. 

 

When people get the power, they use it.  And people don't take 

power unless they plan on using it. And you plan on using it, as 

your government plans on using this power in every other way.  

There's no longer a democracy here.  This is a dictatorship.  

And you're seizing power and you're trying to do it under the 

guise of being the good guys that are protecting everybody 

with their clean air and all the rest.  And really what you're 

providing is a police state -- nothing more, nothing less. 

 

I want to run another scenario by you.  I know this will bounce 

straight off your head and you'll never see it coming, but here's 

another scenario for you. 

 

Suppose you got two farmers and one doesn't happen to like the 

other one for some reason.  Maybe one guy ran over the other . 

. . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I'm having some 

difficulty in hearing the member because other members insist 

on dialogue and overriding the business of the House.  And 

therefore I ask members to take their seats, to observe 

decorum, and pay attention to the business at hand. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to 

finish off this scenario because the reality is here that . . . going 

back and linking this to the clause, the reality is here that the 

police can be dragged into this matter.  It says so right under 

section (10).  It's their obligation once this is passed.  And the 

scenario here, is that suppose somebody wants to take 

vengeance out on another person. 

They can abuse this Act and take vengeance on another person 

without having any proof whatsoever. 

 

Like I said, the guy could have done some minor damage to 

another fellow, and that fellow decides he wants to get even.  

So he phones up the fellow that's in charge of this 

environmental Act and says, so and so has got some chemical 

cans stored over behind his shed there or in the shed maybe 

even, and they're leaking, I suspect, and they're getting into my 

water system.  It's running downhill, and I think this guy's 

causing me a major problem.  This fellow can't get a warrant, 

so he just goes and kicks the door down.  He's going to take the 

police with him, and he's going to cause this guy all kinds of 

embarrassment because the other fellow, in the mean time, is 

trying to get vengeance, is going to phone up the press and 

send them out there ahead to make sure that it all gets covered.  

He'll be totally embarrassed; he'll be totally vandalized because 

that's all it will be, is vandalism.  And there won't be any need 

for proof whatsoever that there's anything done wrong out 

there.  And when it's all over and said and done, the guy will 

say, whoops, I made a mistake, and they'll all go home and 

forget about it. 

 

Now is that really the kind of society that we're trying to 

develop here?  Is that really what you want for people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The scenario that the member opposite 

just related, I think, has little to do with reality and a lot to do 

with an overactive imagination. 

 

We are talking about an Act here that pertains to environmental 

legislation, and anything is possible, I guess, if you sit back and 

dream up circumstances that can be totally out of touch with 

reality.  But we are dealing with an environmental Act, a very 

serious Act, and you can make light of it but it is serious. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

this section of this Bill is repulsive to say the least.  There isn't 

anybody in this Assembly who doesn't believe in the fact that 

the environment should be protected.  And that is what we're 

discussing here.  We're not talking about protecting 

environment; we're talking about protecting the rights of 

individuals.  And the environment, a public safety in the 

judiciary is at risk in this section of your Bill.  That's what 

we're talking about.  We're talking about when entering on land 

or a building pursuant to this section, the minister or his 

designated officer can do exactly as they please without a 

warrant. 

 

(2100) 

 

Now I don't think that in any of the cases that we have cited 

that we have been . . . had an over-agressive imagination.  

Those are the kinds of things that can easily happen when 

people are angry with other people, that they say that's what I'll 

do to get even.  And we are saying that there is due process, 

Madam Minister, in a court of law.  Criminal activity must 

have reasonable grounds to provide a warrant for entry into 

facilities and entry and an arrest.  And that, Madam Minister, is 

what we are arguing here today.  We're not arguing the 

legitimacy of the environment; we're arguing the legitimacy of 

due process in a court of law. 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

And you want to talk to us about using examples.  I'll use an 

example that is specific to agriculture and deals with a GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) Bill.  You're going to bring 

in a GRIP Bill in here that is going to say that a letter was sent 

out when it wasn't sent out.  Is that the truth Madam Minister?  

Is that the truth? 

 

And can you identify that you would be just the same as that in 

this Bill as you would in the GRIP legislation?  When you're 

not going to tell the truth in the GRIP Bill, are you going to tell 

the truth in this Bill?  And when shall we as society trust you? 

 

And I will even go so far, Madam Minister, as to point this out.  

If the Minister of Justice votes for that Bill in this Assembly -- 

the GRIP Bill -- he's perjuring himself, Madam Minister.  That 

is exactly what he is doing.  And we don't want that to happen 

here in this legislation, nor do we want that to happen there.  

And that is how we feel about this, and the majority of people 

that we talk to feel exactly the same way. 

 

It is not a matter of principle in environment; it's a matter of 

principle in law that causes us the greatest deal of concern.  

And that's why we have asked you questions.  Who provided 

you with a reasonable approach and said this is what we need 

to prevent environmental spills in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  That's the kind of thing that we need to have 

your response to.  You need to tell us, Madam Minister, who 

asked you to deliver this kind of legislation that deals with this 

kind of law and this kind of due process. 

 

The minister responsible for Justice in this province is going to 

have to, at one point in time, take this to the Supreme Court.  

And that will not be because some small individual has had the 

courage to do it.  It's going to be on the basis that it's 

constitutionally wrong.  And because it's constitutionally 

wrong, it will invalidate other court proceedings that may have 

significant environmental benefit to you if they proceeded in a 

way that was going to establish precedent. 

 

But what you have here, Madam Minister, is not that.  So we're 

asking you here today to provide us a list with the people that 

asked you to put this kind of a structure into how you proceed 

in the process of finding out whether these people are 

legitimately environmentally unfriendly. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, once again to the 

members opposite, it is the age-old question of the right of the 

individual against the right of the society.  We believe there are 

circumstances where it is necessary and responsible for a 

government to act for the benefit of society at large.  Where 

there's pollution or contamination imminent, taking place, it 

must be stopped immediately and it has to be through this 

right-of-entry provision in this Act. 

 

You can take anything to an extreme.  You can imagine any 

circumstance that might happen.  We have had similar 

legislation under the occupational health and safety.  The 

circumstances that you described could apply similarly to that 

Act but it has never occurred.  The public understands that 

these circumstances are necessary for the government to act 

upon and the government respects 

this. 

 

And I ask the members opposite to respect the right of the 

public to have a safe and secure environment, and for the 

government to take action when there is an emergency.  And 

they must secure the property or they must stop the pollution.  

That is a simple fact.  And there is no diabolical scheme here.  

It is in the best interest of the public and the public had asked 

for this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, let's use that same 

logic and flow that same logic through to 50,000 contracts 

under the GRIP legislation.  Okay?  You're talking about the 

public's willingness to be served.  You don't apply it to the 

Minister of Agriculture in this case.  Not at all.  That logic . . . 

The logic should be this, Madam Minister.  When you protect 

the rights of one, you protect the rights of the group.  If you 

protect the rights of the group, doesn't automatically say that 

you protect the rights of the individual.  And that's what we're 

talking about here, Madam Minister. 

 

You haven't answered the member from Thunder Creek's 

question, nor mine.  Who asked you to provide this kind of a 

definition about how you can enter facilities?  And who asked 

you to put this into the legislation here?  Who did that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again, we have searched our 

records.  We have talked to many, many people.  They have 

told us very clearly that they want protection of the 

environment.  This government has a committed course of 

action to protect the environment.  And this Act that we have is 

part of that commitment by this government to protect 

individuals, to protect the health and safety of the public, and to 

protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I have no problem with 

protecting the environment.  I'm trying to register the complaint 

about protecting the rights of individuals.  That's what I'm 

trying to protect.  And that, Madam Minister, is exactly why 

we're stuck on this item in this Bill.  It's because we cannot 

agree with you that you have to have those rights without 

special permission granted by the court.  In the old Act it was 

Queen's Bench court judge had to provide that right of entry in 

a warrant.  Today you walk in there and you say, oh I know 

better than a judge; I know better than those people.  And how 

do you know that you know better? 

 

We want to know from you: who told you or who are the 

people that came to you and said, I want to have the right of 

entry into this property to protect it for environmental reasons 

and I will supersede all of the rights of an individual in order to 

do that?  Who told you that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again, the public has requested that 

the government take action to protect the environment.  In 

times of emergency it is necessary for the government to act 

immediately.  This provides access for the government to act 

immediately when there is danger to the public and danger to 

the environment.  It is the same as The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act, provides similar type of provision there as 

here.  There is nothing 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

new or Draconian about it.  It's standard practice for people 

who are progressive and want legislation that is protecting the 

environment and the public. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I will assume, Madam Minister, at this point, 

because that's exactly the same answer you've given a number 

of times, that you never consulted with anyone.  Will you 

verify that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This amendment came out of 

interdepartmental discussions trying to understand a procedure 

. . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'm having difficulty hearing the 

minister.  I'm having difficulty hearing the minister because 

members in front benches on both sides want to have another 

exchange; therefore I ask them to observe decorum. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If you're asking if we held public 

consultations, no we did not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well now we're getting some place.  Who 

provided you with the direction that you should take, infringe 

on rights of individuals in order to deal with . . . I'm tempted to 

make an observation about the Finance minister's PCBs, but I 

will not do that at this time in view of the fact that I heard that 

he's going to clean them up on this go around. 

 

Having said that, do you have a right . . . or who told you that 

you should overshadow the rights of the individual to deal with 

the environmental concerns that could be -- and I raise this 

question -- could be assumed to be an exaggeration of the truth, 

superseding the rights of the individual, and doing that and then 

going to the place where you can't sue that individual because 

you will say that it was on good faith that I went and did it? 

 

Now that is the problem we have with this whole part in here.  

It does not stand in good stead when you have to have good 

faith, and the process builds it up to where you investigate and 

there is no identifiable misuse of the environment, and because 

of that you have destroyed property.  Who is going to say that 

you don't have the authority to do that to anybody, absolutely 

anybody -- destroy it entirely. 

 

And that, Madam Minister . . . you said you didn't have public 

consultation.  Then why didn't you at least consult with your 

back-benchers?  Why didn't you consult with other bureaucrats 

to see how that was going to happen?  And if you did, Madam 

Minister, why didn't you tell us about it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, there was 

consultation with the officials in the Department of Justice and 

within the Department of the Environment.  The members of 

the government caucus had discussions regarding this Bill.  It is 

not a secret that the government and our party is committed to 

protecting the environment. 

 

Conversely, I ask you what would happen in your endeavour to 

protect the right of the individual, if through that you 

endangered the lives of several thousands of 

people because you wanted to protect the individual?  What is 

more important? -- the lives and the health and welfare of 

several thousands of people or the right of an individual to say 

this is my property and nobody can set foot on it?  I think most 

reasonable people today agree that it is paramount that you 

place the health and welfare of the public first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, I would say that the responsibility of a 

minister of the Crown would be to protect individuals as well 

as protect society.  And that right is being usurped right here by 

your definition of what has to happen if there is no access 

available through a warrant.  And we say, Madam Minister, 

that it is wrong.  It's wrong in law, it's wrong to our society, 

and it deals entirely in a wrong attitude. 

 

I'm going to use the GRIP Bill again as an example.  You said 

you've got to protect society.  Well why don't you just follow 

that process through and allow society to have its say.  You 

won't take that one out either and talk about it.  You go around 

and talk about municipal law in the province of Saskatchewan; 

rightfully so.  You go around and talk about it, but you will not 

talk about individual rights being cut to pieces.  On this basis 

you don't talk to anybody. 

 

And, Madam Minister, there are a lot of people who have a 

fairly strong view of how to protect the rights of individuals.  

We're not against protecting the environment.  Who's going to 

protect the rights of the individual?  That's the question in this 

one.  And, Madam Minister, I think you're wrong in this. 

 

The old Bill walked as close to the edge of conflict with 

individual rights as I believe it could possibly be done.  And 

what you have just done is you have just gone over that edge 

and provided that, without warrant, Madam Minister. 

 

(2115) 

 

If you were investigating criminal activity on the basis of the 

Criminal Code in Canada, on my farm, you would have to have 

a warrant.  If you did that in anybody's buildings you would 

have to have a warrant.  And, Madam Minister, that is exactly . 

. . the flippant attitude of the House Leader opposite is exactly 

the reason why you've got a Bill.  And I will tell this Assembly 

and the people in the province of Saskatchewan, the member 

who used to be from Shaunavon should seriously consider that 

he is usurping the rights of individuals over the environmental 

aspect of this Bill. 

 

And, Madam Minister, that's what we have a problem with.  So 

I just say that you are absolutely, totally, unequivocally wrong 

in what you're doing here at this point.  And, Madam Minister, 

if we would have had this Bill as it is today when the minister 

of Environment for Saskatchewan was in place in 1977, '78 and 

'79, that member would have had his office scrutinized.  You 

could have walked in there and done anything you would have 

wanted to with that minister, the member from Regina, because 

he covered up PCBs in the province of 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

Saskatchewan.  And he knew about it and didn't do anything. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And he's still there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And he's still here.  Right.  You could have 

taken stuff from his office and seized his papers, all of that 

stuff, because he was infringing on the environmental aspect of 

this.  That's what you're talking about here -- without a warrant, 

without anything.  And an officer of the Department of 

Environment could have turned him in, and should have, and 

would have received immunity because it was something that 

was wrong. 

 

And, Madam Minister, we think, on this side of the House, that 

that is disgusting.  Not from an environmental point of view, 

but from a legal, judicial point of view you're going above and 

beyond what you are required to do.  That, Madam Minister, in 

my view, is absolutely, totally wrong. 

 

The Chair: -- I believe there is an amendment to clause 4.  

Does someone move the amendment? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I've 

looked over the proposed amendment that you have made for 

section 2.3(8)(c), and I believe we still have a problem here 

with this amendment.  It's not exactly in the manner that I 

understood that it would be made into. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Chairman, I would move that the 

committee report progress to give us time to sit down together 

to draft an amendment properly, to allow the Law Clerk to 

assist us in this matter. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I now ask that the Bill be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I now ask the Bill be read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask now that the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Seated beside me, Mr. Chairman, is 

Don McMillan, the acting president; on his right is Barrie 

Hilsen, assistant vice-president, human resource services; 

behind Mr. McMillan is Norm Drummond, corporate 

controller; behind myself is Rob Isbister, director of financial 

planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the 

minister introducing his officials.  I believe it's about two and a 

half months ago that he introduced them before and we 

naturally forgot who they were, it's been so long.  But that's the 

way it goes around here, Mr. Minister. 

 

As I recall, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we made an 

agreement that you would have some answers for us, and I'd 

like to thank you, Mr. Minister, that you did answer those 

questions.  And you said you'd allow us some time and we 

appreciate that, that you brought it back.  And I have just some 

questions pertaining to the answers, Mr. Minister, that I'm 

going to ask.  But I'm going to have a page . . . oh, I've got just 

five questions in this department and my colleague, I think, has 

one or two, so if I have to have a page, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that gives you a copy, so when 

I'm going through them . . . The first question, Mr. Minister, it 

comes from Hansard, May 15, page 461, with one of the 

commitments you gave us, regarding the total cost of leased 

space -- it's on page 461 of Hansard -- you provided the total 

cost to payees.  Please provide how much SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) charges 

and collects from government departments, agencies, and 

boards, broken down by department pay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We will undertake to provide you 

with that information as soon as reasonably possible. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  My second 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

question is regarding a list of any space rented, leased, and 

owned by the department throughout the whole province -- 

page 461 of Hansard.  Please confirm if attached list, computer 

program 68075, is comprehensive and please supply the name 

of government tenant utilizing this space. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We will undertake to supply you with 

that information as soon as is reasonably possible. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On page 455 you 

committed to providing the name of the previous employer of 

your staff in the legislative building. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay, we can certainly provide that.  

I gather that was not provided in the information you gave.  

We'll supply that right away.  I could do that now orally, or 

we'll do it in writing if you want. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine, Mr. Minister, thank you.  And 

on page 456 you committed to providing a more complete job 

description of each and every individual terminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  I see no problem in providing 

that.  Those job descriptions are available for each of those 

occupations.  So we'll supply that at a very early date. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On page 623 you 

committed to providing the term of the leases for rural service 

centres. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We will provide that as well, as soon 

as is reasonably possible.  That also seems to have been 

overlooked. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I wish to thank you very much, Mr. 

Minister.  And the member from Morse, I believe, has a 

question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, when we were visiting here on 

the financial instability Act, The Financial Administration Act, 

the Finance minister gave us the resolve that he would provide 

for us the breakdown of all of the facilities that have been 

provided for in the debt transfer from SPMC to the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

We haven't got all of the questions asked yet . . . or put together 

that we're going to ask the minister in his Estimates, but we 

want assurance from you that those items will be provided to 

us.  I think it was something like $750 million worth of items.  

And we'd like to have your assurance because SPMC, where 

some of that is coming from . . . we want your assurance that 

you're going to provide that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Certainly I'll give the member our 

assurance that you'll be provided with complete details of those 

transactions.  I'm sure my colleague, the Minister of Finance, 

will provide them at an early date.  We'll give you the same 

undertaking. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Those dealt with the SPMC transfers of 

debt to the Consolidated Fund.  And that's the items that we're 

interested in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes I understood that.  We'll supply 

that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

will you tell us how much money will be spent by SPMC's 

corporate communications division? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I could have the attention of the 

page, I'll give you a written breakdown of it in a more complete 

form. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I'm 

wondering, does this indicate what projects will be undertaken 

with this money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes it does in the sense that we have 

no . . . we will not be doing any advertising, apart from routine 

things such as for any invitations to tender.  There'll be no other 

sort of advertising if that's what you're asking.  We don't intend 

to use this vehicle to do any advertising except for routine 

things such as invitations to bid, and so on. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I'm wondering 

then . . . It's very helpful for me to have something like this.  

But one of the things I'm most interested in is always knowing 

what goals are to be achieved by money spent or with money 

spent.  Do you have something that outlines with SPMC the 

particular objectives that are wanting to be achieved by dollar 

spent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm told they don't have anything in 

writing beyond what might appear in the annual report.  I can 

tell the member that the objective, and the sole use that this 

advertising money and the communications, will be to achieve 

the lowest possible cost for providing services to government.  

That will be the sole objective of the expenditure of 

communications.  There is always some need to communicate 

what you're doing to people who inquire.  But the objective of 

communications is solely to provide services to other 

government departments at the least possible cost.  That's really 

the only objective, in the end result. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 

what means are going to be used by SPMC for awarding 

contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We intend to award all contracts to 

the lowest bid, provided there are no extraordinary 

circumstances.  Sometimes the lowest bid is not appropriate for 

some reason or other, because as a for instance there's doubts 

about whether or not they could supply the service which they 

bid on.  But assuming that the lowest bid is able to supply the 

services they've bid on, we will in all cases be accepting the 

lowest bid.  We intend to do this strictly on . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A partisan basis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, the opposite is true.  The member 

from Kindersley repeats the practice of the 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

former administration in awarding contracts of the lowest . . . 

often at what appeared to be a partisan basis.  Our intention is 

the precise opposite.  Cost will be the only criteria. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I'm concerned 

about purchasing in government agencies, and I questioned you 

on this issue some two months ago. At that time you said the 

government was making progress in developing a fair 

tendering policy.  Given that SPMC is the principal purchaser 

for government agencies and departments, I'd like you to 

explain what your tendering policy is to this House, and to tell 

us how it will affect SPMC's role as a purchaser. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just happen to have my music with 

me again.  If I could have the attention of the page I will send 

across a written comment. 

 

Once again the goal, Madam Member, is to deliver services on 

behalf of the taxpayers at a significantly reduced cost, and we 

think that this tendering policy will do that.  It will reduce the 

cost of providing lease space and these services. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I can then 

assume, not having read this, that this policy is already in place 

-- it's been introduced, and that its effects are being felt 

currently on SPMC's balance sheets?  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- How many of SPMC's purchases and 

contracts will be tendered this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You'll read if you see the document 

that they'll all be tendered unless they are of such a nature that 

one cannot provide an adequate description of what you want, 

in which case you use the request for proposals.  But that is an 

extraordinary method.  In all but those cases, the tendering 

process will be used; it will be used in all cases. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if 

you have a particular policy then about how they will be 

advertised and where they will be advertised?  What 

individuals will be responsible for overseeing the tendering 

policy?  And since I can assume from your prompt response in 

writing to everything else, I'll just give you the last part of this 

four-part question.  What powers will they be given to correct 

abuses and to straighten out potential problems that might stifle 

fairness in the system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a handbook on procurement, 

procurement policy, which we could send the member if you're 

interested in it.  Clear instructions have gone out to the staff.  

There are to be no exceptions to this and those policies are to 

be followed without exception.  And so far as I know, there 

have been no exceptions made to it.  I've received inquiries 

from a variety of groups, members on both sides of the House, 

about some particular award, but in no cases have any 

exceptions been made.  So if the member wants a copy of that 

document, I can certainly send it to you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm wondering 

then, are there people who have been identified who are 

primarily responsible for overseeing this policy?  I'd like to 

know who those individuals are, in other words the people who 

can be held accountable, and if in fact these individuals are 

empowered to correct any abuses that they find within the 

system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a statute called The 

Purchasing Act which establishes the office of the director of 

purchasing.  And the director of purchasing has broad powers 

to ensure that the policies which are outlined in that sheet of 

paper handed you are followed.  And as I say, so far as I am 

aware there have been no exceptions to it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Co-Chair, and Mr. 

Minister, am I to take it then there are no specific names, that 

everything is done purely through this procurement Act?  I 

mean, I of course have, as you can well imagine, when I look at 

procurement initiatives on the federal scale, it's rather 

disconcerting to know that while 37 per cent of the population 

of Canada lives in Ontario, they get 50 per cent of procurement 

initiatives.  And in Saskatchewan, we have 4 per cent of the 

population and we get like 1.5 per cent.  Every time the word 

procurement comes around I sort of have this reaction. 

 

Now I know you've talked about a specific Act.  And I'm 

asking a specific question about the individuals who need to be 

identified in order for us to know who has the power to oversee 

the tendering policy of this government, and who in fact has 

been empowered to correct abuses if they're found. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- When the member sees the booklet 

on procurement, you'll see that they're written so as to reduce to 

an absolute minimum the discretion involved.  Certainly there 

are discretionary decisions in any walk of life.  But the goal in 

writing the procurement guidelines is to reduce the amount of 

discretion to as little as possible, so that in all cases there's a set 

of guidelines which determine who gets the bid.  There is really 

remarkably little discretion involved in almost all cases.  The 

lowest bid is given the bid.  I have a funny feeling I've not 

perhaps understood the member's question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Co-Chair, and Mr. 

Minister. I too have a funny feeling that we aren't 

communicating.  And perhaps what I can do is to, just as much 

as I attempt to avoid going back in time rather than looking to 

the future . . . I have a concern, and that is that I have been 

sitting in both Public Accounts and Crown Corporations 

Committees and when Sask Property Management Corporation 

has been brought forward in committee, one of the things that's 

become abundantly clear is that many individuals who indeed 

should have been accountable and should have been 

responsible were not.  And that's really what I'm asking here, is 

that there were considerable and endless abuses to the 

taxpayers of this province as a result of there not being in place 

provisions for people to be held accountable if in fact their 

actions were found to be less than acceptable as far as 

standards are concerned.  And I'm wondering if you in fact 

have that kind of thing in place. 

 

It's one thing to say you'll have fair tendering, it's another to 

say you have an Act that will ensure that this happens. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

I'm wanting to know about people.  Like who is it that's going 

to be held responsible for overseeing this tendering policy and 

to whom can one go and say, yes, this individual was the one 

who's going to ensure that our tax dollars are protected. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Ultimately, I guess, the protection is 

this legislature and our willingness to provide information.  We 

have answered every question you've asked and given as much 

information as is reasonable in the circumstances.  That's really 

the ultimate protection. 

 

I can say that prior to October 21, '71, this was not what 

occurred with respect to these Estimates.  We had the greatest 

difficulty finding out any information at all.  After the election 

we found out why information was so difficult to come by. 

 

The person -- in a more specific sense -- the person who's been 

acting as director of purchaser is a Harvey Abells, did it during 

the '60s and '70s with the highest integrity under two different 

administrations actually, Liberal and . . . three, CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), Liberal and NDP.  

He is beyond retirement age so is only acting.  But he was 

brought back to bring order out of the chaos which you 

properly described.  So far as I am concerned, he has largely 

done so.  I am unaware of any abuses which have occurred. 

 

The clear instructions to the management of this corporation 

are that abuses -- any abuses -- are to be dealt with appropriate 

disciplinary action including dismissal if the conflict of interest 

is serious enough. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Co-Chair, and, Mr. 

Minister. That's really what I wanted on the record.  Thank 

you. 

 

In reviewing the structure of this corporation, I discovered that 

it contains both a maintenance branch as well as a conservation 

branch.  And this structure I found rather curious.  Not because 

I object to compartmentalization in that way, but I just 

wondered if in fact we have maintenance persons who keep 

facilities running day in and day out on the one hand, and they 

usually one would expect would acquire the expertise needed 

to then design and implement conservation and efficiency 

programs. 

 

I'm wondering what attempts you've made to avoid having 

people working at cross purposes by ensuring that these people 

who maintain the equipment have a major role in promoting 

conservation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have made that, we think, clear to 

maintenance people, the people on the front lines, that they 

bear the major responsibility for conservation.  It is true that 

there is a conservation branch which  provides some technical 

and often sort of engineering and architectural advice.  But 

we've made it clear to all the staff, it's people on the front lines 

who bear the major responsibility for conservation.  And by 

and large our impression has been that they've reacted very 

positively and have done as much as could be expected 

of them to practise conservation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I'm hearing you 

then say that it's not something that becomes redundant, having 

a maintenance branch and a conservation branch, that these two 

things are distinct entities and it wouldn't make much sense to 

be able to have these things more merged? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's only one person in the energy 

branch, I'm told by the officials. So it's very small, a very small 

branch.  And I don't think there would be anything saved by 

merging the two on an organization chart. 

 

We haven't really, I want to say to the member, we haven't 

really gone through this corporation in an organizational way in 

the fashion in which we're going to over the next year.  This is, 

by and large, what you're seeing, is what we inherited.  And we 

have been struggling with other problems and have not really 

got to reorganization.  So it is conceivable by next year's 

Estimates, by the time you do Estimates next year, this 

corporation may look differently. 

 

But the officials assure me, in answer to your specific question, 

that there's only one person in the energy branch.  And 

therefore not much would be saved by combining them.  You'd 

still need that person's skill and expertise. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Perhaps this is . . . I'm actually 

thinking of this differently when I think about conservation 

efforts and everything, and do bear with me if I'm not 

approaching this correctly, but I really want to know whether in 

the budgeting process that's used at SPMC, if in fact there is a 

danger of penalizing those branches which do conserve -- in 

other words, if they conserve the most, thereby reducing their 

overall budgets. 

 

Is there something built in that will ensure that this doesn't 

lessen their ability to bring about further conservation efforts 

because you've actually taken monies away from them for 

being good conservers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Our approach to date has been to try 

to avoid in any way making one area competitive with another.  

We've tried to stress to them that they're all part of a team 

whose function is to provide services on behalf of the taxpayer 

at the least possible cost.  We think we can do that most 

efficiently by having everybody act as part of a team and we 

have tried to avoid anything which would smack of 

competition between portions of the corporation. 

 

I guess we'll see how well our approach works, but it's been the 

approach we've taken to date, is to try to induce everybody to 

think of themselves as part of a team whose responsibility is to 

spend taxpayers' dollars with the most possible care. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With significant 

presence across the province, I'd like you to explain what 

square footage of SPMC's overall office space is currently 

empty, and what percentage does that 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

figure represent of the corporation's total office space? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Having boasted of the efficiency of 

my officials, I am told that Mr. Swenson asked exactly . . . the 

member from Thunder Creek asked exactly the same question.  

We simply gave the member from Thunder Creek the page out 

of this gentleman's book and he doesn't have a copy made for 

the Liberal member. 

 

It was . . . I can therefore speak in general terms.  It was less 

than three per cent of the space is vacant.  That is actually . . . 

There are . . . You can only compare this with other 

government institutions, nothing else is really comparable.  But 

I was told by the officials.  Because I asked that myself when I 

was first appointed as minister in charge.  I had an impression 

there was more vacant space than there in fact is.  I was told the 

vacant space was less than three per cent, and that is actually 

below industry norms. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- But we'll send you precise figures. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I appreciate that.  Mr. Co-Chairman and 

Mr. Minister, it means then that I'm sure that you have a 

strategy in place for how you are going to try to ensure that the 

remainder of the space is leased or utilized in the near future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- One of the other people who are here 

assisting me found the page in his book.  So I now have a fresh 

page to send you.  It's actually 1.4 per cent . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That's right, very, very low.  A part of that is 

transitional, is simply transitional. 

 

There will always be some vacant just because people are 

moving sometimes from one space to another.  There is 

actually some space which is surplus to our needs.  We attempt 

to make it available to other branches of the government or 

Crown corporations if we can. 

 

On rare occasions though . . . I don't think this has occurred yet.  

On rare occasions we . . . I remember in the '70s we did try to 

negotiate a way out of leases which had proved redundant.  

That however has not happened.  There's actually a relatively 

good management of lease space.  And I think it reflects rather 

well on these officials. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I am impressed 

with your officials.  I am interested in staff policies.  And I, 

like others, have a firm belief in the merit system.  And I think 

it's important to have clear and understandable rules in terms of 

promotion in the work place. 

 

I was quite disturbed to hear of abuses that prevented others 

from receiving well-deserved advances in SPMC.  And it's my 

understanding that unqualified individuals were promoted to 

higher positions through a policy tool known as temporary 

performance of higher duties. 

 

People were promoted under this policy by political and 

corporate superiors in past years without proper qualifications 

or without open competitions.  And 

apparently, once they were appointed, they often remained 

there until they attained qualifications necessary through 

experience to keep those positions. 

 

So my question is that I would like to know what has been 

done to ensure that this abuse and others like it are not 

repeated, and I would like you to please describe your policy in 

some detail. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have, by and large, eliminated 

those abuses and I think they're probably all behind us.  The 

use of temporary positions was a problem, both in this 

corporation and throughout the government generally, actually.  

Speaking for this corporation, we have, by and large, 

eliminated those positions.  I'm told by the officials that they 

believe, without being dead certain, they believe that there are 

no longer any temporary performance positions left.  They've 

all been eliminated.  And I gather some of that took place 

during the budget exercise and some took place before then. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many 

out-of-scope employees will be employed by SPMC over the 

next year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can give you the current figures and 

simply say that we see no abrupt change in this, although we 

are seeking to reduce costs and it is conceivable that if a 

position became vacant we might be able to eliminate the 

position.  But we don't see any abrupt changes in that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  What 

I'm going to do, if I may, is read out to you what I would 

appreciate some responses to.  Your officials can provide these 

to me in writing and send them to my office.  Indeed I will read 

them out. 

 

I too, like others who are present, sit on committees and have 

found that there are many abuses committed in the hiring of 

out-of-scope employees who never did one day's work for their 

Crown employers.  And I would like you to tell us how much 

money will be expended on salaries and contracts for 

out-of-scope employees at SPMC over the next year.  How 

many of these workers will there be and what process is in 

place to ensure that each of these is hired to perform a needed 

job instead of doing political work or something otherwise in 

an individual's constituency.  That's the first. 

 

Secondly, SPMC has so much property serving so many 

people, what efforts is SPMC making to ensure that its 

operations are not detrimental to the province's environment?  

How much is spent on these programs and what standards are 

being used to measure their success? 

 

And lastly, in its report, the Gass Commission noted that 

SPMC only provided property and real estate services to 

government departments while many Crowns continued to 

conduct these activities on their own.  In the end this meant 

savings that might have been gained from removing 

duplication were lost at the taxpayers' expense. 

 

So I would like a response please regarding your strategic 

vision.  What strategic vision do you have for SPMC to ensure 

that duplications are removed as much as possible 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

so that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, who are the landlords of 

this legislature, can feel assured that their government, all of its 

agencies and Crown corporations, are making purchases in the 

least expensive and most effective way possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, those are I think 

thoughtful, reflective questions which deserve an answer which 

is also thoughtful and reflective.  We'll attempt to do that and 

answer you in writing. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 53 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 53 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation -- 

Statutory 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd just like to 

make this comment at this time, that perhaps, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Chairman, that all the members of this legislature can maybe 

learn a lesson from our Estimates.  We had a bad start.  When 

we first started out we spent days and hours and we finally got 

going.  We're the older members of this legislature -- 15 years, 

I believe. 

 

And I think you found out, Mr. Minister, that we were serious 

about our questions and we do appreciate that you got serious 

and gave us the answers.  And we've been waiting now for 

quite a while to get back on, and I wish to thank you for the 

answers you gave us to tonight, and I just hope that all the 

other departments do as well as you and I have together. 

 

And I'd like to also take this opportunity to thank the officials.  

They've had a long wait here tonight and I thank them for being 

co-operative also.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I thank the member from Arm River 

for his comments.  I just want to make a couple of comments, 

one with respect to the Estimates generally.  We've tried to 

assure members opposite that we are running an honest 

administration and I hope we've given you some degree of 

comfort on that. 

 

More to the point of the member's comments however, is 

that I think the format which was developed of giving us 

advance notice of the questions really is very useful.  It saves 

an enormous amount of very expensive time in this Assembly, 

whereby we try to figure out what you want, you correct us, 

and we go around and around. 

 

I think the process which the members opposite initiated -- and 

I've not seen it done before -- of providing a relatively lengthy 

list of questions that you wanted answered was very useful.  It 

enables members, sometimes in a private way, to work out . . . 

to come to an understanding of what you want. 

 

Because I think all ministers . . . the instructions we have 

received from the Premier, that all ministers have received, are 

if it is legitimate information we are to provide it to you.  And 

so we've tried to provide it.  But I think the format that was 

used really was very useful and perhaps should be used as a 

model in other cases.  I agree with the member. 

 

I'd also be remiss, although I think they all left, if I . . . we 

should thank the officials who spent some time here.  And I 

think by and large we're on top of their material and able to 

provide the answers relatively quickly. 

 

The Chair: -- All members of the Assembly would appreciate 

it if the minister would transfer those comments to the officials. 

 

(2200) 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will begin first of all by introducing 

Shiela Bailey, who is sitting beside me.  She is the chairman of 

the Public Service Commission.  Behind her is Karen Aulie, 

manager of employment services.  Mary Kutarna, director of 

administration and information services is behind me. 

 

Earlier in the day I had forwarded to the member from Arm 

River some responses to questions which he had asked.  I am 

really unaware . . . My general instructions to my staff are that 

what is provided to the official opposition should be provided 

to the independent member.  I don't know if you got it or not.  

If you don't, I will have it delivered; I'll have them give it to 

you now.  Perhaps I'll ask the page to deliver it then. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Could I have a 

page, please.  I just have one question, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, thank you for the other questions that we asked you, 

the answers that were provided.  We just have the one question 

that we feel that's unanswered, and it's regarding Shiela Bailey, 

Hansard, page 877, June 3, '92.  Background and qualifications 

have not been provided as promised by member from Churchill 

Downs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That was certainly nothing but an 

oversight, Mr. Chairman.  We are proud of this official's 

qualifications and her background.  They speak well of her.  

She's worked for the government through various 

administrations and has acquitted herself well. 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

We'll certainly supply that in a formal way in writing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's fine.  I knew you'd have no problem 

with that.  That's all we could find that we wanted to ask 

questions about, Mr. Minister. And there was no more 

questions from our side of the House, and if nobody else has 

any questions, we're through, Mr. Minister.  We'd like to also 

thank you for your co-operation in this department, and your 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would just generally repeat the 

same comments, that the process which we used was useful, 

that of some advance consultation.  It doesn't lessen the 

opportunity of the opposition to call government to account, 

nor does it give us the opportunity to avoid that accounting.  I 

think it simply makes the use of the time more efficient, and 

the process more effective.  Again, I would recommend the 

system that was utilized here. 

 

I also want to thank the officials for attendance through several 

evenings.  Sometimes the waits are long.  These people have 

been here since 4 o'clock this afternoon, and in one way I don't 

apologize for that.  This is the Legislative Assembly.  This is 

the supreme body which provides the accounting to the 

taxpayers for the dollars, and we all serve the taxpayers.  These 

people are as conscious of that as we are.  I think they're happy 

enough to be here to provide information to the public 

representatives who will be asking questions. 

 

At the same time it is not necessarily what you do for an 

evening's entertainment, is sit out here in the hall on those 

chairs, particularly as this evening, when we were two chairs 

short so they had to take turns utilizing them.  I do want to 

thank the officials for a lengthy wait this evening, and for the 

assistance. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to add another 

comment to that.  I think it's a good example of what you and I 

have been talking about here, that by having the written 

questions ahead of time and . . . Sure, I feel badly too that the 

officials had to sit so long, but perhaps if we hadn't done this 

other method, they would have been in here and busy for 

maybe another day.  I thank you, and I appreciate you saying 

that you appreciate what we've done.  I thank you very much. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 33 

 

Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to thank the officials 

and then move that we rise and report progress. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I did thank the officials prior 

to the supplementary Estimates, Mr. Chairman.  I will while 

I'm on my feet move we rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:16 p.m. 

 


