




















































Hansard: July 02, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1153 

 July 2, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the government communications procurement July 

announcement of a market research competition: (1) For what 

department are these surveys being conducted? (2) What are 

the objectives of these surveys? (3) Will these surveys 

involve opinion polling? (4) How much money will be 

allocated to these surveys? and (5) Will the results be made 

public given that the surveys will be paid for with public 

monies? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with great 

honour that I introduce through you and to you to the members 

of the Assembly, Wilf Gardiner behind the bar.  He was elected 

to this Assembly in 1956 as the member for Melville, and in 

1964 became the minister of Public Works, a post that he held 

until 1967. 

 

Given that yesterday we celebrated Canada Day, I would also 

like to point out that Mr. Gardiner's father was the premier of 

this province in 1926 to 1929, the only individual as a premier 

to be re-elected after a defeat, in 1934.  In 1935 he went to 

Ottawa and became the minister of Agriculture for our country 

as well as the minister for National War Services.  So please 

warmly welcome Wilf Gardiner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with a great deal 

of pleasure that I acknowledge the anniversary and the 

celebrations that took place at the little St. Peter and St. Paul 

Ukrainian Catholic Church just south of Hodgeville on 

Monday.  They celebrated the 100th anniversary of the 

founding of the Ukrainian settlements in Canada. 

 

The first pioneers came to that area in 1916, and in 1964 they 

built this fine, beautiful church in a rural setting in an area just 

south of Hodgeville.  And it was a pleasure for me to attend the 

mass services during that period of time.  They unveiled a cairn 

that represented the names of the various people that were part 

of the founding fathers of that time. And I would like all of the 

members of the Assembly to acknowledge the fact that these 

people came from a far country to settle in Canada.  And I want 

to also acknowledge that from the part of Ukraine that these 

people came, is also from the part of the European continent 

that my family came, and it was an honour for me to be there at 

that time. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today, Mr. Speaker, to acknowledge to this Assembly and to 

the people of Saskatchewan yesterday's appointment of our 

friend and colleague, Mr. Lorne Nystrom, from the 

Yorkton-Melville constituency to the Queen's Privy Council. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- In the 23 years the Member of Parliament, 

Lorne, has served as New Democratic Party critic in several 

issues, Mr. Speaker, including Agriculture, Trade, 

Employment, Energy, and Finance.  In September 1990 he 

assumed the responsibility of Constitution and 

Intergovernmental Affairs critic for the New Democratic Party 

and has served on numerous parliamentary committees on the 

constitution. 

 

Mr. Nystrom's appointment was made upon the 

recommendation to the Governor General, Mr. Hnatyshyn, by 

the Prime Minister of Canada. 

 

There are now seven privy councillors for Saskatchewan, 

including the former member of Agriculture, Alvin Hamilton; 

former Wheat Board and Justice minister, Otto Lang; Minister 

of Agriculture, William McKnight; and the Governor General 

of Canada, Ramon Hnatyshyn; and the former premiers, Mr. 

Allan Blakeney and Mr. T.C. Douglas. 

 

Since being elected to the Member of Parliament from 

Yorkton-Melville, Mr. Nystrom has devoted himself to 

fostering goodwill, generosity, and friendship amongst 

Canadians from every call and walk of life.  I ask all the 

members of the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, to join with me 

in congratulating Mr. Nystrom on this very prestigious 

appointment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday marked 

the 125th anniversary celebration of Confederation.  

Confederation has been the subject of much controversy in our 

country.  Discussions about our future have been heated at 

times, cynical at other times, and worrisome to everyone who 

values nationhood.  However I'm glad to see that on Canada 

Day we're able to set our constitutional difficulties aside and 

celebrate the founding of Canada.  More so we gather to 

celebrate the pure joy and pride of being a Canadian. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being a Canadian was especially on the minds of 

everybody yesterday.  Approximately 30 individuals gathered 

in this very Chamber and were welcomed as the newest 

Canadians.  The swearing-in of new citizens is something upon 

which we do often take our citizenship for granted, should 

reflect.  Despite our country's economic woes, its constitutional 

crisis and occasional political turmoil, many people leave their 

native countries and make Canada their new home.  They see 

what we tend to forget -- that above all else Canada is a free 

and democratic country which respects the heritage of all 

individuals. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

On behalf of my colleagues in the legislature I want to 

welcome the newest citizens of Canada and wish them the 

happiest of their lives in our great nation. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this week 

not only marks the 125th birthday of this country and the 30th 

birthday of medicare in this province, but it is also a special 

week for a number of communities and individuals in my 

constituency. 

 

This week the community of Whitewood is celebrating their 

centenary -- 100 years as a community.  Certainly yesterday 

rain may have prolonged or put off the parade, but it certainly 

didn't dampen the spirit of many individuals coming from right 

across this country and renewing acquaintances, and in many 

cases some have been away for 30 and 40 years.  So I want to 

compliment the community and everyone involved for taking 

the time to put on this time of celebration. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the Francis Auction Service, has been a 

major contributor to employment in the community, is 

celebrating 30 years in existence.  In 1962 Donald and Hazel 

Francis established the auction mart.  A year later it was 

completely destroyed by fire.  But they perservered, 

re-established the business, and it's been a thriving business for 

a number of years and now is being run by his son Ken, 

Isabelle, and also Terry and his family. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, a number of farms celebrated 

centenaries, the establishment or the involvement of the family 

on the family farm for 100 years, and I just name a few in the 

Kipling area -- the Cunningham family, the Evans family, the 

Toppings family, the Clark family, the White family, and the 

Cross family.  Mr. Speaker, I want to commend all these 

communities for their celebrations.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to congratulate 

the Saskatoon community bond corporation on their successful 

application to issue a $5 million pooled community bond.  This 

is a pioneer venture, and many people have worked diligently 

to ensure that the citizens of Saskatoon will have this excellent 

opportunity to invest in and to participate in the economic 

recovery and rebuilding of Saskatoon. 

 

In particular I commend the Minister of Economic 

Development for his diligence and co-operation, the Saskatoon 

economic development board for their foresight and faith in 

Saskatoon, and the many private individuals who shepherded 

this venture through to the historic approval and announcement 

on June 30.  Saskatoon citizens have always prided themselves 

on their community involvement and willingness to invest in 

the future of their city.  This community bond marks an 

excellent means for Saskatonians now to build our community 

and our future.  Congratulations. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we're beginning to recognize 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that economic development 

does not just mean government risking taxpayers' money on 

large megaprojects.  Rather, economic development also means 

local people working together on smaller ventures, and it 

means recognizing the importance of the small-business sector, 

the people in our communities that employ 5, 10, 15 people 

here and there.  They are a mainstay in our economy. 

 

So I want to join with the member from Saskatoon Wildwood 

in congratulating Saskatoon on the announcement of its 

community bond.  This is of course the culmination of work by 

the Saskatoon community bond board of directors and many 

others.  Their work gives the citizens of Saskatoon an 

opportunity to invest in their community. 

 

It's a pooled fund, Mr. Speaker, which is a first for 

Saskatchewan.  It will mean various projects, and it will mean 

jobs for families in Saskatoon.  The bonds will be on sale in 

September and I know that all members will want to join us in 

congratulating the city, the government, and the board of 

directors on this venture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is not often that I 

would gladly give up the opportunity to make a public 

appearance at a celebration with my constituents, and I suspect 

other members of this Assembly share this feeling.  But 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was just such an occasion. 

 

I was invited on Canada Day to speak at a ceremony honouring 

the pioneer village of Amulet, now unfortunately no longer on 

the map, and honouring in particular Mrs. Eva Rolston, a 

pioneer of Amulet who is 102 years young and still active in 

the life of her community. 

 

I was looking forward to the unveiling of a heritage plaque and 

to meeting Mrs. Rolston and other members of the community.  

I was eager to bring greetings to the assembled crowd and 

remember with them the tribulations and the triumphs of our 

pioneer ancestors to whom we owe so much. 

 

I wanted to congratulate them for having the foresight to try 

and preserve the memories of a once thriving town, for without 

history we are a people with no past, and therefore without a 

future to build. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I didn't get to speak yesterday.  The Amulet 

celebration was postponed till Saturday.  It rained, Mr. 

Speaker, and it rained a lot, and it's still raining today. 

 

Although the celebration was postponed, we needed the rain 

more.  The rain was truly a reason for celebration on Canada 

Day in my rural riding -- a trade-off that I'm willing to make, 

along with my constituents, almost any day.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding Elimination for Agricultural Fairs and Exhibitions 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Acting Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, 

how important a role do you think fairs and exhibitions play in 

rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that fairs and 

exhibitions play a very important role in rural Saskatchewan.  

They're part of the fabric.  And I think we will continue to have 

them. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in 

the budget of your government, you eliminated all grants to 

fairs and exhibitions without warning.  And as a result, a 

number of communities have been forced to cancel these 

events, some of which have been around for more than 80 

years.  Why were these grants eliminated without warning, and 

without any consultation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, these grants were 

eliminated, as were other budgetary measures that we took, in 

response to a very difficult economic situation.  We looked at 

our budget and made some very tough decisions.  It was not 

one that we wanted to make.  I think that by and large most of 

these fairs will survive.  They are funded by local people by 

and large in the past, and they may take up the slack, and we 

will continue to have fairs. And I'm very confident of this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you: did you carry out 

any kind of analysis to determine what effects eliminating these 

grants would have on the communities, and if so, what did your 

studies show? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we did certainly 

consider what the outcome would likely be.  And we looked at 

the fairs, the portion of money that they were getting from 

grants and portions of money they were getting elsewhere.  

And we came to the conclusion that by and large these fairs 

will survive and thrive.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I find it 

interesting that you stated that you've done some studies.  I 

don't know with whom you consulted, because people who 

have continued to this date to ask for meetings have had none 

with the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, the community of Fertile Valley will not be able 

to hold a fair for the first time this year in 80 years.  And for 

towns and villages such as this and such as Beechy, fairs play a 

part -- a big part -- in maintaining the community. 

 

I want you to tell us what discussions you have had with the 

agriculture exhibition organizations and how you plan to 

rectify this devastating situation. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite exaggerates a bit when she calls this a devastating 

situation.  I think in light of the budgetary deficit and the 

problems we have in this province, I think that the problems 

with fairs is not related totally to government funding but as 

well to the fact that we're having very tough times in rural 

Saskatchewan and depopulation and so on. 

 

I think there has been fairs who have probably faltered before 

this and will falter again.  But I think by and large the fairs will 

survive and rural people are resilient and they will continue to 

have fairs, and they will continue to be part of the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, it appears that lack of 

consultation has become characteristic, synonymous with the 

government.  And if you're intent on cutting funding in this 

kind of way, why didn't you phase it out over a period of time 

to allow these communities a chance to make other 

arrangements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

suggests that we shouldn't have cut this particular grant.  But 

by and large, as a government we had a very tough time to 

choose where we had to make cuts.  We knew we had to make 

cuts.  I think the members opposite all say that, yes, we should 

make cuts, but then they say you shouldn't have cut this.  You 

shouldn't have cut that.  You shouldn't have cut the other thing.  

And eventually, if you cut nowhere, you have a deficit that 

chokes you.  And that's basically the logic behind making some 

of these cuts, although they were very tough decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It goes without 

saying, Mr. Minister, that some cuts are necessary and that a lot 

of people would endure cuts quite well. 

 

But your government has chosen not to consult with the people 

who could be in the best position to tell you how to go about 

making those cuts with the least devastating effects -- whether 

it be in health care, whether it be in education, whether it be 

with the agriculture exhibition boards of this province.  The 

best people with whom to consult are the ones who know what 

the cuts are going to do, and they can tell you where the cuts 

should take place. 

 

I'd like to ask you with whom you consulted on this issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, certainly there are a 

lot of people out there who tell us what cuts will do.  And 

certainly all the cuts are devastating.  Now if the member 

opposite suggests that there are cuts that we could have done 

that would not have caused any harm or any hurt in rural 

Saskatchewan or elsewhere, I wish you would come forward 

with these cuts because I think these cuts were made . . . 

although they were very tough cuts, they were made with the 

best judgement and the most consultation possible. 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My last question 

to you, sir, is this: why is it that your department continues to 

refuse to have meetings with these individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that to 

be true.  I think my department is prepared to meet with people 

and discuss the problems.  In fact I've instructed people in my 

department to meet with several of these people who have 

phoned my office and to be as helpful as we can in maintaining 

their affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Special Care Homes 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Minister of Health, and I want to deal today with level 

1 and 2 funding for special care homes.  I noticed that the 

Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes had to 

consult with you to ask about whether the rumours were true 

that you were going to cut their funding over the next two 

years. 

 

Will you admit, Madam Minister, that you made a decision that 

affects thousands of Saskatchewan seniors without even 

consulting with the SASCH (Saskatchewan Association of 

Special Care Homes) board of directors? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the government has been 

saying for some time, and indeed the members opposite when 

they were in government were beginning to talk, in the 

direction of moving towards more community-based services 

and more home care programs.  And so there has been a 

decision made by government with respect to level 2 to try and 

keep as many level 2 seniors in their homes as long as we 

possibly can.  And so the special care homes people have been 

advised of that. 

 

It is the right direction to be moving, to try and keep seniors in 

their homes.  There's absolutely no question that the majority of 

people agree with that.  And so we are today or through this 

budget beginning to implement the process of trying to keep 

seniors in their homes.  And I think it's fair to say that the 

community at large agrees with that policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, you didn't even 

acknowledge the question that I asked you about consulting 

with the SASCH board of directors. 

 

Would you table for us the studies that you have done on how 

these seniors are going to be affected and how these seniors' 

families are going to be affected, how many of these seniors 

have families, how many of these seniors have no families, and 

how many of these people have nowhere to go if they're forced 

to leave the level 2 care home that they're in? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, no resident in the present 

system will be required to find other accommodations unless 

they prefer to or choose to have their needs met in an alternate 

location. 

 

We are having constant discussions with the special care 

homes, with the administrators, with the public at large.  The 

whole process has begun with consultation, Mr. Speaker, and 

no resident will be required to find other accommodations 

unless they prefer or choose to have their needs met. 

 

We have also increased funding for home-based services in this 

budget by almost 20 per cent -- 19-point-some percentage 

points -- in order to develop a safety net of home care in our 

communities for seniors to stay in their homes, which is where 

they prefer to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I talked this morning with 

one of the SASCH board of directors and she had many 

concerns about this decision.  One of them is that you have 

decided that two years is long enough to have these people be 

uprooted from their residences right now -- only two years to 

place them in a home care or seniors' homes throughout the rest 

of the province. 

 

Madam Minister, have you given any thought to those who are 

already on waiting-lists to get into those facilities in the level 3 

and 4 care homes, and to those many seniors who will be 

thrown into the street with nowhere to go? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are not throwing seniors in the street 

with nowhere to go.  And the member opposite may wish to 

make politics out of what is essentially a good health care 

policy which is to keep seniors in their homes as long as 

possible, but there will be no seniors who will be thrown out in 

the streets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know the legacy of the government opposite when they 

took a run at the former government in 1982 with respect to an 

analysis that was done as to the number of beds that are needed 

in Saskatchewan.  We know that in Saskatchewan we have the 

highest per capita bed of any place in the world. 

 

The fact of the matter is there are alternate forms of health care 

that are superior in nature and provide a higher quality of 

health care for people, and that is keeping seniors in their 

homes as long as possible.  That's better for seniors.  It's a 

better quality of health care.  And this is the direction that this 

government intends to move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I have no quarrel with 

keeping seniors in their homes, but these homes are now senior 

citizens' homes.  How long are you going to keep these seniors 

in the residences they have today? 

 

I'll give you an example.  The Herbert Senior Citizens Home 

has a 32 bed hospital; 6 of them are level 2, 20 are level 3, and 

6 are level 4.  Those 3's and 4's have no place to go.  And 

where are you going to put them?  They can't go 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

to Swift Current; Swift Current is full.  You going to ship them 

to P.A. (Prince Albert), to Yorkton, North Battleford?  Because 

their places are full. 

 

What are you going to do with these men and women who built 

this province for you to have the education that you had?  They 

built this province, paid taxes for you to have the benefits.  Are 

you going to kick them out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then, Madam Minister, tell me this: when are 

you going to start consulting with the SASCH board of 

directors to find out whether they're going to get level 1 or 

level 2 care funding in their homes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The consultation is ongoing.  There are 

people from the Department of Health who are throughout . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I didn't hear any 

interruption when the member asked his question.  I don't 

expect any interruption when the minister answers.  No 

interruptions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The consultation with the SHA 

(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) and the special care 

homes association is ongoing, Mr. Speaker.  We are presently 

in the process of consulting with communities.  We are asking 

communities to tell us what are your needs, what are your 

requirements. 

 

Our policy is to keep level 2 in their homes as long as possible.  

We recognize there are some level 3 and perhaps level 4 

individuals in these facilities and they will remain in these 

facilities because, as I said before, we are not going to be 

putting anybody on the street. 

 

This is an evolutionary process which will take place over a 

period of time.  The objective of the government is to keep 

people in their homes as long as we possibly can.  That is the 

objective of the government, and to provide high-quality, 

adequate home care services for seniors in their homes as long 

as possible.  So if some of these . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, I want to point out some 

very fundamental things that you may have overlooked.  These 

senior citizens' homes are now with level 3 and level 4 care 

people in them.  They are being funded on the basis of a level 

2.  And that funding has not increased to provide the benefit to 

them and they still are surviving. 

 

Now are you going to tell these people that they are out? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay then you find a home for them.  And 

that is what they want to know.  Why don't you just leave it to 

where it was.  That's what you should do -- leave them where 

they are. 

I'll tell you something else, Madam Minister.  Those people in 

that community have built that home, they have worked in that 

home, and they are part of that home.  They want to have their 

seniors become a part of that home and they have continued to 

do that and support that facility all these years.  Are you going 

to tear that down, push it aside? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

obviously has a lot of false information and he's fearmongering 

and trying to use political tactics to try and make a point and 

deter the health care system from implementing a very valuable 

policy.  In other words, he is using political tactics in a very 

selfish fashion, when what the government is doing is coming 

forward with a policy that is good over the long term. 

 

We are not going to tear down any homes.  We are not going to 

close any homes.  We are not going to kick any residents out of 

their homes.  We are going to look at phasing out funding for 

level 2.  If there are level 3 and 4 in there, we will take care of 

them; they will stay in their home if there's no other facility 

they can move to or want to move to -- no other level 3 or 4 

facility.  This will be an evolutionary process that will take 

place over a period of time in consultation with these 

communities. 

 

And I ask the members opposite to join us in what is an 

essential and a quality, good health care reform in this 

province, instead of playing silly politics with this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, that home and many other 

homes across this province were built by religious 

organizations.  And the ones that serve the ones in my 

constituency are in Herbert, and that one was built by the 

Mennonite people and the Mennonite churches around in that 

community.  And that, Madam Minister, they built it from 

donations made and received.  And that is where they 

constructed it. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, can you tell me what you're going to do 

with the level 1 and 2 funding in the next two years? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we are developing home 

care, quality home care services in our communities, so those 

seniors who are level 2 -- who are level 2, for example -- will 

be able to stay in their communities as long as possible.  Some 

of the level 2 that may be in these facilities now might move 

into a level 3 or a level 4 care level.  They will stay in their 

facility as long as is necessary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We recognize the involvement and the personal attachment that 

our rural citizens have with respect to many of these homes.  

This government is not going in and closing the doors of these 

homes.  It's announcing a policy to move towards keeping level 

2 people in their homes as long as possible.  If they're already 

out of their homes, that's another issue.  They'll stay in that 

facility unless they prefer to move to another location, or 

choose to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, these people moved to 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

these homes because of a number of reasons.  One, they wanted 

to.  Number two, they felt that the care that they would receive 

there was adequate to supply them for the benefits they needed. 

 

And what I say to you, Madam Minister, you haven't answered 

the question yet.  Are you going to cut the funding for level 2 

care on the next two years, so that these people will be forced 

out, because they haven't got the finances to live in those 

homes once they're forced out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will not be forcing anyone on the 

street.  We will not be cutting funding for people who are in the 

institution. 

 

And I want to say this: the reason why people are in those 

institutions is because your government provided nothing else 

for them in the community.  You spoke a good line about home 

care, but the fact of the matter is, is you didn't build that safety 

net out there so that this transition could've taken place a lot 

sooner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Number one, Madam Minister -- I'll give you 

a lesson in history -- number one, you had a moratorium on the 

minister's . . . the House Leader of the government put a 

moratorium on building nursing homes in this province.  You, 

Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser have a question to ask?  If he hasn't, then I would ask 

him to let the member from Morse direct his question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, we built more nursing 

homes in one facility in Saskatoon than you did in the last 

seven years of your administration.   Now where are you going 

to put those level 3 and level 4 care people in my constituency 

and in every rural constituency in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and every urban constituency?  Where are you 

going to put those level 1 and level 2 who are residents of those 

communities?  Are you going to move them all over the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member 

opposite earlier that we are having consultations with the 

communities to determine what their needs are, Mr. Speaker.  

The people who are level 3 and level 4 will be kept in level 3 

and level 4 facilities within their communities.  We will be 

talking to the communities about what sort of needs are 

required and we will be developing, in conjunction and in 

consultation with the communities, a plan for their districts and 

their areas that will provide accommodation for our seniors. 

 

Appointments to Health Care Boards 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, one of the problems 

that the seniors and the people that work with seniors in our 

province are having with your government is that they don't 

trust you.  You have broken every 

election promise that you made a short seven months ago.  

They have no reason to believe that the things that you're 

telling this legislature are true. 

 

Madam Minister, in discussions all across this province you are 

laying the law down to various communities.  You're going to 

my home community of Moose Jaw and you're saying that 

you're going to have a board and that the people that have been 

doing the governance in that community aren't worthwhile 

sitting on that board, that you're going to choose eight 

individuals and you're going . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- To the minister.  Madam Minister, why do 

you so distrust the people that have been looking after our 

health care facilities that you have to appoint people totally 

removed from that process?  Tell us that, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When we go to an area, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, and talk to people about organizing as much as 

possible on a district basis, or as we did in Regina and 

Saskatoon, we will be asking the community and the boards 

involved.  For example, in P.A. the hospital boards and the 

special care home boards had substantial input into who would 

sit on the P.A. board. 

 

There is no intention at all to exclude anybody.  If someone is 

already sitting on a board and wants to sit on the amalgamated 

board in the communities such as P.A., Saskatoon, or Regina, 

and if the rest of the boards that are participating in that agree 

with that, there is no problem with that at all. 

 

The point that was probably being made -- and I wasn't present 

at the particular meeting -- is that what we don't want to see, 

like for example in the situation like Regina, is one hospital 

being represented on the board and the other hospitals not 

being represented by a board representative.  So when we 

select these board representatives there's been substantial input 

from the community, from the mayor in P.A., for example, and 

the stakeholders in the system.  And we choose . . . if there is a 

board member that everybody else agrees to, there's absolutely 

no reason why this government would have any trouble with 

that person sitting on the board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

noticed in your litany of places that you didn't mention Moose 

Jaw.  Your officials have been meeting with the various groups 

in Moose Jaw and saying that there will be an entirely new 

board here and that no one will be connected with the existing 

facilities. 

 

I remind you, Madam Minister, it was Moose Jaw who led the 

way in this province to take away 80 acute care beds and 

rationalize the system and combine services.  And now you're 

saying to those people that led the way in this province that 

none of you are fit to sit on a board, that we 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

are going to appoint eight individuals with some kind of litmus 

test, a litmus test that I suggest will be your friends only.  

That's what your officials are telling the people, Madam 

Minister.  Talk about Moose Jaw and what your people are 

doing there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to Moose Jaw, I really hope 

that the Moose Jaw boards and special care homes if they want 

to be involved, but certainly the hospital systems, come 

together and develop some sort of amalgamated board.  I think 

that it would improve the quality of health care services 

inasmuch as it would provide more co-ordination, integration, 

and more of a continuum of health care services. 

 

I don't know what the official said with respect to the Moose 

Jaw people.  What I am saying is this, is that if all the boards 

get together in Moose Jaw with consultation with the 

Department of Health and if they have a member who wishes 

to sit on the board and all the boards are in agreement with this, 

there should be no problem with that person being on the 

amalgamated board.  And that's the point I wish to make. 

 

Now if the boards cannot agree because they are concerned 

perhaps that one hospital may be represented or one facility 

may be represented and not the other, well then we have 

difficulty with that kind of situation because what we want is a 

board that governs all of the facilities and is as neutral as 

possible with respect to the governance. 

 

If there is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- If it is good enough for the people involved in 

St. Paul's in Saskatoon to maintain governance on that board, it 

is good enough for the Sisters of Providence to maintain 

governance in the city of Moose Jaw, and they are being told 

that that will not be the case, Madam Minister.  That is what is 

being told. 

 

I want you today to stand in this Assembly and say that 

everyone in the health care-giving business in the city of 

Moose Jaw is going to have an opportunity to be part of that 

board, that the Sisters of Providence, the job that they do for 

the citizens of Moose Jaw and area will be recognized and that 

you, Madam Minister and your officials will not take 

governance away from them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't accept what the 

member opposite has said.  The officials have not told the 

Sisters of Providence that their board is going to be wiped out 

and they won't have any input.  I know that to be certain, that 

they haven't been told that. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that both in P.A. and in Saskatoon, 

the fact that there was a religious institution there was 

recognized and was respected, and they kept their own 

particular boards intact.  And that is the case with Moose Jaw.  

And the member opposite should quit trying to play politics 

again with the situation that . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Agri-Food Act be now introduced and read for a 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Community Bond Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move The 

Residential Tenancies Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Senior Citizens' 

Heritage Program Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move that Bill No. 52, The Senior 

Citizens' Heritage Program Amendment Act be read a second 

time. 

 

The senior citizens' heritage program has provided an 

unconditional annual grant to low and middle income senior 

households.  Amendments are necessary to better target the 

program and to meet the funding levels identified in the 

Estimates.  The heritage program has not been well targeted. 

 

At a time when we still have some single seniors living below 

the poverty line we could ask why the previous government 

made grants to people with three times that income.  We could 

also ask why they made grants to estates or to those already 

significantly supported in subsidized public housing. 

 

The Bill proposes several modifications to the senior citizens' 

heritage program.  First of all, the program criteria will be 

tightened.  The income ceiling will be reduced from $30,000 

per year family income to $22,000 per year.  This will allow us 

to retain the program this year for those with lower incomes 

even as we lower the deficit. 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

People living in rent-to-geared-income public housing will no 

longer qualify for the grant.  It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that 

we had to draw the line here, but we had to examine the need.  

We had to look at those seniors whose rents are controlled and 

who are benefitting from a significant subsidy in public 

housing, a subsidy estimated, if you consider the federal and 

the provincial contribution, to amount to 6 to $8,000 per year.  

We had to compare these seniors with seniors with the same 

income who are trying to maintain their own home.  It is clear 

that you have to protect the seniors trying to maintain their own 

home and give assistance to them. 

 

In addition, estates will no longer be eligible for the heritage 

grant.  The need for this will be reduced by moving to a flat 

grant rate through which a surviving senior spouse would 

qualify for the same amount.  And significantly, I find it hard 

to justify providing a publicly funded grant to benefit not the 

senior when they need it but their heirs. 

 

(1415) 

 

In addition to tightening the eligibility criteria, the grant 

structure will be significantly simplified.  A flat $500 grant for 

eligible senior family is contemplated in this Bill.  Since the 

heritage program is administered on a calendar basis the 

amendments will be in effect for 1992 only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a confusing array of income support 

programs in place, all with their separate administrations.  That 

is why the recent Speech from the Throne announced a 

comprehensive review of all income support programs.  The 

senior citizens' heritage program will be included in that review 

and we fully expect that we can find a better way to target 

needed funds to those seniors who really need them. 

 

The senior citizens' heritage program cost $34 million last year; 

it cost almost another $400,000 to administer.  It has not been 

well targeted, but, Mr. Speaker, I know that seniors have come 

to count on it.  That is why we are not cancelling the program 

this year.  That is why we are offering it in a modified and 

simplified form.  We want to give our seniors the time needed 

to adjust to the change, and we want to have the time to study 

their needs in the wider context of all income support 

programs. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support the 

Bill, and I hereby move second reading of Bill No. 52, The 

Senior Citizens' Heritage Program Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I guess I won the 

race.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few remarks about 

this Bill.  And I would like to start by saying that we are 

hearing remarks from seniors that this government is heartless, 

and, Mr. Speaker, Bill 51 is proof of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public has seen the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) destroy the financial future of single mothers.  We have 

watched them while they single-handedly ruined the 

agricultural and livestock future of Saskatchewan.  And now, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are turning their backs on the seniors. 

 

Well of course according to what I read in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and the slashes to the senior heritage program, it 

would seem they are turning their backs on the seniors of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this could very well end up being another case 

like the Saskatchewan Pension Plan where the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton said, it's coming back, while the member 

from Regina Elphinstone chokes at the very thought. 

 

For the sake of the seniors, Mr. Speaker, I hope this 

government does reconsider this terrible decision.  I remember 

when the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was first introduced, Mr. 

Speaker.  The member from Regina Hillsdale claimed it did not 

address what she thought was the most important issue -- 

poverty among seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Senior poverty, Mr. Speaker, was what she said would be a 

priority of her NDP government if they were even given the 

chance.  She said she would increase funding to programs that 

would help seniors, programs like the senior citizens' heritage 

grant -- the very program her government is scrapping. 

 

Does anyone else see the inconsistency here?  Well of course 

they do, Mr. Speaker.  Every senior I talked to, which is many, 

has told me how disappointed and how angry they are at this 

government.  They have told me in consultation with the 

minister from Hillsdale, how cold and uncaring she appears to 

be.  Well, Mr. Speaker, who could blame them?  Seniors, in my 

opinion, Mr. Speaker, have been betrayed. 

 

The member from Regina Hillsdale will probably still try and 

say that her government have the senior citizens as a priority.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, in fact let me see what they've done. 

 

They have bumped seniors to a pretty low spot on the list -- 

right beside the single mothers and home-makers who are 

suffering because of the cancellation of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  And I'm not just talking today about the Bill 

before us, Mr. Speaker,  allowing the NDP to slash the senior 

heritage program, I'm talking about the many ways that this 

government has hurt seniors. 

 

First, the supposedly caring -- and I stress the word supposedly 

-- this supposedly caring government tacks on huge hikes in 

phone bills, car insurance, and power bills that everyone has to 

pay, including seniors. 

 

And I want to say today, Mr. Speaker, that an extra 5 or $10 

dollars may not sound like much to some of the members 

opposite, but to many seniors it is a very significant amount. 

 

Now some seniors have been able to adjust to these new tax 

grabs, Mr. Speaker, but the NDP don't just stop at an extra $10 

here and $5 there.  Does the NDP government choose instead 

to make seniors pay for eye exams, chiropractic care, and even 

worse, Mr. Speaker, up to $380 for their prescription drugs, 

after standing in their place day after day when we were in 

government telling us how bad it was to have to pay $75 a 

year. 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

Mr. Speaker, being a senior myself, I understand just how 

expensive it is to pay for the necessary medication.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure you, sir, it's not cheap.  Mr. Speaker, even 

after the $380 is paid, the seniors have to pay a large 

percentage of their prescription drugs. 

 

To someone who is 20 or 30 years old, paying for prescription 

drugs oftentimes doesn't mean much more than maybe $50 in a 

total year.  But, Mr. Speaker, seniors are most affected by the 

changes to the drug plan.  Just ask, Mr. Speaker.  The same 

people who claim seniors are having to choose between their 

drugs and groceries, the same people from over there, when the 

deductible was set at $125, now raised it to $380 in the blink of 

an eye -- that quick.  And I ought to ask you, Mr. Speaker, 

when you talk about hypocrisy, that is hypocrisy at the 

ultimate. 

 

These examples, Mr. Speaker, are just a couple of the uncaring, 

cold deeds that this administration is carrying out. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The NDP administration. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- The NDP administration, right.  And this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is no exception.  If this was the only 

legislation that they were bringing forward that hurt seniors, we 

may not make an issue of it.  But, Mr. Speaker, never before 

has any government been as cruel to the people of this province 

as this NDP government. 

 

Further proof, Mr. Speaker, of their heartlessness is the Act to 

amend the senior heritage fund, a fund the former government 

put in place to help our province's senior citizens maintain a 

dignified, independent life-style, a fund to help supplement 

seniors and senior couples to maintain their own homes. 

 

Before the NDP government got their hands on this program, 

Mr. Speaker, which I have never heard anyone oppose, senior 

couples, gross income between 25,000 and $30,000 a year, 

could receive an annual grant of up to $350 for a couple, and 

$250 for a single senior.  The plan provided more funds for 

those seniors who were more in need.  Seniors with incomes of 

less than $25,000 received substantially more -- about $700 per 

couple and $500 for a single senior. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who were living in subsidized housing 

found that the senior heritage fund was a necessity.  And they 

received $400 for a couple and $200 for a single senior.  But 

this government has even taken away the senior heritage 

money that seniors and government-subsidized housing were 

getting. 

 

Subsidized housing, Mr. Speaker, those seniors who could not 

afford to rent an apartment or own a home of their own, let 

alone pay for their drugs, their bills, and their groceries -- these 

are the people, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP don't think need a 

supplement to their income.  In fact when I looked at the 

explanatory notes that came straight from the NDP Bill No. 52, 

it says, and I quote: 

 

 Residents of public housing where rent is geared to income 

are already subsidized.  In the interest of fairness and 

affordability, the Heritage Program 

will no longer be available to them. 

 

In the interests of fairness, Mr. Speaker?  That is the most 

ridiculous thing I've ever heard.  Where is the rationale?  

Where is the rationale or the logic in a statement like that?  

Where is the help that was promised to the seniors?  Where, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fairness of this government's actions?  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the notes go on to explain why subsidized seniors 

are no longer receiving their couple hundred dollars a year.  It 

says: 

 

 . . . to significantly reduce the cost of the program, benefits 

must be restricted for those seniors whose rates are 

subsidized. 

 

Well I don't think the members opposite can properly . . . It's 

impossible for them to understand just what kind of a position 

they're placing thousands of seniors in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Most seniors have no place to turn, no where to turn, Mr. 

Speaker.  And by taking away this seniors' heritage grant, this 

government is imposing even more hardship on those who can't 

afford it. 

 

This is a sorry way to repay the pioneers of our province, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the NDP government will be very sorry that they 

ever turned their backs on the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I stand 

in this Assembly today to address the Bill No. 52 before the 

Assembly, I just want to remind the members, and 

back-benchers, and people across this province as I've heard 

over the last few days, of the fact that it appears this 

government continues to show its callousness towards 

individuals, and especially at this time low income seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I'm getting and what I'm hearing and even in 

the seniors' clubs is the fact that the government is turning its 

back on the people of this province.  Many people are asking, 

well what do we do or what can we do?  And I've given them 

the opportunity and suggested that possibly they take the time 

to write their minister.  Certainly they can contact my office.  

As their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), it is my 

responsibility to also speak out on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this time the NDP government is turning its back 

on seniors who need government's assistance, seniors -- and we 

acknowledge there are many seniors across this province -- 

who do not have the same means as other individuals, many 

seniors who are living on next to nothing.  I believe the actions 

of the government totally contradict what this government and 

what the NDP have claimed in the past. 

 

Whether the NDP were sitting on the opposition benches or 

hitting the campaign trail, they were telling people or they were 

leading people to believe that they cared.  Day after day after 

day, Mr. Speaker, we heard the NDP claim 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

that they cared.  They claimed that they would listen to people 

and that they would alleviate Saskatchewan people's tax 

burden.  And even in the Speech from the Throne, they said 

that they would even consult with people before they make any 

drastic changes to any government programs. 

 

They told the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, that they 

were the only party who cared.  And they said that they were 

the only party that would really stand up for people, especially 

low income individuals, including seniors. 

 

They used harmonization as an example of the previous 

government's so-called callousness -- a program, harmonization 

of the sales tax, Mr. Speaker, which would have given the 

government additional funds with which to continue the 

programming and expand or at least solidify the programming 

that was available to individuals, low income earners and 

seniors and people of disabilities across the province.  And not 

only that, Mr. Speaker, but also help businesses across this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, harmonization as I find today, many people 

across this province are beginning to see the fact that there are 

a lot of merits.  And there's no doubt in my mind that, maybe 

even before this term of government runs out, that the 

Saskatchewan tax will be harmonized because I believe other 

provinces across Canada will do the same thing for the simple 

reason that it is the proper thing to do. 

 

This government said that Saskatchewan's low income earners 

couldn't afford any more taxes.  They said it would destroy 

Saskatchewan.  However now that they have formed 

government, what have they done?  They have increased every 

tax that exists in this province and have even created a new tax.  

And, Mr. Speaker, all people -- young and old alike, 

middle-aged -- are affected by the massive tax grab of this 

government. 

 

(1430) 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the House of an item 

on the news yesterday.  I believe it was later in the afternoon 

yesterday and this morning, about the tax increases that took 

effect yesterday, July 1, tax increases across Canada.  And 

where did they take effect, Mr. Speaker?  They took effect here 

in Saskatchewan, in Ontario, and in B.C. (British Columbia), as 

well as Newfoundland.  And it's interesting to note, Mr. 

Speaker, that three out of those four provinces are represented 

by newly elected NDP governments. 

 

And what do we see the government here in Saskatchewan 

doing now?  They are introducing legislation that will hit the 

most vulnerable in our society, our low income seniors.  

They're not only attacking the heritage program, but even as we 

heard in question period today, they are attacking our seniors 

by eliminating funding to level 1 and 2 care -- funding, Mr. 

Speaker, which helped many individuals who found it difficult 

especially when they lost their mate or partner and were single 

seniors living in their own homes and didn't have family close, 

found it a lot easier and found their existence to be a lot fairer 

and a lot easier on them to be admitted to low income seniors' 

care homes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This NDP Bill will not only reduce seniors' income level for 

eligibility for senior citizens' heritage program but it also 

legislates an end to the program on December 31, 1992.  Mr. 

Speaker, let us acknowledge the fact that this program did not 

provide a lot of money to our seniors in need.  Maybe to the 

members opposite a figure of $100 a year doesn't mean much; 

maybe it's just a drop in the bucket, but to people receiving this 

money, it was a life-preserver. It was money which they could 

use to buy the necessities or the gifts they needed at Christmas 

time or Easter.  Or I'm sorry to say in most cases it was money 

used by seniors to provide the groceries that they needed and to 

pay for their accumulated bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is ending a program that our 

senior citizens, many of our senior citizens across this 

province, depended on.  Why have they singled them out?  It 

seems like the NDP went through government programming 

with a fine-tooth comb.  They eliminated a pension plan that 

was utilized almost specifically by women.  And we've heard 

people right across this province, Mr. Speaker, speak out on 

that and ask the government to reintroduce the program.  And I 

would suggest that by aiding men and women, and specifically 

women, build a pension plan for themselves, the government 

would be helping themselves in the long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They reduced health care funding and hit diabetics hard 

through changes in the prescription drug plan.  It seems, Mr. 

Speaker, every time we turn around the NDP are picking on the 

sick, the elderly, and women.  Who will be the next victim?  

Will they be eliminating lunch programs for children?  Is that 

the next program on the agenda for elimination? 

 

This Bill attacks the poorest of the poor, Mr. Speaker.  It hits 

seniors who cannot even afford to pay their rent.  This Bill 

affects seniors residing in subsidized housing units, units 

subsidized, Mr. Speaker, by the federal government.  The NDP 

are pulling the rug out from under seniors, senior citizens who 

have paid taxes all of their lives and now must pay for the 

massive tax increases imposed by this government -- this 

government, I might add, that many of the seniors across this 

province came to believe.  What do they get for their lifetime 

contribution for the government coffers?  They get the 

Saskatchewan heritage program taken away from them, and as 

I mentioned, a grant which amounts to maybe 100 or $200 a 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP Premier, the member from Riversdale, is 

sitting on a million dollar pension fund, and he is taking away 

$100 from our seniors.  How dare he?  That $100 may be the 

money they need to pay for the increase in the drug plan 

deductible.  It most certainly wouldn't have helped if the low 

income senior is a diabetic.  The heritage grant could have 

helped pay for their insulin.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have had 

many people come to my door even very recently because of 

the problems they are running into with the costs of drugs and 

the access to funding that they find that is being taken away 

from them. 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

The NDP claim that it had to be done, that they had to do it to 

cut expenditures in an effort to battle the deficit.  They cut 

programs like the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the seniors' 

heritage program -- programs created to protect and to provide 

for those with no other means at their disposal. 

 

Why didn't they look harder at alternatives?  Mr. Speaker, cuts 

could have been made that wouldn't have bled people dry.  

Why didn't the government take a look at cutting arts funding?  

They are providing money to Saskatchewan people to go to 

Germany to read poetry.  But, Mr. Speaker, they won't provide 

$100 to a senior citizen who makes $22,000 or less, a senior 

who lives in subsidized housing.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, this to 

be preposterous.  It is obvious that no one is thinking these 

actions through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is this government?  What are these people trying to do?  

What will the government put in place to make sure these 

senior citizens are going to be taken care of?  It seems to me 

that the government has taken away an amount of money 

almost equal to new taxes these seniors will be paying on their 

income. 

 

Let's look at the new NDP tax, a 10 per cent tax on a tax.  The 

NDP are taking money away from those who have no money to 

give.  They are taking money away from seniors with this Bill, 

with utility rate increases, with the income tax hike, with the 

E&H (education and health) tax increase, with the increase in 

the drug plan deductible, with the user fees in optometric and 

chiropractic services.  And, Mr. Speaker, what is next?  An 

NDP-appointed tax collector to hunt down seniors who have 

nothing more to give? 

 

I would ask the NDP to reconsider what they are doing with 

this Bill.  Saskatchewan's low income seniors depend on this 

money to help them through those tough times.  With the 

ceiling put on, who can apply?  It is obvious these people who 

have no other means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this Bill affects the poorest of the poor in 

our province.  What have they left after the NDP government 

destroys the seniors' heritage program?  Mr. Speaker, certainly 

there are many other areas that we will be bringing up as we 

get into further discussion on this Bill, and I thank you for the 

opportunity to speak this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's very unfortunate that we 

are forced to debate a Bill of this nature in the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a Bill that will affect those who are so 

desperately in need of government assistance. 

 

No one can deny that our low income seniors are the most 

deserving of government intervention and attention.  They are 

residents who have put most of government into government 

coffers over the years, Mr. Speaker.  People who have worked 

their entire lives and paid taxes in this province now will be at 

risk.  Think about all of the years that these people have 

contributed to the province via the taxation system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these seniors who are already having 

a difficult time making ends meet because of their income 

level, these same seniors must now stretch their limited funds 

even further because of the NDP massive tax grab.  These 

seniors are not exempt from increases in telephone rates, power 

rates, or natural gas rates, Mr. Speaker.  All of these essential 

services are examples of additional monies these people will 

have to pay out of their limited income. 

 

They are not exempt from user fees for chiropractic or 

optometric services, Mr. Speaker.  And now this Bill shows 

that they are not exempt from being victimized by this NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker.  Low income seniors now have 

joined the ranks of all of the others that have been harmed by 

this NDP government. 

 

This government continues to grow.  Soon, Mr. Speaker, we 

will find that all of Saskatchewan residents have been bruised 

by the NDP government, this so-called, on-track budget.  

Senior citizens have been singled out to pay for the NDP blow 

to the deficit.  The Minister of Finance says cuts were 

necessary because there was a deficit, so we must all feel the 

pain.  I dare say that cutting programs in place to protect low 

income seniors is not an appropriate place to start, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm sure that no one in this Assembly would say that the senior 

citizen heritage fund was an extravagance.  My goodness, Mr. 

Speaker, what kind of money did it provide to eligible seniors?  

A figure of around $200.  That's what it provided, around $200, 

Mr. Speaker.  Is the elimination of this program going to save 

the government money, money that will be redirected to the 

deficit, an amount of money that will make a significant 

difference?  Not likely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rather this action will likely in the end, result in costing the 

province money.  It will cost more money because this Bill will 

force low income seniors onto the social assistance rolls.  We 

are absolutely sure that's what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker.  

The numbers on social services are sure to swell under this 

NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens' heritage fund was not an 

expensive program to maintain.  It is one of those programs 

destroyed because the NDP said it is necessary in order to 

achieve financial stability.  I ask the members opposite, who 

made this disastrous decision?  What do you think the 

elimination of this program will do to the financial stability of 

our seniors -- low income seniors who are living on nothing but 

perhaps Canada pension?  What does it do to these people?  

They are not just people who are applying for a program just 

because it is there, Mr. Speaker.  It was an income-based 

program. 

 

Not only have the NDP members opposite decided to eliminate 

it after December 1992, they've even reduced the income level 

which determined eligibility.  They reduced the number of 

seniors who will be able to access this small amount of money 

the same year that you are outright eliminating it.  It seems 

ironic that the date set to eliminate this program is December of 

1992.  It should be a real good Christmas present for the 

seniors of this province -- the elimination of this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should have some 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

compassion about this.  Saskatchewan seniors should be 

protected.  They should not have to bear the brunt of the NDP 

government's budget, a budget that was clearly not very well 

thought out.  The NDP budget eliminated a lot of programs.  

But aside from announcing the programs would end, no 

alterations were put in place. 

 

There is no plan of action, Mr. Speaker.  There is no plan of 

action for the seniors of this province.  The members opposite 

claim they will be protected.  You're taking away the senior 

citizens' heritage fund.  What is being put in its place?  

Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely nothing being put 

in place for the seniors of this province.  How are you going to 

protect them?  How long will the seniors of this province have 

to wait for government action, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Social assistance is not the answer.  Our low income seniors 

are making ends meet, but it's tough. But they are making ends 

meet.  I know many seniors in my constituency who accept the 

heritage grant because it is a grant, Mr. Speaker.  These people, 

and I know them well, would not accept social assistance.  

They've worked hard all of their lives.  They are of a different 

generation, a generation which feels shame at having to accept 

social assistance.  They do not want to have their hands out.  

They do not want to continue on living their . . . They want to 

be able to continue to live their lives with dignity.  That's how 

they feel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only is this NDP government using this Bill to strip senior 

citizens of desperately needed cash, they are also stripping our 

province's seniors of their independence.  The heritage fund 

gave our seniors that little extra, a little bit extra to spend on 

what they please, although it was probably spent on the 

necessities that they needed to maintain their lives.  Or it may 

have been also spent on things like treating themselves to 

something a little bit extra or probably, in a lot of cases, spent 

on their grandchildren. 

 

Think about it, Mr. Speaker.  I would encourage this NDP 

government to review this Bill before they outright eliminate it 

for the seniors of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- At this time, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to adjourn the 

debate on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Adoption Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of Social Services please 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is a 

great pleasure to introduce Dan Perrins, associate deputy 

minister of Social Services; Bonnie Durnford, manager of 

child protection services; and Tara Truemner, legislation 

manager of Social Services. 

 

I would like to make some remarks before the questioning 

begins.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to respond to the 

comments made by the member from Arm River, because I 

think his comments are misleading to say the least. 

 

First, Mr. Chairman, I want to clear away some confusion that 

was introduced by members opposite in respect to amendments 

5 and 6 of The Adoption Act.  These amendments relate to the 

confidentiality of adoption information. 

 

What I want to make very clear is, amendments 5 and 6 do not 

represent any change in policy or practice related to the storage 

and release of adoption information.  Amendments 5 and 6 are 

strictly housekeeping amendments that were recommended by 

solicitors at the Department of Justice simply to clarify the 

relationship between section 18 of the Department of Social 

Services Act and confidentiality provisions in The Adoption 

Act and The Child and Family Services Act. 

 

In addition, Mr. Chairman, I want to make it absolutely clear 

that these provisions have nothing to do with the investigation 

of child abuse.  These provisions relate only to civil law 

matters.  An offence such as child abuse is a criminal matter.  

The department would have no choice whatsoever in terms of 

people testifying in a criminal matter such as child abuse. 

 

So to repeat, the member from Arm River is totally misleading 

the public when he suggests that the Minister of Social 

Services has any power to decide whether anybody can testify 

or not testify when it comes to an issue such as child abuse, 

which is a criminal offence.  Amendment 6 on 

non-compellability simply transfers an existing clause in The 

Department of Social Services Act, specifically clause 18(2). 

 

The members also talked about the lack of consultation with 

agencies.  Again the members opposite were mistaken.  With 

respect to the two major amendments which make changes to 

the legislation, the following groups have been consulted: the 

Saskatchewan adoptive parents association, Royal University 

Hospital social services and legal department, Christian 

Counselling Services adoption program.  All of these groups, 

Mr. Chairman, have expressed approval for the two new 

provisions.  The two new provisions provide first, for 

counselling to be provided to birth parents, and second, that 

mandatory reports for the courts be conducted by qualified 

professionals. 

 

I was concerned with the line of questioning and the line of 

attack mounted by the members opposite concerning 

amendments 5 and 6, regarding the minister's authority to 

release information, referred to by the members opposite as 

"sweeping powers of the minister".  Let me make a few 

comments. 

 

They either do not understand that the changes proposed are 

strictly housekeeping -- that in fact the changes are exactly the 

same as was in the legislation when they were in government -- 

or they are trying to deliberately 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

mislead the House and the people of Saskatchewan into 

believing the government is trying to change the intent of 

confidentiality provisions related to adoption. 

 

To make this point, I would like to read the previous provisions 

of the Act and the current provisions.  I would like to remind 

the members opposite that The Adoption Act was assented to 

on August 25, 1989, when the members opposite were 

government and was proclaimed as law on December 1, 1990. 

 

I would like to quote from Bill 96 of 1988 when The Adoption 

Act was first introduced.  At that time subsection 21(3) read as 

follows: 

 

 The director, every agency and every person who provides 

services . . . or administers this Act or any provision of this 

Act shall preserve the confidentiality of all documents in (his 

or their) possession . . . that relate to an adoption and, except 

as . . . provided in (section 30), those documents are not 

available for inspection by any person without the prior 

written consent of the minister. 

 

I would now like to read the legislation that we were 

proposing. 

 

 . . . the director, every agency and every person who: 

 

  (a) provides services pursuant to this Act; 

 

  (b) administers this Act or any provision of this Act; or . . . 

 

 shall preserve the confidentiality of all records in the 

possession of the director, agency or person that relate to an 

adoption or to anything done pursuant to this Act and, except 

as otherwise provided in this Act or the regulations, those 

records are not available for inspection by any person without 

the prior written consent of the minister. 

 

What the members opposite should notice is that the wording 

with respect to the powers of the minister is virtually identical 

to the wording that was in place when the members opposite 

were government. 

 

I would also like to quote from subsection 21(3) of Bill 9 of 

1989, introduced when the then minister of Social Services, the 

former member from Melville . . . Subsection 21(3) states: 

 

 The director, every agency and every person who provides 

services pursuant to this Act or administers this Act or any 

provision of this Act shall preserve the confidentiality of all 

documents in the possession of the director, agency or person 

that relate to an adoption and, except as otherwise provided 

in this Act or the regulations, those documents are not 

available for (the) inspection by any person without the prior 

written consent of the minister. 

Again, the wording is virtually identical -- the powers given to 

the minister the same as when the members opposite were in 

government. 

 

The members opposite will find the same is true if they 

compare section 18(2) of the Department of Social Services 

Act, which was in effect when the members opposite were 

government, with the proposed legislation before them today. 

 

Just to clarify the matter, I will read into the record subsection 

18(2) Department of Social Services Act*, the legislation in 

place when the members opposite were government: 

 

 Neither the minister nor any person serving on a board or 

committee appointed by the minister under this Act or any 

other Act administered by the department, nor any member of 

the . . . department shall be; 

 

 (a) compellable to give evidence in respect of: 

 

  (i) written or oral statements made to him; 

 

  (ii) knowledge or information acquired by him; in the 

performance of his duties; 

 

 (b) required to produce any written statement mentioned in 

subclause (a)(i) at a trial, hearing or other proceeding. 

 

Let me also read into the record the provision that we are 

proposing: 

 

 The minister, officers and employees of the department, 

agencies, officers and employees of agencies and all other 

persons who are employed in or assist in the administration 

of this Act: 

 

 (a) are not compellable to give evidence with respect to: 

 

  (i) written or oral statements made to them; or 

 

  (ii) knowledge or information acquired by them; 

 

 in the performance of their duties pursuant to this Act or any 

predecessor to this Act; and 

 

 (b) shall not be required to produce any written statement 

mentioned in subclause (a)(i) at a trial, hearing or other 

proceeding. 

 

My point is quite simple.  The sweeping powers that the 

members opposite speak of are exactly the same powers that 

were in effect when the members opposite were government.  

There is simply no change. 

 

Let me speak just briefly about the intent of the provisions that 

were in place when the members opposite were government 

and continue to be in place today.  The intent on the one hand 

is to protect sensitive information gathered in the course of 

doing a home study in an adoption. 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

To cite an example.  In the course of doing a home study for an 

adoption, members of the Department of Social Services would 

acquire very sensitive financial information, not just about the 

family, but if it was a family business, about other members of 

the family.  What this legislation does is it allows the 

department to decide not to have a member of the Department 

of Social Services called as a witness in a civil case such as a 

divorce proceeding when there is a dispute over assets -- a 

divorce proceeding that perhaps doesn't even affect the family 

involved, but if it was a family business affects another family 

member. 

 

As well there is a long history of ministerial discretion which 

goes back almost 40 years in legislation with respect to the 

release of information, because there are times when it is 

necessary to release confidential information. 

 

Let me give you an example of such a situation.  Such a 

situation would be, say, an adopted child with a very serious, 

life threatening disease.  The child requires a bone marrow 

transplant.  And they request the minister to reveal the names 

and locations of siblings so that a bone marrow transplant can 

occur.  It is only under such life and death situations that a 

release of information would occur. 

 

The situation, let me stress again, is the same now as it was 

when the members opposite were government, and will 

continue to be the same if this legislation is passed. 

 

Now when it comes to the changes, the members opposite 

suggested a legal opinion would be a good idea.  And I can tell 

you, I have a legal opinion from the Department of Justice.  I 

quote from that opinion.  The opinion states: 

 

 The amendments proposed in section 21 and 21.1 of The 

Adoption Amendment Act, 1992 do not constitute any 

change in the law prescribing the Department's practice or 

policy. 

 

I will table that document. 

 

Once again, Mr. Chairman, amendments 5 and 6, which are 

under debate today, make no changes in the intent or practice 

of the legislation.  These two amendments are simply of a 

housekeeping nature.  What these amendments do is they 

consolidate the rules relating to adoption in one piece of 

legislation. 

 

Without these changes, Mr. Chairman, confidentiality and 

provisions for release of information will be governed by three 

different pieces of legislation, including The Department of 

Social Services Act, The Child and Family Services Act, and 

The Adoption Act. 

 

The powers afforded the minister in amendment 5 have not 

changed from powers given to previous ministers.  Amendment 

6 simply transfers to The Adoption Act the provision already 

contained in section 18 of The Department of Social Services 

Act. 

 

There are two new provisions of the Act and they are with 

respect to counselling for birth parents.  And they are with 

respect to the need for home studies to be done by qualified 

people.  There has been consultation with respect to these 

amendments.  There is widespread support.  I hope that there is 

no reason why the members opposite would oppose these 

positive changes.  Thank you. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minister 

stands to her feet and she gets very insulting and says how 

terrible people we are over here.  And it's not that way, Madam 

Minister.  If you can prove to me that there's no . . . and to the 

members of this caucus that there's no sweeping powers and 

there's no changes that's going to affect the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, you won't have any trouble with us. 

 

But don't stand there and just read off statements and then say 

that the member from Arm River was deliberately misleading.  

Now I don't understand how come the Chair didn't pick that up 

when you said the member from Arm River . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Is the member raising a point of order 

with respect to language in the House?  And if so, then the 

member should state his point of order clearly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I'm stating a point of order that the 

member said -- and perhaps she didn't realize it -- but she did 

say, as far as my colleague is concerned, that the member from 

Arm River was deliberately misleading. 

 

The Chair: -- I appreciate the member bringing this to my 

attention.  The Chair did not hear that language.  The Chair will 

endeavour to check the record.  If in fact those words were 

used, they would be deemed unparliamentary and the Chair 

will be making an appropriate ruling at that time. 

 

In the meantime, I suggest that we proceed with consideration 

of this Bill and I will intervene and make an appropriate ruling 

when I review the record. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, I 

appreciate that.  And if it turns out that the record says that 

that's not correct, then I give my apologies because I have to 

say myself that I didn't, Mr. Chairman, I didn't hear it, it was 

my colleagues that heard it.  And that's why I put the point of 

order in.  If it turns out it isn't right . . . 

 

Madam Minister, you were just saying that there's . . . you've 

read off a lot of information there, and it's hard for me to 

follow it when you were reading it.  But I would like in your 

own words, just in your own words, to summarize the intent of 

the Bill and from whom the request came from to have this Bill 

brought before this House.  There has to have been some 

request some place, from some groups of people or whatever, 

or this Bill would not have come forward to the House. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- As I mentioned to the member 

opposite . . . and we don't have to have the Chair check 

proceedings.  If I said "deliberately mislead", I apologize.  

What I meant to say is the comments were misleading.  So that 

we can have that written into the record.  If I did say 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

"deliberately mislead", that was not my intent.  The comments 

were misleading. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  If the member is saying that she 

said that, then I invite her to withdraw the remark and therefore 

clear up this matter finally. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I probably did say that because 

when I look at the remarks, it says "deliberately mislead" and I 

apologize for that.  My intention was that the remarks were 

misleading.  Okay? 

 

But to get back to your question . . . 

 

The Chair: -- I invite the member to withdraw the remark. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I withdraw . . . (inaudible) . . . for 

the record.  To get back to your question, the changes were 

requested by Saskatchewan Adoptive Parents Association, 

Royal University Hospital social services and legal department.  

Christian Counselling Services adoption program was also 

consulted. 

 

The changes -- what is new about the legislation -- is two 

things.  Up until now, a birth parent giving up a child was 

required to have legal advice; that's all.  What we are saying in 

this legislation is that the birth parent would require not just 

legal advice about the implications of giving the child up for 

adoption but more broad-ranging advice about the implications, 

perhaps social or psychological, of giving up the child for 

adoption, and also counselling about alternatives.  So that's the 

first change. 

 

The second change is now if a couple is going to adopt a child, 

a home study has to be done.  That's the existing provision.  

The change that we're proposing adds another dimension which 

is that the home study has to be done by a qualified person.  So 

it's ensuring that if a home study is going to be done, the person 

who's doing the home study is a qualified person. 

 

The other changes are merely housekeeping changes 

recommended by the Department of Justice to tidy up the 

legislation so that, as I said in my opening remarks, we do not 

have provisions with respect to confidentiality in three different 

Acts.  We have it all consolidated in one Act.  They 

recommended this, and they recommended that it would not 

only be easier but it would be more consistent with freedom of 

information and protection in privacy legislation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'd just like to 

respond on a letter that was just handed to me, written by you, 

Madam Minister, on June 15.  I haven't had a chance to read it 

because it was just handed to me by the pages now.  And I'll 

just read the first paragraph. 

 

I'm writing to you regarding the intent of the adoption 

amendments Act with reference to the confidentiality and 

non-compellability clause . . . and you go through it to say 

some of the things to clarify.  I'm just wondering why I couldn't 

have had it prior to just you and I being in consultation here 

now.  Was there some reason I just got it now? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No, and all that does is it just gives 

you your personal record of what I said today.  It just goes 

through the different provisions of the legislation and how what 

we're doing now is exactly the same as what was done 

previously. 

 

I would point out to the member opposite that critics have . . . 

you have changed your critics.  The member from Rosthern got 

a letter from me with respect to these provisions and I would 

have hoped that he would have shared that with you at an 

earlier date. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Anyway, Madam Minister, when I asked 

you in your own words, what are the groups of people that 

wanted to have this here Bill brought forward to this House and 

what was the reason for it, and you said one change would be 

that there must be qualified people that are going to visit with 

the prospective parents and whatnot.  What gives you the idea 

and where's been the complaints that there hasn't been qualified 

people in the past? 

 

I mean I've been involved and my family with adoptions back 

for a good many years, and I'd just like in your words to tell me 

. . . That's an easy statement to stand here and say yes, we must 

have qualified people.  And I agree with you, you must have 

qualified people to discuss these things with prospective 

parents.  But that's just an off-the-cuff statement.  It's not 

enough to bring a Bill towards the House. 

 

What was wrong with the people we had before?  Are you 

saying that the people that have been involved with visiting 

with parents for the last 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 years haven't been 

qualified? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I'd like to inform the member 

opposite that this change was required because there has been 

an increase over the years in independent adoptions.  In the 

past, virtually all adoptions were done by the department and 

we knew the people who were doing the home studies. 

 

We want to ensure that there's conformity of practice 

throughout the piece and that there are similar rules regarding 

independent adoptions as there are with respect to adoptions 

done by the department. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What are these changes?  Can you tell me 

exactly what these changes are that these people have to . . . 

what qualifications they have to have that are different than 

were before?  I know of families that have applied for adoption 

and taken up to three to four or five years to obtain a child and 

had to go through, you know, some very, very many meetings 

with Social Services and a real look into their family affairs.  

Now I'd like to know what you're saying here.  I don't 

understand it. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- These changes in fact will speed up 

the process because what it does is assists the court, so that the 

court can take the information from the qualified person and 

use that in the adoption. 

 

It makes it easier for people as well because the Department of 

Social Services will provide services free 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

to individuals. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, maybe this is something 

we don't need to be discussing too long.  But you're saying now 

it will speed it up, and you never said that before in your 

remarks.  And these are the details we'd have to get into 

because I'm quite satisfied that I've never heard complaints 

from people that needed to be speeded up.  They wanted the 

adoption itself after they're qualified -- they want that speeded 

up. 

 

But that's because we have so many abortions in this province 

that there's not many babies left for adoption.  And you're part 

of a government that encourages abortions.  So, you know, that 

would be the easiest way to speed up adoptions is to make 

more babies plentiful for adoption.  But . . . and I'm not sure of 

your individual stand on that, Madam Minister.  Maybe you're 

one of the four or five people that are in favour of saving the 

little children on that side but haven't had the fortitude to be 

able to stand up in this House and wouldn't be able to say what 

they even think.  There's four or five over there I know that 

believe that, but we don't need to get into that.  But you were 

saying they'll speed it up. 

 

Now you still haven't said to me, Madam Minister, you haven't 

said that the qualified people that dealt with people prior, what 

the improvements are going to be.  Just speeding it up doesn't 

change anything.  What are their qualifications?  Because I 

have never had a complaint yet that when you went through 

Social Services to adopt a child, that people didn't . . . nobody 

complained that their people weren't qualified.  Now if there's 

going to be more qualified people, are they going to be 

different people?  Are they going to have different training?  Or 

what is the process here?  Because you're not really explaining 

the process. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What we are doing is we are 

ensuring in the case of independent adoptions that a home 

study has to be done -- this is new -- a home study has to be 

done by a qualified person.  Our intent is to ensure that every 

child that is adopted into a home in Saskatchewan has, to the 

best of our ability, been a home that has been checked out and 

is a safe and secure home.  This was not the case . . . we did not 

know that this was the case previously because independent 

adoptions did not have to have such home studies done by a 

qualified person.  Okay, so that's the change. 

 

What also is true though is that applicants are being given a 

choice.  They can have a home study report done by the 

department without cost, or they can go to an independent 

adoption practitioner who can do the report.  But the person has 

to be trained and approved by the director, the regional 

director. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

in an earlier response to my colleague when you were talking 

about the sections of the Bill dealing with compellability in 

court, did I hear you correctly, say that in the new Act all items 

are withheld whereas the old Act talks about oral and written?  

Is that the response I heard from you? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No, what my response was, is if 

you take the legislation which existed before the legislation, the 

powers given to the ministers under the previous administration 

were the same as the powers that are now available to this 

administration.  And I submitted a legal opinion to that effect. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Because I know, Madam Minister, your 

reservations about for instance, a divorce proceeding and things 

that may arise in a divorce proceeding, but I think that perhaps 

when we're talking about civil actions we would want to 

differentiate between civil and any criminal proceedings.  And 

your responses that I've seen at present don't differentiate 

between them, and I think it's an important point that you 

clarify that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I clarified that in my opening 

remarks.  I said that with respect to criminal matters, the 

Department of Social Services, the Minister of Social Services, 

has no discretion at all.  The criminal law supersedes any civil 

legislation, so that when it comes to a criminal trial, the 

Department of Social Services, the Minister of Social Services 

simply has no discretion.  People have to testify because it's 

covered by the Criminal Code, which is legislation which 

supersedes this legislation.  This applies only to civil cases. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Then why in the previous Act was there that 

stipulation on either oral or written comments?  Why was it 

deemed necessary at the time to have that provision in there? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It's very simple.  It's just to cover 

two kinds of information -- information that may actually be 

written down by a social worker or someone else, or 

information that may be conveyed to the social worker orally 

and the worker has knowledge of that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, the main concerns that I 

have about this Bill is that back in about 1980-81, we had an 

adoption Bill come before this House.  And we went through 

the same kind of things we're going through today -- not in 

Committee of the Whole.  But the minister said the same 

things, that it was just no powers to a minister and The 

Adoption Act wasn't going to be changed and it wasn't going to 

open up prior adoptions. 

 

But when we got into having meetings, Madam Minister, 

throughout the province, because I advertised at that time about 

consulting with people . . . you had the same sin then as you 

have now -- you didn't consult with people. 

 

And I'm not saying that you didn't get words from certain 

people here.  But I did get a commitment.  But I'm going to tell 

you where that commitment came from.  When I was talking 

on second reading, I said that I'd like to know who this 

government consulted with. And the Minister of Justice was 

sitting in his seat.  And I said if I let second reading go as I'm 

speaking -- you weren't here, Madam Minister -- and he nodded 

from his seat that there will be consultations before this would 

come back to the floor of the House and Committee of the 

Whole.  Can you tell me what further consultations you've done 

with people throughout the province of Saskatchewan, letting 

them know . . . advertising to let them know this here Bill is 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

before this House? 

 

Because -- just before I'm through, Madam Minister -- the fear 

that people have is if in this Bill, some hidden place in this Bill, 

some hidden words that we don't understand and . . . I don't 

trust you.  I'm not saying you as an individual, Madam 

Minister; I don't trust your government.  Because you've had . . 

. well we've just had a real example of it, of this Bill that had 

the bells ringing here for 18 days, and you're not a trustworthy 

government.  And we might as well face that, that the people 

don't trust you out there. 

 

And if there's . . . Before this Bill is going to pass Committee of 

the Whole, I'm going to have you, and I'm going to have you 

on the record, saying all these things.  You're on the record 

now, Madam Minister.  You're on the record of saying very 

clearly that there is absolutely no more ministerial powers in 

sections 5 and 6 than there was before. 

 

So if you're on the record saying that, that's an accomplishment 

that we have because that's where we thought that you had 

some extra, sweeping powers.  But if you're on the record 

saying that it hasn't and then all of a sudden you use some 

power from your minister's office, then you'd be the one that 

would be misleading the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

So I'm asking you who -- since this Bill was here in second 

reading -- who and what groups have been consulted or have 

you advertised or whatever to let the people of Saskatchewan 

know?  Have you done anything prior to second reading on 

consultation on this Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I simply can't do 

anything about the member opposite having no trust in the 

government except to say that I don't think it's a view shared by 

people out there. 

 

I have written into the record today the proposed legislation 

that we are putting forward.  And I have written into the record 

. . . have read into the record today the legislation as it existed 

when the members opposite were government.  Surely that is 

enough assurance that there is no change.  It is there for all to 

see and all to read. 

 

The changes are of a minor nature.  The changes are positive 

changes.  The changes are simple.  Counselling will be 

provided to birth parents so that they are aware of the very 

important decision that they are making.  The second change is 

that all adoptions, whether they are government adoptions or 

private, independent adoptions, will require a home study done 

by a qualified person to ensure that all children who are 

adopted in this province are put into safe homes in so far as the 

government has the capacity to guarantee that.  We have done 

our utmost. 

 

These are changes that were discussed with the three major 

groups involved, and I think that I find and I think the people 

of the province will find that quite adequate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's easy for you to say, Madam Minister, 

that it hasn't been done right in the past, that 

there haven't been qualified people that have visited with 

prospective parents that are wanting to adopt children.  You say 

that hasn't been right before but it's going to be better now.  

And you know, that sounds nice for you to stand up here and 

say that, but you evaded my question. 

 

My question was to you: before you brought this Bill back to 

the House in committee, who have you consulted about the Bill 

and assured that what you're saying in this House is factual, 

Madam Minister?  Who has been consulted since the second 

reading on this Bill till it was brought back into committee, 

because I was told it wouldn't be back into committee until 

there was consultation on this Bill?  Who have you consulted? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I've consulted with 

the Department of Justice with respect to the changes.  I would 

also like to read into the record a letter from the Saskatchewan 

Adoptive Parents Association.  I will read: 

 

 . . . we sincerely thank you for consulting with our executive 

on several adoption issues.  We support the Department's 

efforts in the Area of Intercountry adoptions and changes to 

The Adoption Act regarding independent adoptions as far as 

it goes.  We appreciate your response in the area of 

permanency planning and the goals set out in search of 

permanent families.  We continue to emphasize that children 

not be detained in the system either as foster children or 

permanent wards any longer than is absolutely necessary.  

We are aware of the Department's support of our proposal for 

funding, and look forward to input from your office . . . 

 

Signed by the president of the association. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, would you give me a copy 

of that letter, please?  I'll enlarge a little more while I'm getting 

that letter.  I guess what I want to know is the date on that 

letter.  Do you remember what the date on that letter was, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It was May 13, 1992. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Then how was that to be . . . slipping that in 

to be since we've had second reading in this House.  That's not 

since the second reading, I don't believe. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that 

the best time to consult with people is before you draw up the 

legislation, not after.  Certainly the practice of this government 

is to consult before we draw up the legislation, not after. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I'm afraid you can sure tell 

that you've been new in this game because that's exactly what 

this government over here has been famous of doing -- just 

draw up the Bill and hope for the best.  You had your 

consulting done before.  We had the bells ring on a Bill here 

for 18 days, and boy, we sure got some explanations from rural 

Saskatchewan, or all over Saskatchewan how wrong that Bill 

was, even urban people.  So maybe it's the same thing here. 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

I asked you . . . I said in my remarks in second reading, that in 

second reading, who have you . . . I just asked the question.  

We weren't in a position, Madam Minister, where we could get 

replies and ask questions at that time.  But I said it very clear 

that I don't trust this government, the same as I didn't trust them 

in 1980, because this Bill was in the same position in second 

reading when it got pulled. 

 

And that's why I addressed my remarks in second reading -- 

because you weren't here, Madam Minister -- and I addressed 

them to the Minister of Justice.  What I'm talking about was the 

prior minister of Justice who is now the Premier, when we 

wrote letters throughout the province, we advertised in public 

papers about The Adoption Bill, and the now Premier had 

approximately 10,000 letters came in. And he stood up in the 

House -- naturally he didn't give the member from Arm River 

any credit for it, but I'm the one that was responsible for it -- 

but he said, we've had so many requests we're going to pull the 

Bill. 

 

So it's these things, when this government has to have one Bill 

pulled, The Adoption Act Bill pulled in 1980 or '81, whichever 

year it was, then you slip it in again now, that's why we don't 

trust you. 

 

Can you stand to your feet, Madam Minister, and tell me, how 

will this affect a child that was adopted prior to this Bill 

coming in force?  How will it affect them whatsoever, any 

child that's been adopted prior to this Bill coming in force? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is the kind of 

questions that I find really concern me.  There is simply no 

comparison between this legislation and what happened in 

1981-1982.  There will be no change.  No, there will be no 

change at all with respect to adoption -- the rules of adoption, 

the confidentiality of information with respect to adoption. 

 

I tell you, what I can't honestly understand is whether you don't 

understand the legislation that we're proposing, or whether that 

you're trying to raise unnecessary fears.  This is very routine 

legislation which has no relationship whatsoever to what 

happened in 1982.  I have consulted with the Department of 

Justice to clarify that opinion and they said yes, they stand by 

it, no problem -- since the last sitting.  That is all that is 

appropriate for routine changes like this. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I appreciate that remark, 

Madam Minister, and I'd just like to have it on the record 

though.  Will you say it very clearly that this Bill, Bill 13, The 

Adoption Act, will not affect in any way whatsoever, adoptions 

prior to the coming into force of this Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. This Bill, Bill 

13, will not affect in any way whatsoever adoptions that 

occurred prior to this Act. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I appreciate that because that's exactly what 

I wanted.  And if that's the case, I do have a few other . . . like 

if, Madam Minister, I will say that if there's . . . I want to put 

this on the record.  If there's changes and 

you're going to improve the qualified people, if they are going 

to be qualified that's going to be visiting and going into the 

homes and visiting with people that are going to do . . . are 

coming into new adoptions or looking for parents that are 

wanting to adopt children and are visiting with them, and that's 

going to be improved, I have no qualms whatsoever if anything 

changing from this day on.  I haven't got any qualms with it as 

long as it's for the betterment of our children and our adoptive 

parents. 

 

I have no problem with that, as long as there wasn't going to be 

something here that I didn't understand or I couldn't see.  And 

I'm not a lawyer like . . . I think you're a lawyer, Madam 

Minister.  But I don't read Bills like you do, and I have to trust 

you.  And I am trusting you to say that it doesn't affect past 

adoptions. 

 

So if that's right and if anybody adopts is under new rules, 

there's no problem with me with that.  If you adopt under the 

rules today and whatever it be, whatever your criteria be in 

Social Services or for private adoptions, whatever the rules are 

today and people adopt under those rules and regulations, then 

they adopt under that criteria of today. 

 

I just wanted your assurance and you gave it to me, and I thank 

you for that, that there'll be no prior changes to the Acts.  And I 

thank you.  If somebody else has any questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I believe it was about four or five years ago the Christian 

adoption agency was given the responsibility of providing 

adoption services.  It certainly had been involved in working on 

and providing adoptions in the province over a period of years.  

And I believe this agency has indeed done a commendable job 

in working with parents, working with young mothers who 

were looking for homes to adopt their children to or to find 

parents that they would be very comfortable to have raise their 

children. 

 

In fact in my constituency itself, Madam Minister, I know of 

two particular cases where parents had worked for a number of 

years in trying to have a family.  And that process went through 

the adoption process and after about nine years went through 

this agency and adopted a child and then were called a year 

later by the agency asking if . . . the mother who had mothered 

the first child was again pregnant and wanted the same couple 

to raise her second child. 

 

What I would like to know, Madam Minister: is this agency 

going to be given the ability and the powers to continue to 

provide adoption services in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- This legislation doesn't affect that 

issue at all. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess I should ask one more question.  Where 

the legislation may not affect that particular question, but I just 

want the assurances that they will be continued to have the 

same ability to work and to provide the adoptive services they 

have had over the years in the province of Saskatchewan. 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well as they said it's not relevant.  

This legislation doesn't change that situation in one way or 

another.  So that question is not relevant to this particular 

debate.  You may want to ask it in another context. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now just to 

clear up any misunderstandings, Madam Minister.  When you 

first came on you said that I said some statements that were 

misleading.  If you think that I did say statements intentionally 

misleading, I want to apologize to you because I don't do things 

like that.  I really don't.  If I thought that this Bill was meaning 

something different than it was, I still don't see it in the Bill 

written here black and white and a letter that you wrote me and 

making some explanations. 

 

But what I am doing is taking the word under oath from the 

minister today, and I accept that.  I accept that, and we'll let 

that pass be.  And if there's anything I said, Madam Minister, I 

apologize to you and we'll let the Bill go. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And 

indeed I would like to introduce my officials.  On my right is 

John Wright, the deputy minister of Finance.  To my right and 

behind the deputy minister is Gerry Kraus who is the 

Provincial Comptroller, and immediately behind me is Len 

Rog, assistant deputy minister of the revenue division. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to maybe ask the 

minister what the full intent and purpose of this Bill that's 

presented to the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I could go through 

the comments that were made in the second reading.  The 

changes here are . . . there's a number of them.  One is to repeal 

a provision which permitted the vendor to avoid obligation of 

collecting taxes on the sale or the purchase, of E&H tax.  Most 

of these provisions have been in since April 1, 1991.  They 

were implemented by the former administration but because, as 

the member will recall, the legislature did not continue, the 

legislative revisions weren't provided.  So we're now providing 

the legislative provisions in order 

that it can be legally done correctly. 

 

Other changes.  There's some changes to some procedures in 

the comptroller's office.  The major change will allow the 

Provincial Comptroller to examine payments either before or 

after payment is made, creating significant payment processing 

efficiency.  This has been requested by the Provincial Auditor.  

The Provincial Auditor supports this change and encourages it. 

 

There's also an amendment to ensure that people who are 

members of the Municipal Board are also members of the 

Revenue Commissioners.  That's always been the case.  But 

what has had to happen is that there has had to be an order in 

council making this provision.  We're putting into the 

legislation what has been in practice, by order in council so it's 

done automatically.  Basically those are the major amendments 

that are on the Bill. 

 

I missed one other change which would be of interest to 

members.  It's a very positive change and that is, businesses are 

able to obtain a deduction for the tax portion of their bad debts.  

As you know businesses collect education and health tax, and 

in the past before about a year ago, they would be liable for the 

tax even though the goods may not have been . . . even though 

they may not have been able to collect the payment.  Now that 

exempts them so that they are not saddled with that extra 

burden on the tax side.  Once again, this is something that's 

been in effect for a little over a year, and we're just simply 

bringing in the appropriate legislative amendments to put it into 

the legislation as it ought to be. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- First of all, Mr. Minister, regarding the appeal 

process.  How does the appeal process work?  And how will 

that affect small businesses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There's no change here in the 

appeal process at all.  It stays the same as it always was. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- This appeal process you're talking of, and I 

believe this is talking of the education and health tax besides 

revenue collected on education and health tax, would this affect 

businesses such as small liquor vendors who have sold, taxed, 

and unknowingly have collected the -- let's see, what was it? -- 

collected the tax and then had the hotelier as well, when they 

put the product on the market, pick the tax up?  And so there's 

actually a double tax has been collected.  I know a number of 

small businesses in my area are out money because they didn't 

pick up the fact that they shouldn't have been charging the tax 

and then they're out some.  And I'm wondering if this affects 

individuals such as that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, I think I understand the 

question.   In the cases of the bad debt, if you the vendor, the 

vendor sells goods for a hundred dollars to somebody and is 

then unable to collect on that sale, then the vendor will not be 

liable for the E&H tax on that sale.  That's the change that was 

brought in and has been in place now for the last year, a little 

over a year, and all the legislation does is legislatively puts that 

into place. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Okay, I can appreciate that because I was going to 

come up with a question to address the bad debt there.  But just 

to maybe try and clarify a bit.  What I was 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

trying to bring forward, Mr. Minister, and certainly we've 

brought forward to the Department of Finance is the fact of 

taxes being collected on liquor sold by the vendor and then as 

the liquor is moved through the . . . this is on liquor sold to a 

hotelier.  And then the hotelier . . . my understanding is in 

talking to the vendors is that the vendors didn't realize they 

didn't have to apply the tax there because it would be applied as 

it's sold in the hotel, and so there was a double taxation and in 

many cases many vendors ended up with thousands of dollars 

that they had overtaxed that they shouldn't have been taxed on.  

And I'm wondering if this addresses that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure I still have the right 

answer because I'm not sure I have the right question.  But the 

way it was explained to me, in cases where the vendor has sold 

and collected tax and paid the tax, there used to be a provision 

where they could claim for a refund going back three years.  

What this Bill does is extends that period so that they can now 

go back four years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- We're getting back to . . . Now I'm starting to 

understand a little more myself as well.  That's the question. 

 

The other question that comes up is the fact that some of these 

vendors have been in the process of appealing.  And I guess 

that's where I'd ask.  The appeal, one in particular that has 

come up in my area, in the Maryfield area, I think it's D and K 

enterprises.  I'm not sure if that's the exact name but I believe 

they have six years of back tax.  They have received the first 

three and of course they're waiting for this Bill to address that 

fourth year.  But they're wondering if the process would correct 

the fact that there were two years that they still miss prior to 

that, the other two years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, unfortunately not.  This goes 

back to the four years, and this Bill will not address that 

extended period of time. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Has the minister or the department given any 

consideration?  Most likely you've probably had other 

businesses such as in my area that may have, through whether 

it's the fault of their own or the fact that they didn't pick up on 

the overpayment of taxes . . . has the department given 

consideration to maybe backing up and also allowing a refund 

up to, say, that six-year period or an additional year or two, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the consideration of this it was 

thought that the four-year extension was reasonable under the 

circumstances on the province-wide basis.  And that's why the 

legislation is being introduced as it is.  As I said earlier, it's not 

a provision that this government put in, although it was a 

positive provision put in by the former government.  We're 

simply implementing the decision that was made. 

 

If there needs to be some further look at other options, we're 

always prepared to look at for another time.  But as for the 

purposes of this Bill, it's the four years. 

Mr. Toth: -- Well certainly in light of the problems that have 

been created over the years and I think maybe possibly 

business is not quite totally understanding and wanting to make 

sure they had collected the taxes and the fact that this Bill is 

trying to address some of the overpayment and put the refund 

out there, what provisions have the department put in place to 

maybe just spot check, or police and help businesses out in 

order that they do not collect extra taxes or be forced to find 

themselves in a deficit position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can comment on three things.  

There is a taxpayers' information program in place so that as 

new vendors come into place they are provided information 

and counselling on all of the procedures and other aspects.  

There is a periodic audit that's also made.  And also recently 

there was an information bulletin, or information that was sent 

out to vendors specifically dealing, I believe, with the situation 

that the member raised a while ago. 

 

So we've taken . . . those three steps are in place in order to be 

able to inform the vendors and try and assist them to do the 

appropriate things and save themselves any difficulty that may 

arise. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, one 

other question regarding the Bill.  Once this Bill is certainly 

passed and receives Royal Assent, what provisions or what 

steps will then be taken to respond and make this fourth-year 

payment back to the businesses that have applied for this 

refund?  Will they have to reapply?  Or has the department all 

ready got a program in place to automatically refund this 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The latter procedure is the one.  It 

will be an automatic initiative taken by the department to 

follow up. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Just a question, Mr. Minister, with respect to 

the change that used to require an order in council and now will 

be normalized through this change in the Bill.  I'm not quite 

sure that I caught all of that.  Would you just describe that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What has happened as long as there 

has been the Municipal Board and the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners, is that both the Municipal Board and the 

Board of Revenue Commissioners have been the same.  And 

that's still the way it is.  What's happened is that the Municipal 

Board would be appointed and be in place, and then the 

Treasury Board and an order in council would have to be 

passed, making the Municipal Board also the Board of 

Revenue Commissioners. 

 

What the Bill does is makes that automatic, that once there is 

the Municipal Board appointed they automatically also become 

the Board of Revenue Commissioners, leaving out that one 

extra step which is administratively not necessary. And it just 

puts into place a practice that's existed for a long time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well could the minister perhaps just remind us . 

. . perhaps his officials could help us remind us why that step 

was in there? 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't know if I can answer why 

it's been there.  It's just simply been a practice that has been 

there. And all we're doing is doing away with the 

administrative need to go through this process, saving whatever 

costs are involved in going through that process and saving the 

time that you really don't need to put into it.  It's the same 

people doing the same work in both of these different 

functions, and we're just simply saying since the Municipal 

Board is the Board of Revenue Commissioners, let's say so in 

the Act.  Then there's no need to go through that extra step.  It 

doesn't change anything except it simplifies the process. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay.  Well perhaps maybe your officials 

might know it.  How long has this been the process?  Has it 

gone back 10 years, 20 years, 30 years?  And did you always 

have an order in council to change the Municipal Board to 

make them the Board of Revenue Commissioners?  Has it 

always been the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am told -- and you got to look at 

these fellas, know that they're pretty young -- but I'm told that 

this practice has been existed since about 1939, somewhere in 

that period of time, and the Board of Revenue Commissioners 

has been in existence for many, many years.  So this is not a 

new function that has been recently created.  It's just been 

ongoing for as long as they've been there, and it's many, many 

years. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend the Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that I'll 

take a few minutes to address some of the questions that are 

being brought forward in this Act.  First of all, just taking a 

moment to remind the people of Saskatchewan the fact that, I 

believe, the government of the day indicated prior to the last 

election that they certainly wouldn't need any further taxation, 

that there were all kinds of ways and means of finding the 

funding that would be necessary to provide the services that we 

in this province have come to expect over the past number of 

years. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think many people across this 

province are beginning to realize that, as well, the former 

government, the government of the day, when they went to the 

electorate last October, had indicated that if we were going to 

maintain the services, if we were even just going to maintain 

the programs that were available, that the people of 

Saskatchewan certainly probably would have to dig a little 

deeper into their pocket; that we would have to find the 

revenue in order to counterbalance the loss or the lack of 

revenue that was available through the 1980s, because of the 

deterioration of the grain market prices across this province and 

across the country, which we had very little control over, 

because of the fact that our resource revenue had fallen off.  

And certainly we have seen the resource revenue decreases in 

potash, Mr. Chairman, and in oil prices. 

 

Mr. Chairman, through the 1980s the province of 

Saskatchewan definitely did face a period in time in which the 

government of the day showed a fair bit of compassion for 

people across the province in establishing programs and 

services for our seniors, for those on low, fixed incomes.  But 

that all came with . . . It all came with a cost. 

 

And we saw how the revenue had increased in the province in 

certain sectors, but there were also sectors in this province that 

were hurting.  And agriculture was one of those areas in which 

we saw a major decrease in revenue in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And many members in this Assembly, certainly 

members on this side of the House, know and saw the effects of 

the decrease in revenue coming into the agricultural sector. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to remind the minister . . . And 

certainly I'm sure the officials in Finance were also, over a 

period of years, could see the writing on the wall that sooner or 

later we were going to have to address a number of issues, a 

number of concerns that were out there that, as I believe, we 

couldn't just frivolously throw money out after it to try and 

solve problems, and maybe just have short-term programs. But 

we certainly must look at long-term programs and the 

availability of the funding to continue to provide the services. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, the former government did 

acknowledge the fact that additional revenue was needed, did 

acknowledge the difficulty that agriculture was facing, did 

acknowledge the need as the present government, then 

opposition, continually reminded us of the fact of money 

needed for health care services. 

 

And we're all aware of the questions that arose from the present 

government, then opposition, regarding the need for more 

nurses and more staffing in our hospitals and more funding for 

our hospitals so our hospitals could provide the services.  In 

fact I remember a number of questions regarding the waiting 

lists in hospitals and the fact that hospital beds would be shut 

down over the summer period.  Mr. Chairman, we're all aware 

of the fact that the summer period, there are holidays, and it's 

an ongoing process. 

 

And yet when the former government tried to address some of 

the concerns that were out there, the present government, then 

opposition, suggested that there was so much waste and 

mismanagement that if they were given the opportunity to 

govern they wouldn't have to raise taxes, that the people in 

Saskatchewan could expect an increase in health spending.  

They could expect an increase in education.  They could expect 

even a better quality of life.  And all the government would 

have to do is wave the magic wand; they'd find all this waste 

and mismanagement.  And bingo!  There they would have the 

funding to provide the services without increasing taxes. 

 

However, what do we have before us today, Mr. Chairman?  

We have a government bringing forward the increase in taxes 

that they said, as an opposition, they 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

would never do.  And when the former government suggested 

that by harmonizing the tax we could indeed generate the 

revenue that was needed to continue on with the services, not 

necessarily expanding, but just meeting the needs of the 

ongoing services, the present government, former NDP 

opposition, said that, no, we wouldn't need that.  

Harmonization was the wrong thing to do. 

 

In fact I remember being on the campaign trail.  I remember 

talking to a lot of business people, and a lot of business people 

didn't quite understand, no matter how you explained it, did not 

understand the concept of harmonization. 

 

(1600) 

 

However, today they are realizing what they let go.  They are 

realizing the fact that harmonization would have really aided 

their businesses.  And certainly small businesses across this 

province and especially in our small communities would have 

definitely been helped by harmonization.  Harmonization 

would not only have aided the small-business community, 

would not only have helped the farming community by 

providing a more simplified taxation system, but it also would 

have brought in the additional revenues needed by government. 

 

It would also allow government to address the problem of 

cross-border shopping.  As the federal government had 

indicated, by harmonizing the tax the two governments could 

co-operate and work together and even provide a tax at the 

border. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that the very indignant . . . that the 

government, the present NDP government would suggest in 

opposition they didn't need the extra taxes, now come to this 

House and ask this Assembly to pass a Bill that gives them the 

opportunity to increase the sales tax by 1 per cent -- from 7 per 

cent to 8 per cent. 

 

And a person begins to wonder when you look at the fact, even 

though they've increased the provincial sales tax or the E&H 

tax from 7 per cent to 8 per cent, increased personal income tax 

by 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and a number of other areas 

they've increased taxes across this province, we find that the 

Minister of Finance has still come in with his budget this year 

with a $500 million deficit. And I think that is very deplorable. 

 

I think the people across this province are very dissatisfied with 

the NDP government and all the promises that they were given 

and the actions that have been taken to date.  And certainly, 

Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that people across this province 

would like us to remind the government of the promises that 

they made to them. 

 

In fact as I was visiting in a coffee shop last night, Mr. 

Chairman, just talking to a number of people, there are a lot of 

people that are very indignant.  And I don't find it just . . . I 

would expect it from someone who maybe supported me and 

was of the political persuasion I am. 

 

But the people across this province tend to be broken down into 

about 34 per cent, 10 to be long-time NDPers, around that 30, 

33 per cent are Conservative, and then a 

mixture in between.  But I find, Mr. Chairman, even long-time 

NDPers -- and I would suggest that they would rather consider 

themselves old-time CCFers (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) -- are very dissatisfied with the present NDP 

government and the philosophy that the government has taken, 

their actions that they have taken in light of all the promises 

and what people expected of the government. 

 

Even as my colleagues mentioned today when we talk about 

taking . . . first of all they take away funding to seniors, they've 

reduced funding in health, and reduced funding in education.  

Even in my local communities many positions have been 

eliminated from hospitals -- nurses, nursing care, and 

assistants.  Programs have been cut.  We have increases in 

taxes, and yet we see the deficit ballooning. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there's no doubt we must address the deficit.  

There's no doubt we have to take a long-term approach to 

meeting the needs of the financial obligations we have in this 

province.  And maybe we, as individuals of this province, must 

take a more responsible attitude or have a more responsible 

attitude to the way we fund programs and the type of programs 

we fund. 

 

Because I personally believe that we indeed should be looking 

at funding the type of programs that meet the basic needs of 

individuals, not just throwing out funding for every little 

frivolous demand or request that comes of government.  And 

certainly it's going to come . . . there will be an onus on all 

governments to sit down and look at what the basic needs and 

requirements are of our electorate and the services that we 

should be providing for them. 

 

And I believe in this country we talk about the rights of 

individuals.  We talk about the freedoms we enjoy.  But I also 

believe there were responsibilities.  We all have a 

responsibility to share.  And I don't believe the responsibilities 

of the deficit should be put on the backs of lower income 

earners.  And the taxes we are seeing that are being requested 

of the government are . . . certainly these taxes here are putting 

a greater burden on lower income earners in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister to give his 

reasons for increasing the tax, the E&H tax by 1 per cent from 

7 to 8 per cent, and what effect it will definitely have, if any, on 

the deficit we face today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad 

that the member opposite agrees that we must address the 

deficit.  I don't think anybody should question that need.  And 

I'm glad that the member agrees with what the government is 

doing, and that is following the principle of looking at funding 

to meet the basic needs. 

 

There's a whole philosophy underlining the budget which we 

are considering in this session -- a budget which addresses the 

question of the growing deficit and the growing debt which is 

now way beyond what it ought to be.  That is being said to 

Saskatchewan by the credit rating agencies, it's being said by 

the investment community, it's being said by the people of 

Saskatchewan.  We're concerned about the future, 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

concerned about the impact of this huge debt on their children 

and their grandchildren.  I think all of us in this House share 

that concern. 

 

We have to come to grips with it.  We can't continue the pattern 

of the 1980s which showed no regard for how that debt was 

growing.  Spending money on not just the basic needs, but 

money -- which I won't get into now because I'm not interested 

in rehashing old debates, at least not for now -- spending 

money in frivolous ways on things that governments should 

never even spend money on.  Wasting money.  Making 

business deals with people and organizations without any due 

diligence. 

 

Somebody comes along with a suitcase and says, boy, have I 

got a deal for you.  Will you put just put a little money in my 

suitcase and everything will be just great.  The problem is that 

the money was gone and nothing is very great.  Those things 

never happened.  We've got to put a stop to that.  Whether it's 

the former government or whether it's this government.  It just 

so happens it was the former government who followed that 

practice.  We want to turn that around. 

 

I hear the members of the opposition, both parties, say in this 

House, well you should increase funding for all of these 

different areas or you should not have reduced the funding in 

certain areas, and you should not have raised any new 

revenues, which is what this Bill is about. It's new revenues -- 

$65 million in this budget.  Well if we had done that, Mr. 

Chairman, our deficit this year would have been $1.2 billion.  

It's unsustainable.  Because of the measures we took on the 

expenditure side . . . reduced expenditures of the government, 

actually reduced the expenditures of the government on the 

operating side by 3.1 per cent from last year.  That's a very 

significant reduction, the only province in Canada that has 

accomplished that. 

 

Oh sure, there is no doubt that that has caused some difficulty.  

Of course it has.  But people in Saskatchewan recognize the 

need to do this because they're concerned about the future.  So 

the costs on the expenditure side were reduced very 

significantly, and also there has had to have been an increase in 

revenues.  But what we have done is reduce the deficit from 

what would have been at $1.2 billion to $517 million -- a very 

major reduction in the deficit. 

 

And because of the decisions being made, the deficit will be 

even lower next year, and it will be lower the year after.  And 

in four to five years it should be balanced, and that's what the 

strategy and the objective is all about. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the choice was clear.  Either we continue 

with the old way which accumulated the deficit and therefore 

passes the burden on down the road . . . because every time you 

have an $800 million deficit, you add $80 million to the 

interest charges which you have to pay into the budget.  And 

then it adds each year on top of those interest charges. 

 

And what that does is, each year afterwards reduces the amount 

of money that you have to spend for education or for health or . 

. . you pick your program that's good for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  So we've got to put a stop to that 

and turn that around. 

 

Now I know the argument has been made that the 

harmonization was the answer to it all.  Well argue as much as 

any member wants, members opposite, the people of 

Saskatchewan said no to harmonization.  It's almost irrelevant 

what the opposition of that day said because what's important is 

what the people say.  And the people clearly said in an election 

campaign, no to harmonization as it was. 

 

Harmonization meant putting the sales tax on everything 

including services.  If you hired a carpenter to come and fix 

your house as a senior citizen, you have to pay 7 per cent on 

top of that 7 per cent that the federal government was 

collecting. 

 

And the folks, the people of this province said that that is not 

the way to go.  We have a sales tax in Saskatchewan which is 

now at 8 per cent.  But it's on a narrow range of items.  It's not 

on everything.  It exempts, for example, children's clothing.  It 

exempts adult clothing under $300, to give you two examples. 

 

So there's some progressivity worked into the system to the 

extent that you can on the consumption tax. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the deficit for 1991-92 would have 

been $960 million, and $180 million that would have been 

raised under harmonization for the treasury would have been a 

long way from balancing the budget.  So that's not a good 

argument to use about harmonization.  It was not an attempt to 

balance the budget because although it would have taken $440 

million out of the pockets of the consumers, is what it was 

doing, it only gained for the treasury $180 million. 

 

Guess where the tax load was shifting to? -- the consumer, the 

people who have to buy things for the children, people who 

have to buy all kinds of commodities, people who have to 

repair their homes.  That's where the tax load was being shifted.  

The people clearly said in the election, they don't like it.  They 

said go and be more creative; find some other ways to raise the 

revenue that you need. 

 

Unfortunately, we had to raise some revenues.  But that's the 

real world.  We can debate on whether the public supports us 

on that or not.  In my opinion, there is widespread public 

support for this budget and the direction that it has taken.  Of 

course there are some individual areas which some people who 

are affected won't like.  But overall on the budget there is 

widespread public support, and as the one who has had to 

present the budget speech, I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister indicated that people 

were supportive of their party, and the NDP Party, and their 

stand on harmonization.  But I would suggest to the minister 

that people were supportive because they were misled.  They 

were led to believe that harmonization, elimination of the PST 

(provincial sales tax), meant the total elimination of the E&H 

health tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And many people, and the member from Swift Current 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

would indicate to this House that we led people to believe that 

the harmonization was only on certain goods.  It was an 

expansion of the education and health tax, not a provincial 

sales tax.  If you will, whether it's PST or E&H, yes it could be 

a philosophical difference in view regarding parties. But the 

expansion of the E&H tax . . . and I want to remind the 

Minister of Finance, the fact that it was taken off of clothes was 

the former government that had removed the tax of clothing for 

children and on clothing under $300. 

 

But many people across the province of Saskatchewan, they 

went to the polls on October 21, 1991, believed that when the 

NDP said they would eliminate the provincial sales tax, they 

thought and believed it meant every cent.  Not the expanded 

E&H, as we had indicated, which went on food and clothing, 

but everything.  And many business people I talked to indicated 

that they had irate customers for a few days following the 

election because they automatically believed all of the E&H tax 

had been eliminated. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what studies have you done to indicate that 

the increase of the sales tax from 7 per cent to 8 per cent was a 

proper thing to do in light of the studies that were taken prior to 

on the harmonization indicated that would be a proper method 

to follow regarding taxation increases? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, let 

me just correct one comment that was made by the member 

opposite, is that it was never suggested to anyone at any time 

other than by members of what are now the opposition who 

tried to interpret what the New Democratic was saying was its 

policy, but it was never said that the doing away with 

harmonization would do away with the sales tax.  As a matter 

of fact I can remember issuing a statement to that effect 

publicly during that election campaign.  So I think that one is a 

red herring which is going nowhere. 

 

Quite frankly, nobody in Saskatchewan would have believed 

that to be the case because they would still remember the 

promise in 1982 by the former government when they said that 

upon election they would do away with the education and 

health tax altogether.  That was an unrealistic promise.  We 

know it was unrealistic.  We would never even think of making 

that kind of a statement. 

 

Now on the question, Mr. Chairman, of children's clothing.  

And the member indicates that the former government who are 

now the opposition did away with the tax on clothing.  I want 

to remind the member -- he can be forgiven because I don't 

think he was here in 1982, or maybe he was -- that in 1982 the 

budget which this Minister of Finance, who was then minister 

of Finance then presented, exempted children's clothing from 

the sales tax.  That's when that happened, and that was taken 

away when harmonization was brought in.  They were going to 

be taxed again.  Now with harmonization gone, the children's 

clothing is once again not taxed by sales tax.  That's the 

scenario of the sales tax as it applies to clothing with regard to 

children. 

Now, Mr. Chairman, with regard to the study that was done on 

the impact of the 1 per cent increase in the sales tax, there is no 

major study that's available for that.  That was not done.  A $65 

million increase in taxation on an economy of $20 billion, 

there's no way you could do a study that'll show you what kind 

of an impact that's going to have. 

 

Now on the question of the harmonization, the study that was 

provided then -- and it was kind of hastily put together, I 

believe -- was on a long-range impact over a lot of years, a 

major change of policy.  You would need to do it then.  In this 

case, not necessary, nor is it practical or possible to do that.  So 

there is no specific study on an individual tax of this kind.  The 

analysis that we have done, which I have reported to the House, 

was done on the overall impact of the budget and all of the tax 

measures on the budget and on the economy and on the 

revenues of the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister.  I hear a number of government back-benchers would 

like to ask some questions too.  And they certainly will be 

given an opportunity, I believe, if they'd like to become 

involved. 

 

Mr. Minister, what type of consultations were taken with the 

public prior to putting your budget together and addressing a 

number of the questions that you've raised in this House, and 

certainly the fact that you've increased taxes substantially to the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I'm pleased to answer that 

question, Mr. Chairman, because the consultation was very 

broad.  And as we get ready to prepare for the next budget, I 

can tell the member opposite it will even be broader and it will 

be done even better. 

 

What we did is we had meetings, well in excess of 50 meetings 

all across the province, to talk about the budget, to ask people 

for ideas, talk about various tax options that people brought up 

with us.  There were well over 50 meetings, some of which I 

was involved in, some of which others were involved in, some 

of which the Department of Finance officials were involved in. 

 

At these meetings we asked the business community to take 

part, the municipal leaders to take part.  We asked labour 

people to take part.  We asked farm leaders to take part.  And 

this is the way we went about doing the consultation. 

 

I found it extremely useful.  And many of the things that we 

have been able to incorporate in this budget were as a result of 

the ideas that came as a result of these meetings.  They weren't 

huge meetings.  They were meetings involving leaders of all 

sectors of the economy, organized in such a way that they not 

only came to listen to what the Minister of Finance or his 

officials had to say, they also came and were given a lot of 

opportunity to say what they had to say and give their thoughts 

and ideas on what the budget ought or ought not to be. 

 

And that's the kind of consultation that took place.  We found 

that to be very constructive, and we'll continue to 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

do that.  And hopefully now that we've had some experience 

under our belts, so to speak, we'll be able to do it even better. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you've . . . I thank you, Mr. 

Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you've suggested that you had 

somewhat in excess of 50 meetings I believe, across the 

province, with individuals and groups.  And another question I 

would like to ask, Mr. Minister, were the meetings open to the 

public or were there specific invitations given out or what type 

of meetings, what type of format did you follow?  And then I'm 

going to pass it on to one of my colleagues. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, actually there were 

both.  Some were on invitation, although people came . . . 

anybody who came was able to come in.  We made a point of 

making sure that people in different sectors of the 

Saskatchewan economy were represented.  But we also had 

public meetings prior to the budget -- I'm looking at the 

chairman; I know we had one in Moose Jaw I believe -- to 

which large numbers of people attended.  And so there was 

both processes that were in place. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

said you had about 50 meetings.  In those meetings and in your 

surveys, did you find anywhere in your research the impact that 

you would have on the border between Alberta and 

Saskatchewan in terms of lost revenue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course there is some concern 

there and I share that concern.  And I don't think we can tell 

you what the impact will be.  We think with a 1 per cent 

change it will not be all that significant. But obviously it is a 

concern that is on a continuous basis being addressed. 

 

The one thing I want to point out to the member opposite, and I 

don't want to stake the status of the education health tax on this 

statement which I'm about to make, but I have some reason to 

believe that because of the state of the deficit and the debt 

situation that's being created in Alberta -- and that's been 

signalled by the business community in Alberta; I know the 

chamber of commerce in Calgary is now saying that it's time 

for Alberta to look at a sales tax -- I suggest to the House it 

won't be long before the province of Alberta, because of its 

financial situation that it faces, is going to be introducing a 

sales tax which will help to alleviate some of the difficulty that 

exists on the border situation. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Did you then, Mr. Minister, take into 

consideration something like a free zone along the border to 

take effect until something like that would happen in terms of 

some of the small businesses on the Alberta 

_Saskatchewan border?  They may not last long enough for 

Alberta to make up their mind to make a decision. 

 

And I would like to also pick up on something you said, sir, 

that the people turned down harmonization.  Well the reason 

that people turned it down is because you told them you didn't 

need the money.  And certainly if you don't need the money, 

you know, there's no one wants to pay taxes.  And I think you 

misled the people into 

believing that you wouldn't have to expand the E&H tax . . . or 

the harmonization tax, that you wouldn't need that 180 million 

to $200 million, and yet you've tacked on around $400 million 

in extra taxes. 

 

So I would wonder if the people themselves, if they'd have 

known the true facts, if they would have maybe went for 

harmonization.  And I'll let you answer the question about the 

free zone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, no changes were 

considered in respect to a free zone.  We are continuously 

monitoring the situation and we're having continuous input 

from people that are being affected.  So the answer to the 

question is, no changes were being considered. 

 

But I just want to point out something else.  One of the most 

important changes that were made, in order to rectify some of 

the growing problem with the Alberta . . . with the United 

States border, is doing away with harmonization.  

Harmonization, which was adding an additional 7 per cent on 

all the items -- services, every goods and service other than 

prescription drug and groceries -- was making the problem with 

the Alberta border very much more difficult than already 

existed. 

 

So by simply not going ahead with the harmonization as it was 

proposed -- maybe some form of it down the road if the federal 

government makes some changes; it's something that's worth 

considering -- but as it was proposed, was the worst possible 

thing to do with regard to the problem across the border. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, do I 

then take it from you that you have no intention to try to 

alleviate the pressure that you're putting on small business 

along the border in terms of not only the gas tax . . . I'm 

thinking some of the service stations that are along the border 

who are impacted by this.  The gas went up 3 cents.  They're 

now about 8 cents a litre out of tune with Alberta, and their 

accessories that they sell in the business is now 8 per cent. 

 

And you're telling me that you don't have any plan or any 

notion of trying to alleviate that pressure for those 

small-business people along that border.  Is that what you're 

saying to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would not 

want the member from Wilkie to read into what I said -- and 

maybe I wasn't clear -- that we definitely shut the door to any 

options that may come up.  We welcome any suggestions.  And 

if the member from Wilkie has some suggestions we can look 

at, we'd be prepared to consider them within the fiscal 

framework. 

 

One of the key elements in all of this is the fiscal framework of 

this budget and where we're trying to head with the finances of 

the province.  But I don't shut the door on any options that may 

make some sense and may work and may apply within the 

fiscal framework.  At the present time we don't have anything 

that we're prepared to implement at this time other than what's 

already there, but we're open to any good ideas which may be 

workable. 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

Mr. Britton: -- Then, Mr. Minister, would you tell me what's 

in place?  You said other than what's in place.  What protection 

have you got in place for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The two elements of the program 

that exist which have been there for some time, is that there is a 

provision for different rates on tobacco tax ranging from zero 

per cent to 50 per cent and 25 per cent up to 48 kilometres from 

the border.  And there is a zero rate of gasoline tax in 

Lloydminster, which is right on the border, and Onion Lake.  

Those are the provisions that are there at the present time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I'm aware of that.  And I ask 

you then, why you wouldn't consider the same type of 

protection for those people all the way south through Macklin, 

down to Maple Creek and Elrose and all through . . . not Elrose 

but Alsask, the same protection that we allow in Lloydminster. 

 

I also wonder, sir, why you don't do the same thing for gasoline 

or for furniture and stuff like that that you do for gasoline.  

We've lost one business already because of that tax.  And if 

you're saying to me that you're going to do something later on, 

I would suggest to you, sir, that by that time many small 

businesses would be out of business because the extra taxation 

that you've put on them impacts not only on the E&H tax, but 

on the power and lights and telephones. 

 

And all of that impacts on those small businesses and they have 

the extra load of trying to compete with Alberta.  And I wonder 

why you wouldn't take a look at doing the same for the 

cross-border shopping as you're doing for tobacco in 

Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, indeed we 

recognize the difficulties.  But I guess a judgement has to be 

made at how far you continue to move the border.  

Lloydminster's right on the border. It's one city.  Onion Lake, I 

guess, is in the same kind of circumstances. 

 

So it's a question of how far you continue to move the border, 

and where do you sort of say is the magic line and where, at the 

same time, you don't lose the revenues, which the treasury 

needs.  And other taxpayers in Saskatchewan who have to pay 

say, hey how come you exempt so many people and you don't 

exempt me?  A question of fairness there. 

 

(1630) 

 

This problem isn't new.  This problem was here when the 

former government was in power, and somehow it was not 

possible to find a solution to this that was perfect.  And I guess 

that's the situation that we face today.  When I say the problem 

isn't new, what I'm saying is that there has been this situation in 

Saskatchewan since August 1, 1939, or something there about, 

when the -- 1938 actually, I believe -- when the E&H tax was 

first brought in in Saskatchewan. 

 

Maybe I've got my years a little bit out, but that's . . . we've 

lived with this.  It's not the perfect world.  It's not the perfect 

situation we'd like to be.  And we have to keep 

working on it to see if we can find ways to manage it.  But it is 

as it is.  Any ideas and options that people might have, 

including the member opposite, we'd be prepared to look at 

them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I gave you some 

ideas.  I'm wondering what's the difference between the people 

along the border at Provost, Macklin, and Cactus Lake and 

down through there, difference between them and the people in 

Lloydminster?  You say give you some ideas.  Well I say to 

you, sir, well why don't you take a free zone?  Take five miles.  

Take 15 miles.  At least do something. 

 

If you took a look along the border and found out how far the 

small towns and businesses are in, you could strike a balance.  I 

wonder why if a person lives in Lloydminster he can buy a 

whole new home tax free.  And if you live a mile out of the city 

limits, you have to pay the full tax.  Now what's wrong with the 

people that live along my border?  What's wrong with those 

people?  Why can't you give them something?  As far as a line 

that didn't stop you from deciding how much you were going to 

charge, you didn't have any trouble doing that.  Why would you 

have trouble striking a line? 

 

It seems to me everything you're doing in the last six or eight 

months, you've done it without consultation.  You never got too 

concerned about who you hurt.  Maybe you shouldn't be too 

concerned about who you help.  And I think it would be 

considered a move in the right direction if you would strike a 

line somewhere.  And I agree with you that it's pretty tough to 

strike a line that satisfies everyone.  We've tried that, and we 

know that.  But you could at least strike a line that looked like 

it was fair because you're going to -- and I tell you this in all 

sincerity -- you're going to drive some small business out of 

business along that border. 

 

We have people who are going into Alberta buying their major 

appliances.  They're buying furniture, they're buying rugs and 

even some machinery, and you're losing the revenue.  Now it 

would seem to me that if you could save the revenue and pass 

that on to people who are in business, you wouldn't hurt 

yourself a whole lot, and you would save those businesses.  I 

think that when you say that it's hard to strike a line, well it 

wasn't hard to put the price up.  You done that.  You raised the 

gas price. It never seemed to worry you.  Why don't you strike 

a line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I find the 

logic of the member's argument rather strange considering the 

fact that he was one of those who supported the harmonization 

of the sales tax in this House, although the government never 

brought it to a vote because they adjourned the House for 

waiting for an election. 

 

What I'd like the member to explain is how is it, how is it that 

the situation as it is now is worse than it would have been 

under harmonization where people not only would have went 

across the border to buy their furniture, but because of the 

harmonized tax on restaurant meals would have stayed there to 

have their meal as well.  There's been a major, major 

improvement by doing away with the proposed harmonization 

as it was.  The problem under 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

harmonization wasn't only with Alberta, but we created a new 

problem with Manitoba as well as with the United States which 

is an ongoing problem anyway. 

 

Now the situation in Lloydminster, as the member well knows, 

is to some degree unique.  It is the same community situated 

right on the border where businesses in the same community 

are competing with other businesses who happen to be on the 

other side of the border in Alberta.  So there is that one unique 

difference in Lloydminster that doesn't exist in others. 

 

But let me explain something else.  Let us assume that you'd 

said that the border was going to be, for purposes of sales tax, 

10 miles in.  Well there still is then immediately created a 

situation where everybody on the east side of that 10-mile 

border -- because you have essentially moved the border -- is 

facing the same situation as the people who were facing it on 

the west side of the border up against the Alberta border.  So 

you've really solved nothing.  You have reduced the revenues 

to the province. 

 

And I ask the member to tell the House where he would cut 

some additional expenditures because you wouldn't have those 

expenditures because you'd lose that sales tax.  And at what 

point do you stop the border?  The only solution to that is to 

keep moving this until you move the border to Manitoba and 

you don't have any sales tax in Saskatchewan.  Well I'd love to 

have that situation.  But the fiscal financial situation of the 

province as such, that's just not possible. 

 

When we get the finances under control and we stop this 

horrendous increase in the deficit and the growing debt, then 

we will finally as a province, I hope in not too many years, 

have the opportunity to begin to address these kinds of 

questions and begin to do some things that will assist the 

situation.  But until we got the deficit under control, a deficit 

not a creation of this government, to some degree our hands are 

tied. 

 

And the most responsible thing is to get the finances where 

they ought to be so that we could have the flexibility to provide 

the leadership on programming and development of new 

initiatives that Saskatchewan once used to have, and hopefully 

provide some relief on the tax side as well. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I don't think 

you understand the rural situation.  When you're talking about 

moving the border 10 miles, which is your figure, now what 

I'm saying to you is look and see how close the towns are to the 

border.  Now if you moved the border, as you call it, in 10 

miles or the free zone, that doesn't necessarily mean that's only 

10 miles we're talking about.  The people that you're talking 

about going into that zone could be 30 miles away.  So you 

wouldn't have the problem you're talking about because when 

people travel 10 miles to get a tax-free item, that's one thing, 

but if they have to travel 50 miles, that's another thing. 

 

So what I'm asking you to do is consider the damage you're 

doing to the small towns along that border.  Because even the 

regular customers for those service stations and grocery stores 

and hardware stores and things, will not stay home to shop if 

it's only five miles 

across to the border.  That's what we're saying.  Now if you 

moved that in, you would take those towns in and you would 

eliminate that problem. 

 

Now you're talking about harmonization.  Well when we said 

we were going to harmonize, there would be no other taxes.  

Now what you said was you don't need the money, and then 

you put the taxes up by $400 million.  Now the net benefit to 

Saskatchewan under harmonization was about $250 million -- 

$250 million.  Now that's net benefit to Saskatchewan.  You are 

going to gain $65 million you say.  But in order to do that 

you've charged the taxpayers of Saskatchewan another $400 

million. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to point 

out some of the problems that I think occur because of an 

overcomplicated tax system and particularly as it pertains to 

small-business owners.  I know that the minister has 

commented on several occasions that small-business people are 

very supportive of what's been happening, but I do wish to give 

you an example, and this is a real live example from a friend of 

mine in the bar and restaurant business. 

 

When changes were made to bring in the goods and services 

tax, my friend had to spend thousands of dollars on new cash 

registers because his machines were unable to handle more 

than one tax.  And when making his selection he chose a 

system that would program up to two taxes, because after all, 

he asked himself, how many more taxes could there actually 

be.  Well after the recent provincial budget there are now three 

different taxes on the products that are sold in his 

establishment. 

 

When one orders a meal they pay 7 per cent GST.  When one 

orders a meal and a drink, they pay 7 per cent GST on the meal 

and the drink plus 7 per cent liquor consumption tax on the 

drink.  When that same individual orders a meal and a drink 

and purchases a package of cigarettes, he then pays 7 per cent 

GST on everything, 7 per cent liquor consumption tax on his 

drink and 8 per cent provincial sales tax on the cigarettes. 

 

Now I'd like to point out what this really means for someone 

like this small-business owner.  If his tills could handle three 

different taxes, it would have cost $200 per till to reprogram 

the provincial sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent.  But since his tills 

can't handle three taxes he has a choice.  He has a choice of 

spending between 2,400 and $3,000 for two new tills, or doing 

the extra calculations manually on cigarettes and any other 

items subject to the 8 per cent provincial sales tax. 

 

Now not only is the increased tax hurting sales in a slow 

economy, it adds yet one more calculation and takes more time 

from a small-business person's day to work as a government 

tax collector. 

 

Now I'm not for one minute suggesting that you raise the liquor 

tax to make life easier for this individual.  What I'm asking is 

whether it would not make more sense to determine what level 

of revenue your government needs and then figure out a way 

that you can simplify the whole thing. 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I couldn't 

agree with the member more that the tax system is very 

complicated.  There's all kinds of reasons for it.  There is the 

kind of explanation that the member makes, the member from 

Greystone.  There's a problem with the income tax and the 

corporate tax in that we do it under the auspices of the federal 

government and we're locked into that system.  That hopefully 

can change if the federal government is prepared to co-operate 

or if there's at some point in time a new federal government 

that's even more prepared to co-operate.  So we can make some 

of those changes and begin to simplify the tax system. 

 

I recognize what the member says about the sales tax.  That too 

has some difficulties with it.  I would welcome any suggestion 

that the member from Greystone has on how to simplify it.   

Simply saying that you can give up some revenues, and I'm not 

suggesting that that's what the member said, but to give up 

some revenues at this time is the answer is, in my humble 

opinion, not good enough.  We cannot afford to give up some 

revenues at this time.  To give up some revenues means that the 

deficit would have to be in excess of $517 million, or we'd 

have to find even more places in which to cut expenditures. 

 

Now that we've identified the problem I'd be interested in 

knowing any suggestions that the member might have on how 

you provide a solution. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't have 

expertise in taxation.  You have many, many people at your 

disposal since you have all of these employees who indeed do 

have expertise in taxation, and I hope that you will consult with 

them. 

 

One of the things that I was very clear about saying during the 

election, as you were, is that I did not agree with the PST 

harmonization at the level at which it was harmonized.  What I 

did state is that for small-business people, harmonization made 

things much more simple and that they welcomed that aspect of 

harmonization, but they did not agree with the level at which 

harmonization had taken place, nor did they agree that it should 

be across the board. 

 

And I'm just wondering why it is, whether it was an aversion to 

something being called the PST, whether it was aversion on the 

part of your government with a term called harmonization -- 

because the previous government had done it - 

_ that kept you from looking at this as one of the possibilities. 

 

Why is it that Saskatchewan did not do what provinces of 

Quebec and other provinces in Canada did who chose to 

harmonize at a lower level and exempt certain items?  And if in 

fact what we wanted to do was what Quebec did in terms of not 

having any tax on books, that's precisely what the province of 

Quebec did, was to pin-point an item like books and say we 

won't have a tax on that item.  So I'm wondering if in fact you 

looked at different kinds of combinations of things that could 

have taken place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is an answer to that, Mr. 

Chairman.  First of all, the member from Greystone ought to 

know that one of the problems with the harmonization and 

doing it not across the board is the federal 

government.  The federal government refuses to make 

exceptions. 

 

Now the member from Greystone will say, well it's done in 

Quebec.  Well the difference is that in Quebec, Quebec collects 

the taxes.  In Saskatchewan, because of . . . and all the rest of 

the provinces, that's not the case.  There is some differences 

between the tax collection system provided for the province of 

Quebec which is not provided for other provinces.  So that 

therefore is a problem.  The federal government is not 

prepared, or at least has not until now been prepared to looking 

at making some of those exemptions. 

 

(1645) 

 

I'll give you the example of the cross-border shopping 

situation.  There is no reason in the world, even without 

harmonization, why the federal government could not collect 

the provincial sales tax along with the GST (goods and services 

tax) at the border.  And we've discussed this with them.  But 

they continue to say, either you harmonize totally or we don't 

collect anything.  I think that's not really quite responsible on 

their part. So there are some other options being explored now 

with the provinces and the federal government which at least 

would say the federal government ought to collect those sales 

taxes at the border which are common to all of the provinces, 

except of course Alberta which does not have a sales tax. 

 

So there is these kind of complicating factors involvement with 

the federal government that need to be addressed.  We're 

addressing some of them, and we'll continue to do that.  But as 

long as the federal government continues to say no along the 

line, there's not much we can do. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I do hope that what 

really is going to transpire is some examination of different 

forms of taxation, different means by which you can work 

things out with the federal government, because I just don't 

think that what's happening is good enough.  You are the 

individual with the government resources to have people with 

expertise come in to this province, if they aren't already here, to 

help us devise a taxation system that is going to be far more 

fair and just than what the people of this province have had to 

put up with for so long. 

 

I'd like to go on to clause 4 if I may and to give some insight to 

you on the actual affects that removing the sales tax exemption 

from cigarettes is having on certain retailers.  And I don't have 

to repeat, I'm sure, that as a non-smoker and a non-drinker I 

really couldn't care less about whether or not people have an 

opportunity to smoke cigarettes.  But there are some people 

who do smoke cigarettes so I'm going to say this on their 

behalf. 

 

In my constituency there are businesses which have a serious 

impact on the consumer gasoline prices in our city.  And I 

believe that they're largely responsible for keeping some of the 

multinationals in line price-wise.  One of the main sources of 

profit for these outlets, and they're small outlets, is the sale of 

cigarettes.  In fact one operator told me that he sells over a 

million packages of cigarettes per year and that those sales are 

enough to 



July 2, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

allow him to pay his overhead, employ people, so that his gas 

profits are actually his.  And by keeping gas prices low, he 

keeps his volume of gas and cigarette sales up. 

 

Now the only problem with this is when a government tampers 

with the delicate retail balance that he has built. The recent 

hike in price on cigarettes and gas has cost him dearly, so 

dearly in fact that as of just recently he is likely to be leaving 

this province. 

 

The recent hike in price on cigarettes . . . or pardon me, his 

margins are based on volume and this tax is already having 

very negative effects.  He tells me that dozens of his customers 

are opting to either quit or to buy cigarettes in the United 

States. 

 

Now I received information as well from the spouse of a 

customs officer the other day that roads are actually being 

created in fields by semi-trailer trucks crossing the border to 

avoid customs, and that these vehicles contain contraband in 

cigarettes and liquor.  Every carton of cigarettes that gets 

through untaxed is an $10 loss to our province in sales and in 

cigarette tax. 

 

I would like to know, sir, the calculations that you did to 

determine the impact of this tax on overall sales of cigarettes in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, there are two ways 

in which this impacts on the revenues, and the analysis that we 

have considers both of those.  Every year there has been a 

decline in consumption of tobacco.  That's good.  We support 

that.  And we expect that with this change in the tax system 

there may be even more decline in the use of tobacco and 

tobacco products. 

 

I'm sure the member opposite will not stand up and say we 

should be encouraging people to use tobacco and tobacco 

products.  It is well known that it is a major cause of cancer in 

our society.  It is well known that it is a major cause of illness 

of various kinds which increases the cost of our health care 

system because of the treatment that's required.  That has been 

factored in the Estimates on the amount of the decline. 

 

There's also the question of the cross-border shopping.  That's 

probably costing the province about three and a half million 

dollars a year because of the cross-border situation.  Now there 

is now a commitment by the federal government, and 

negotiations are taking place on its implementation, where the 

sales tax on tobacco and alcohol will be collected at the 

provincial border.  That will address to some degree -- I hope 

significantly -- the problem of the cross-border situation with 

the United States. 

 

So if the member, finally, has information or if some of the 

constituents she speak of have information about the 

semi-trucks that are beating the paths across the border please 

be so good as to let us know and we will deal with it because 

that is illegal.  And if the member knows of an illegal practice 

that is taking place, I would suggest it's a member's 

responsibility to report that.  And the sooner we get on with it, 

the better. 
 

That won't prevent those who sneak across the border. 

That's always been the case, and it will continue to be the case.  

But where we can stop this practice, this illegal practice from 

taking place, which jeopardizes legitimate businesses in the 

province of Saskatchewan, we'd be more than happy to take the 

action required. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I suggest that 

. . . I'm sure that not only has your department but other 

departments have heard of this long before I've raised it here 

today.  This is not anything that should come as a great surprise 

to you, I'm sure. 

 

You've actually indicated that you did do an analysis.  And I'm 

very pleased to hear that.  And I hope that what you would be 

willing to do is to table those analyses for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'll undertake to provide the 

historical experiences on which we base our assumptions.  

Sure, that's no problem -- don't have it here.  We're going to 

have to put it together.  But I have no problem making that 

available to the member, and we will see that it's done. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, were there 

analyses done to determine the impact that the combined tax 

rate would have on the tourism industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The E&H tax was designed to fund the 

programs of health care and education.  What proportion of the 

E&H tax is presently dedicated to health care and education 

budgets?  I'd like the actual dollar amount. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As is the case with all the tax 

measures, the money that is collected or the revenues that are 

collected go to the Consolidated Fund.  There is no designated 

tax.  It's a name that's there which originally was established 

when the tax was first implemented in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The Gass Commission report makes it very 

clear. 

 

And that's why we have legislation in this session which will be 

introduced -- in fact I think I've given notice -- to do away with 

the Heritage Fund.  The Gass Commission indicated, stop, the 

government should look at all special funds that the 

government has had in place because it makes it difficult for 

accountability purposes to determine where money is coming 

in, where it is being spent.  And therefore the Gass 

Commission recommended we change that. 

 

So we're not looking at creating special funds.  There's no 

dedicated of any particular tax for any particular project.  It 

goes into the Consolidated Fund where all of the revenues 

come in.  And then, depending on the amount of money that's 

available in the total revenues of the province, the government 

then decides how much is available to be spent on health, on 

education, on policing, on grants to municipalities, and so on. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 

why then did you call this the deficit tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the income tax 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 1992 

changes were the deficit surtax.  This is not a deficit tax as 

such.  But all of the tax measures which we have brought in the 

budget obviously are dealing with a deficit.  If we didn't have 

the $300 million of revenues that are coming out of the tax 

measures in this budget, our deficit would be $817 million 

rather than $517 million.  To that extent these are part of 

measures to reduce the size of the deficit. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you 

assist the people of the province if there are . . . anyone 

happens to be listening today.  Is there specific legislation that 

tells us where all of these taxes are going?  Is there actually 

going to be legislation like a deficit reduction Act?  I'm just 

wondering if . . . I mean I think that as a taxpayer in this 

province I would feel so much more comfortable if rather than 

just this pool called the Consolidated Fund into which all of 

these monies are going, that there could be some direct 

correlation between dollars put in and dollars put out in a much 

more specific way, in a concise way so that people could 

understand it better. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is that.  There is that now.  

There is the Consolidated Fund.  The Consolidated Fund 

clearly shows all of the revenues that come in.  Tax measure by 

tax measure, licences and fees, and federal government 

contributions -- all of that is clearly identified.  And all of the 

monies out of that that are spent is also clearly identified in the 

budget as the proposal for expenditures and then verified in the 

Public Accounts after the expenditures, which receives the 

scrutiny of the Provincial Auditor who shows exactly to the last 

cent where the money has been spent. 

 

The Consolidated Fund already provides that mechanism and 

makes it very clear.  And we've taken steps in this budget and 

the legislative provision we're bringing in to make sure that it is 

even more clear. 

 

The Chair: -- It being near 5 o'clock, is it agreed that the 

committee rise and report progress? 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Adoption Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 

 

 


