




















































Hansard: July 31, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1895 

 July 31, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

Presenting Petitions 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to present this 

petition on behalf of several residents in and outside Regina: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That back pain and highly prevalent neuro-musculo-skeletal 

disorders are extremely costly to the Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technoloy treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the names on this petition include people like Donald 

Towne from Cardinal Crescent in Regina; Phyllis Benner from 

Southey, Saskatchewan; Mr. Cline from Pasqua Street in 

Regina; Chris Curry from Cherry Bay in Regina; Mrs. Larter 

from Probe Street in Regina; Ella Ulrich from Krauss Street in 

Regina; a gentleman from box 97, Edenwold, Saskatchewan; 

Miss Bourassa from 

Athol Street in Regina; Mr. Adams from Clermont street; and 

the list goes on and on, in and outside of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I submit these names. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions this morning from people that take issue with the way 

that the government has been handling the chiropractic care 

process, and I'll only read the last paragraph, Mr. Speaker, in 

deference to time: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have people on these petitions from Weyburn, 

Regina, Oungre, Creelman, Beaubier, Bengough, Yellow 

Grass, Regina, people from all over the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who take issue with this. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions from people this morning, people that are not happy 

with the government from how they're treating the people that 

use chiropractors' services.  As my colleagues have read parts 

-- the member from Estevan read the whole petition, and the 

member from Thunder Creek read part of it -- I won't add 

anything to it, Mr. Speaker.  I'll just go through some of the 

towns that these are coming from. 

 

These towns that representing in this petition, Mr. Speaker, 

well the first . . . are Saskatoon, and then at Bradwell, Allan, 

and there's Outlook.  These are some from my own 

constituency, Mr. Speaker: from Warman, Saskatchewan.  

There's some down from the southern part of the province.  

These are from all over the province, Mr. Speaker: Weyburn, 

Fillmore, Tribune, Radville, Halbrite, Ogema, Pangman, 

Francis.  And of course, Mr. Speaker, there's always some from 

Regina, from Churchill Downs.  It's my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, 

to . . . 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to present 

petitions as well, signed by people across this province.  The 

petitions I have in my hand not only include names from 

Regina, but from Saskatoon and Prince Albert.  And the people 

here are as well speaking out against the action by the 

government regarding chiropractic services.  And their prayer 

is: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

withhold consent from any government proposal to 

discriminate against chiropractic patients by charging them 

fees not assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, we've had signatures here 

from Holbein, Big River, Duck Lake, Prince Albert, Saskatoon 

and a number from Regina, and in fact many from Regina and 

the Saskatoon area.  I so submit. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to present some petitions 

from my constituency, and I believe I'll read one paragraph that 

says this: 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

And I have people here from Morse, Swift Current, Kyle, 

Wapella, Webb, and also from Prince Albert, Big River, 

Weirdale and other places from across the province.  And I 

submit these to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have some 

petitions dealing with chiropractic care in the province: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

They are from primarily the Kyle area in the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency and the second one is . . . most of the signatures 

are in the Saskatoon-Riversdale constituency, Mr. Speaker.  I 

present these now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 

like to present some petitions to the Assembly concerning the 

same matter of chiropractic care.  And I believe the important 

part of the petition, Mr. Speaker, other than the names on it -- 

which are the most important -- but it's that the government not 

be allowed: 

 

 . . . to eliminate full coverage and universal access to 

chiropractic treatment and that your Honourable Assembly 

withhold consent from any government proposal to 

discriminate against chiropractic patients by charging them 

fees not assessed for any other medical treatments. 

 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are mainly from 

Saskatoon and one from Bradwell, Saskatchewan.  In fact one 

lady on here is a Mitchell.  I don't know whether or not she's 

related to the Minister of Justice or . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member knows full well he 

does not comment on petitions.  Just give the location where 

the people are from if you wish, and submit your petition. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The people on 

this petition are mainly from Saskatoon and a good number of 

them from the riding of the Premier, Riversdale, Mr. Speaker.  

I now present this petition. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The petitions that 

have been presented by my colleagues also reflect the direction 

of the petitions that I wish to present to the Assembly for 

consideration today.  I think the last paragraph though has to be 

reiterated for the consideration of those that are going to make 

these decisions.  And it simply says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to reverse 

its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal access to 

chiropractic . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I will remind members that 

when petitions are being presented, they are not to interfere 

with those petitions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I will simply pick up in the middle of the 

paragraph so as to finish it:  And: 

 

 . . . that your Honourable Assembly withold consent from 

any government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

I note with concern, Mr. Speaker, that these petitions are 

coming from all over our province, and I'll just list the towns 

that are on this one.  They start out with Ponteix, Gull Lake, 

Swift Current, Vanguard, Hodgeville, Climax, Cadillac, 

Beechy, Wymark, Rush Lake, Morse, and Cabri. 

 

All of the people of south-west Saskatchewan seem to be very 

concerned about this issue, Mr. Speaker, and I now present this 

petition. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the livestock cash advance program; 

 

 of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the FeedGAP program; 

 

 and of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal 

access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Foreclosures in Drought Regions 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday I asked 

a question to the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of 

Rural Development attempted to try to answer, and he didn't.  

So I am going to ask the question today, Mr. Speaker.  It will 

be to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

As the minister knows, this is getting down to the last days 

where the heavy-handed government is trying to bring the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) Bill to a close here.  And 

my question will be on this line.  And he knows, Mr. Speaker, 

that through the province we have drought areas and we have a 

disaster with farm foreclosures all over the province. 

 

Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House 

how many foreclosures are in place and how many are 

currently being put in place, and specifically the Agricultural 

Credit Corporation?  And please try to also give us the numbers 

that are in the drought areas of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 

is aware that I don't carry that information about in my head.  I 

can certainly find it out.  But I think it's important to recognize 

as well that the income crisis of which the member opposite 

speaks is one that is based in fact on the farm program 

initiatives of the government previous and the federal 

government in Ottawa. 

 

And I think it is exactly for those reasons that we have been 

pursuing with the federal government alternatives for support 

to farmers that is clearly inadequate, from the results that you 

yourself are referring to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

should be ashamed of himself because he should carry those 

figures in his head at all times if he really cared about farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this 1992 GRIP program is an absolute disaster.  

When crop insurance came out in 1962, crop insurance was to 

cover farmers with a low cash flow and for drought areas.  

Now what's happening, the 1992 GRIP is for the farmers that 

have good crops.  And there's nothing in place for additional 

revenue here for the people that have poor crops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if he's even aware that there's thousands 

of farmers that have foreclosure notice hanging over their 

heads and the government is just . . . probably just waiting for 

this here session to conclude before it lowers . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Can the member put his question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I definitely have a question.  Will the 

minister give the House the figures, tell us how many 

farmers are in the process, and when do you plan to kick them 

off the land? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It's going to be a very difficult 

question period if this continues -- on both sides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

been referring to the income crisis for Saskatchewan farmers.  

There is no one that knows that better than I and the member 

opposite ought to be aware of it, from his time in government 

and in opposition. 

 

The fact is that farmers in Saskatchewan have an income 

shortfall going back to 1990 and 1991 in excess of $900 

million that has nothing to do with any current programming 

initiatives, has everything to do with the time that the members 

opposite were in government. 

 

The member opposite knows as well that we began 

immediately from the position where you had been ignoring, 

where the members opposite had been ignoring, the debt crisis 

in Saskatchewan, to begin co-operative discussions with the 

financial institutions through which a voluntary . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  If the opposition wish to have 

the question period taken up by the Speaker interrupting, that's 

fine with me.  But I've just asked members not to interrupt and 

I heard two members in the opposition just constantly 

interrupting the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should 

have been aware that a co-operative discussion was engaged in 

through which the financial institutions provided a breathing 

space so a good discussion could take place.  A very good, 

balanced program was the recommendation of that committee.  

We've prepared the legislation for that.  And as soon as the 

members opposite stop their stalling of processes, that 

legislation can proceed so farmers can in fact be protected by 

the program they themselves have designed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I've asked the Minister of 

Agriculture two questions, and he's never even come remotely 

close to answering the question.  How many farmers are you 

kicking off the land, and how many foreclosures in the drought 

areas of this province?  How many? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is fully 

aware that the provisions of the voluntary agreement and of the 

legislation that has been introduced in first reading in the 

House is legislation which in fact prevents the removal of 

farmers from their land and provides for them stability of 

tenure on their land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think if the 

Minister of Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan hasn't 

got a handle on the drought areas of this province and cannot 

tell us how many farmers are being foreclosed 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

upon in that area . . . should not be the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

My question to you again: how many farmers are being 

foreclosed upon in the drought areas of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

delights in using oblique references to things I believe he does 

not understand.  The member opposite is aware that in the legal 

process that they put in place and that they did not do anything 

about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How many?  How many notices? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There is provision for notices to be sent 

out as the Leader of the Opposition interjects when he should 

ought to be listening.  But the members opposite know that it is 

in fact the will to prevent the final action on those notices of 

foreclosure that cause us to provide the legislation through the 

joint committee that prevents farmers from being removed 

from the land -- legislation, I might remind you, that you didn't 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, as you can see the minister is 

not answering my questions.  How many farmers have had 

foreclosure notice in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

specifically in the drought areas? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote -- I've asked twice now -- not to 

interrupt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the member 

opposite has now refined his question, upon instruction from 

the member opposite.  Now he's talking about foreclosure 

notices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know that number either exactly, how 

many foreclosure notices there are; it's a number that is readily 

available and I can give to you.  You could phone my 

department probably and get it. 

 

But the fact is, that what is significant is what have we done to 

maintain the stability of tenure for farmers.  Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite are aware that they did not have the courage 

to proceed with a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I think this is the third time 

I've asked the Leader of the Opposition not to interrupt.  And I 

want to say to the Leader of the Opposition, the last time I'm 

warning you, not again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

aware that they did not have the courage to proceed with 

actions; that they did not have the will to bring together the 

co-operative spirit of the farmers and the financial institutions 

who recognize there's a crisis out there; instead of just playing 

with words in the legislature. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite now pretend to be 

interested in the well-being of farmers while they hold up the 

legislation that is required to provide stability for our farmers 

in Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

knows right well that the drought is going to add maybe 

thousands more of foreclosure notices to the farmers in this 

province.  I've asked question after question and he's not really 

answering my question.  But the last time he said that we could 

get it in a moment's notice.  And I ask him finally, on this 

particular part of my questioning, will he commit that he will 

not come into this House again without always having those 

figures in his head and at his fingertips? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

referred to the drought situation in Saskatchewan.  Clearly that 

has been a concern in some areas.  In some areas it's been 

alleviated by rain, continues to be a concern in some corners.  

There are other crop risks that are there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working with the federal government to 

look for avenues for address of that.  And the member opposite 

is aware, as I have repeated twice now, that the current income 

crisis has everything to do with the design of farm support and 

protective legislation by your government.  We are attempting 

to implement new legislation, and the members opposite need 

to be co-operative with us in putting that legislation forward to 

in fact provide the protection that the members opposite are 

suggesting we need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, you can see that the minister 

just made a political speech and never even come close to 

answering me. Will he commit to bring those figures into this 

House and have them in his head at all times? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move on to a new question.  Mr. 

Minister, the farmers who are about to be kicked off their land 

by your government at least deserve to know whether they 

might have been able to survive if the federal government's 

offer had been accepted by the province.  You have broken 

your contract with them already in crop insurance, so surely 

they deserve at least this consideration. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this: will the 

minister at least agree, will you at least agree to put all 

foreclosures on hold indefinitely until there's a final package 

worked out. 

 

You yourself, Mr. Minister, said that you're working with the 

federal government.  The door is open.  So will you now put 

foreclosures on hold indefinitely until this package is worked 

out?  Farmers need this breathing room before many more of 

them lose their land.  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks a 

question, gets the answer, and somehow, whether I didn't 

communicate it clearly or whether he didn't listen 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

clearly, the fact is the member opposite is aware that the 

financial crisis that farmers are presently engaged in is a result 

of the programs put in place by the previous government.  The 

results of the stretched-out payments on GRIP result in the fact 

that payments for programs farmers paid for a year ago have 

not yet been received, and so they are short of cash; that the 

third line of defence, negotiated theoretically by your members 

with the federal government, was not caused to be fulfilled, and 

we are short $900-and-some million in income from 1990 and 

1991. 

 

That's the cause of the farm income crisis in Saskatchewan.  

And the member opposite knows it.  And he talks . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  

There's no sense going back when he hasn't answered the 

questions.  He just makes political speeches.  So I might as 

well just keep moving on and hoping that he'll answer one of 

my questions. 

 

Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  Your government 

has been told by the president of SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) that the province should 

co-operate with the federal government and get on with 

providing farmers, particularly in the drought area, with some 

money.  Thousands of farmers' very existence could depend on 

this assistance, yet this government refuses to help them.  

You're refusing to help them. 

 

This is serious, Mr. Minister.  Will you get serious about my 

question to you?  What are you going to say to the thousands of 

farmers that you are going to foreclose on?  What are you 

going to say to them?  Are you going to tell them it was their 

own fault, or are you going to tell them that it was their own 

fault, or are you going to tell them they just weren't worth 

trying to save?  All you have to do is talk to the federal 

government. 

 

Will you, Mr. Speaker, promise this Assembly that you'll talk 

to the federal government immediately about accepting that 

offer and working out the '92 GRIP along with this year's 

specific help?  Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, farmers in Saskatchewan, as 

a result of your policies, have a debt load in excess of $5 

billion -- $5 billion that we are attempting to address through a 

farm debt policy, through stability of access to their land, 

through legislation that the members opposite will now not 

allow to proceed. 

 

The Farm Credit Corporation, directed by your friends in 

Ottawa, carries about 55 per cent of that debt load and are 

responsible for a significant number of threatened foreclosures 

the member opposite indicates.  We have worked out a 

program co-operatively for the maintenance of tenure by 

farmers on their land. 

 

And we intend to carry through with it because we've had 

the co-operative discussion with the financial institutions of the 

farmers that are required, and they've committed themselves to 

a report that's resulted in legislation.  And the member opposite 

ought to be co-operative with us in making sure the federal 

government co-operates fully with that program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to 

the minister: rural members must be telling the Minister of 

Agriculture to work with the federal government.  They must 

be telling you this.  All people are telling you this, and you're 

saying you're doing it. 

 

Farmers don't want fighting; they want help.  And they don't 

seem to understand that.  In fact, Mr. Minister, you won't even 

write back to the chamber of commerce, like the Swift Current 

chamber when they sincerely asked you for information about 

GRIP. 

 

My question:  Mr. Speaker, some ministers over here must 

have a problem.  The Minister of Agriculture must have a 

problem.  Are you afraid that you actually might save some 

farmers?  Is that what you're afraid of?  Or do you not care?  

Can you tell us, do you want to save farmers or don't you, Mr. 

Minister?  Do you want to save them or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite says, 

farmers don't want to fight.  They want co-operation.  And I 

invite the members opposite to change their tune on support for 

the third line of defence initiatives we've called for.  I call on 

the members opposite to support us in working with the federal 

government on implementing the debt legislation, and I look 

forward to the co-operative initiatives the member opposite is 

indicating. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite knows 

quite well the third line of defence, he threw it away when he 

threw the GRIP away.  What you've been offered now, third 

line of defence goes evenly to farmers all over the province. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd just like to ask the member 

from Humboldt not to intervene. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish this minister would get 

a grip on things.  What are you telling us now?  That thousands 

of farmers and their families don't count?  Because that's what 

you're telling us.  You're telling them that they will be 

sacrificed so you can have a political fight with Ottawa.  That's 

actually what you're doing, is having a political fight with 

Ottawa. 

 

My question now, Mr. Speaker, will be to the Deputy Premier.  

Does the Deputy Premier, who once made . . . sorry, Mr. 

Speaker.  Does the Deputy Premier support his minister's 

treatment of thousands of farmers?  Do you, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, also believe these farmers can be sacrificed over a 

battle with your government and Ottawa?  Do you believe that . 

. . 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no one in 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

Saskatchewan who wants a political fight less than I do here.  

The member opposite is aware that we followed the procedures 

of the Act laid out in past last year by your government in 

reviewing the program.  The member opposite is aware that 

those . . . that we discussed those measures with the federal 

government and the games then started to be played. 

 

The member opposite is aware that the farmers . . . that we 

have implemented the program around the noise you've 

created.  And the member opposite is aware that the provisions 

of the new program are the correct ones, that we are sincere 

about support of farmers because we have redesigned our farm 

debt policy, which was inadequate in your government, and 

we've redesigned it co-operatively. 

 

We've put in place a stress line so farmers who are 

experiencing these serious income shortfalls as a result of your 

policies have somebody to talk to when they're in crisis, and we 

continue . . . we offer to continue to work with the farmers and 

invite you to join us in that effort. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, my last question, and it's to the 

Deputy Premier and I'd ask him to please answer the question.  

Do you support your minister and your ministers in the 

treatment of thousands of farmers?  Do you, Mr. Premier, 

believe that these farmers can be sacrificed as you do battle in 

Ottawa? 

 

And if you cannot answer this question, please don't let the 

minister because I don't want to hear from him no more.  Either 

you or not from him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf . . . Mr. Speaker, 

on behalf of the Deputy Premier, I want to say that I believe he 

does support the measures.  This government is a government 

that operates through legitimate processes, a claim that the 

previous government could not claim to make considering the 

disruptive kind of distracted way in which things were done; 

where announcements were made without consideration by 

anyone, on the spur of the moment when the spirit struck, that 

resulted in contracts and obligations that have destroyed the 

economic credibility of the province and destroyed the 

credibility, not only with financial institutions across the world 

but with your own partners in Ottawa. 

 

We do do things by legitimate process and joint consensus and 

full discussion, and there is agreement by all of us about the 

things we do. 

 

Provincial Funding for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  Last night when we were talking with 

the Minister of Finance, he confirmed that you have cut your 

agricultural budget from about $315 million down to about 

$265 million, or a 45 to $50 million cut. 

 

On top of that we see the fact that you've cut the Crop 

Insurance budget down from 198 million down to 181 

million.  So you have been saying because of the deficit, you 

are cutting your expenditures in Agriculture for farmers and 

cutting the expenditures in Crop Insurance. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, my question is this.  You write farmers, in 

the light of those cuts in your budgets, and you say this: the 

province in spite of it's limited financial capacity, has taken on 

a dramatically increased role in providing income support to 

farmers.  That's not true, Mr. Minister.  That's not true.  Your 

own . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  This is the second 

warning to the member from Humboldt.  It's a second warning.  

Leader of the Opposition . . . I wish the Leader of the 

Opposition would put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I ask the minister, in light of the fact that your 

colleague, the Minister of Finance, admits that he's cut the 

agricultural budget by 45 to $50 million and admits the Crop 

Insurance budget is down, and obviously . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the Leader of the 

Opposition to put his question.  You've had over a minute.  I 

ask the leader to put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Is your statement that you're providing 

increased financial assistance to farmers not absolutely false in 

the light of the evidence presented by the Minister of Finance 

yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the opening statement of the 

member opposite is inaccurate.  It's absolutely not true.  With 

respect to the provisions of our budget this year, the member 

opposite is aware that many adjustments had to be made in the 

provincial budget -- not because we enjoy the struggles of 

budget reductions, but because in order to provide stability and 

the ability to provide stability in the future, we have to have a 

provincial budget and a provincial budgeting process that can 

be sustained. 

 

The member opposite is aware that we are at the edge of a debt 

crisis in Saskatchewan that puts at risk all of our programs.  

What is true, Mr. Speaker, is that the budget of Saskatchewan 

Agriculture continues to put forward 80 per cent of its dollars 

for farm support measures, and we need to maintain the 

stability of the province so that it can continue to provide that 

support for farmers and people in all other areas of the province 

through other programs.  And there is no capacity to be 

spending money in a way that puts the province at risk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Notice of Closure Motion 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Last night your House Leader took 

an unprecedented action and gave notice of closure on an issue 

that had been debated for less than one day.  Do you have 

knowledge of the shortest length of debates before using 

closure in the entire Commonwealth? 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the members opposite and to the public and to the press that 

we've now had the House held up on the GRIP issue for 51 

calendar days.  It's unprecedented in the Assembly.  I want to 

say as well that the budget for the province of Saskatchewan . . 

. There hasn't been a budget for close to two years.  The fact 

that the former premier ran away from the House months 

before the election and didn't pass his budget. 

 

They're now holding up the passage of this budget to where we 

haven't touched 25 Estimates at least, haven't even touched 

them, and we're now 55 days into the session. 

 

And what I'm saying to the members opposite, they have the 

rules of the Assembly that they can use to delay.  We have 

rules that we can use in order to pass budgets.  We haven't had 

a budget for two years.  And the people are telling us it's high 

time to get on with the business of the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I've listened to the answer presented 

by the House Leader.  And certainly as I indicated, and my 

question was:  has the government or the Premier ever been 

aware of closure being used anywhere in the Commonwealth 

on such short notice, on such short debate.  And then the House 

Leader would indicate that we've had long-ranging debate and 

we have a number of issues to cover.  And I would suggest to 

the House that many items of business in this Assembly have 

not been brought forward for us to discuss.  It's been very 

difficult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unprecedented to have a closure motion 

passed at this time and allow this House to operate.  And we 

find it very difficult for this House to work.  I therefore move 

the House adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:39 a.m. until 10:49 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

-- 6 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Serby 

Shillington Scott 

Koskie McPherson 

Goulet Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Stanger 

 

Penner Harper 

Upshall Keeping 

Lyons Kluz 

Pringle Renaud 

-- 28 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Farewell to Dale Eisler 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the indulgence of this Assembly to discuss 

briefly a matter which is of little or no consequence to the 

people of Saskatchewan but something which should be said 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on August 31, 1908, the Montreal firm of Peter 

Lyall and Sons began construction of this Legislative Building.  

The next day, Dale Eisler was on the scene, writing a column 

about the NDP (New Democratic Party) and wealth creation.  

And now, 84 years later, this building still stands as beautiful 

as it ever was.  Mr. Eisler, however, turns out to be less solidly 

rooted. 

 

This will be the last day for at least a year that this Assembly 

will be graced with Mr. Eisler's presence, as he heads to the 

University of Toronto to study under a Southam's fellowship.  

Dale will be studying political economics at the University of 

Toronto.  I firmly believe that Dale can fill all his gaps on 

understanding political economy in a one-year period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course I also believe we're 

getting the province's debt under control.  For many years -- 

some would say too many years -- an Eisler column has been a 

mainstay of the Saskatchewan political scene.  There are also 

some of us, Mr. Speaker, who can remember when an Eisler 

column could be found on the sports page.  It wasn't any more 

lucid, but it was certainly more relevant. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But Dale decided to leave the world 

of sports reporting for political reporting.  When you consider 

that the sports page in the jargon of journalists is called the toy 

department, and the Legislative Assembly is known as the 

play-pen, it's easy to see Mr. Eisler is regressing -- which 

would explain why anyone would choose to leave Regina for 

Toronto. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the years to come history will judge the 

successes and the failures of the current government.  But one 

accomplishment which nobody will be able to take from us is 

that we are the ones who finally drove Dale Eisler out. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I assure you that this 

government will not be reversing that action.  We must 

remember however that Dale has left this province a 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

lasting legacy.  Anyone who has read his columns over the past 

15 or 30 years will know that we have absolute proof of the old 

saying that there is nothing new under the sun. 

 

When Dale leaves here, he will be taking not only our best 

wishes but also the best income of any journalist this province 

has ever seen.  And as a Minister of Finance, I will miss that 

income, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to close on a very serious note, and 

that is by wishing Dale and his wife all the best in their sojourn 

in Toronto and by wishing him success in his academic 

pursuits. 

 

I would have had this statement embossed, Mr. Speaker, but 

due to fiscal restraints I thought that that would be imprudent.  

So I will have to present this, if a page will come and do so, to 

Mr. Eisler, as it is.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

the Minister of Finance in wishing Dale Eisler the very best.  

Obviously one of Dale's last columns in the province of 

Saskatchewan had as the headline, "Tory Opposition Doing 

Well."  And apparently Mr. Eisler has finally come of age after 

his years and years of political writing. 

 

Dale has been not only a provincial journalist but a national 

journalist, and has written in columns across the country, for 

Maclean's and for other magazines.  And he has a rural 

editorial as well as urban, and people really enjoy the fact that 

he has expressed, with his considerable experience, something 

about Saskatchewan life -- politics in Saskatchewan.  And 

politics in our province is the blood sport.  And moving from 

sports to politics had sort of a connection for Dale and I think 

he found it extremely interesting. 

 

And as a result of his reward and . . . his scholarship to study 

political economy and to get into economics, and from my own 

background and some of the debates that we've been in, I think 

that he'll find it very interesting to study a little bit of 

economics and political economy. 

 

I know that he has in this province ripped all political parties, 

and letters to the editors have all ripped Mr. Eisler.  And I think 

that's a sign of somebody who has looked in a fair fashion at 

political life in the province and given beefs and bouquets 

when in fact they were deserved. 

 

Dale will be going to the University of Toronto.  We do 

appreciate the fact that he has added significantly to the 

assessment of political life in the province of Saskatchewan.  

We wish he and his wife and family the very best, and 

hopefully they'll return to the province of Saskatchewan.  Good 

luck! 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 10:59 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Adoption Act 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Contributory Negligence 

Act 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Printer Act 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers Act, 

1987 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Senior Citizens' Heritage 

Program Act 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Products 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Act and to 

enact a consequential amendment related to the 

enactment of this Act 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

Ukrainian Catholic Parishes within 

Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition 

Association, Limited 

Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Credit Society Limited and 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services 

Limited 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Financial Administration 

Act 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act and 

to make consequential amendments to certain 

other Acts resulting from the enactment of this 

Act 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 

Act 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 

 

Her Honour: -- In her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:03 a.m. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With leave of the 

Assembly, I'd like to have leave pertaining to a private 

members' Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on the issue, if we 

could have a brief outline of what the Bill is?  We just don't 

know what we're giving leave to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite.  This is a private members' Bill that came in from the 

bible school at Caronport asking for a name change.  The town 

of Briercrest opposed this here name change because it had the 

name Briercrest in the name of the Caronport Bible School and 

also is called Briercrest School at Briercrest. 

 

So with discussions with the member from Thunder Creek and 

myself, we've been able to get them to drop this Bill.  So it's 

just to get the Bill dropped.  I want to say a couple of things 

about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- For the record, it's to delete a Bill, 

not to introduce one.  It's not clear, but my understanding is to 

delete a Bill. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Moved by myself and seconded by the 

member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That the order for the referral of Bill 04, an Act to amend an 

Act to incorporate the Briercrest Bible College to the 

Standing Committee of Private Members' Bills be discharged 

and the Bill withdrawn. 

 

And with your permission I'd just like to give an explanation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to put it on the record how 

co-operation can work.  We had a little dispute between the 

Caronport Bible College and the town of Briercrest, where a 

request came to the member from Thunder Creek that 

Briercrest town did not want their name, Briercrest, because it 

was a mix up in the two schools.  There would be people going 

to Caronport thinking they were going to Briercrest School and 

vice versa going to the town of Briercrest. 

 

And so this was getting to be just a little dissension, and when 

it came to the member of Thunder Creek and myself -- because 

I'm a member of the board from Caronport Bible School -- we 

discussed it with the people from Briercrest.  I had many letters 

from Briercrest.  I discussed it with a Mr. John Barkman; he's 

the president of Caronport Bible School, and he said he didn't 

want any problems, any bad feelings, so he would for this time 

have the Bill deleted . . . or pulled from the records. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

question put by members, question 48, I'm pleased to provide 

the answer to the Assembly at this time. 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Vote to be Taken on First Reading of Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that at the 

conclusion of my remarks I intend to make a motion: 

 

 That, immediately following the adoption of this motion, the 

Assembly shall proceed with the vote on first reading of a 

Bill respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income 

Insurance Legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 1991 the members opposite, in 

anticipation of an election, introduced a carelessly designed, 

thrown-together farm support program which did not meet the 

needs of farmers and which the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

could not afford.  Farmers expressed their serious concerns 

with the program through large rallies across the province, 

ending with 7,000 people gathering in Regina. 

 

After the election we established the review process provided 

for in the Act which had been passed last year.  The committee, 

consisting of farmers and representing farmers through the 

organizations who approved their appointments, delivered their 

report within the time frame provided in the Act passed last 

year.  The program was announced and implemented and 

farmers have made their decisions on participation, and have 

based their farming decisions on the knowledge that the 

program would be implemented as described. 

 

We have attempted to introduce this Bill into the . . . we did 

attempt to introduce this Bill into the legislature on June 10.  

The members opposite, while crying for more consultation, 

have denied legitimate debate on the program for the last 51 

days on the pretence of caring for and about farmers.  They 

have been playing politics on behalf of themselves and their 

federal cohorts. 

 

The time for playing politics has ended.  It's time to get on with 

working with farmers and for farmers in adapting and 

strengthening this important industry to the meet the changing 

needs of the '90s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move, seconded by the member from 

Canora: 

 

 That immediately following the adoption of this motion, the 

Assembly shall proceed with the vote on first reading of a 

Bill respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income 

Insurance Legislation. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Today, Mr. Speaker, begins the debate on a 

very, very historical motion and Bill. 

 

It will be the first time, Mr. Speaker, that this Legislative 

Assembly will be asked to do something that will change 

evidence in a court of law before the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, this historical debate 

has some significance.  And I was going to make this 

observation about Dale Eisler's leaving, and it has some 

historical significance -- a competitive political 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

analyst in a journalistic fashion would leave on a day that this 

historical debate begins. 

 

And I want to point out there is significant difference between 

historical debates that have taken place in this Assembly on 

issues that related to philosophical differences between 

individuals, their philosophy in relation to politics, their 

philosophy in relation to economics, and their philosophy in 

relation to social justice and related items. 

 

This today, Mr. Speaker, is a historic event.  We will put into 

place in this Assembly an issue that I can't describe, in short a 

three-letter word, but it will make this Assembly do things in a 

legal fashion that I think are unethical, I think they're illegal, 

and I think they're immoral for the actions that are being taken 

by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And therefore on this debate I want to bring to the attention of 

this Assembly some of the items that need to be thought about 

in relation to the process and the agenda that this government 

has placed itself in. 

 

We have today just witnessed a time when Her Honour came in 

here and gave Royal Assent to, I would say, 15 to 25 Bills, 

indicating that this House has been working.  It's disagreed, but 

it's been working.  And, Mr. Speaker, that has been in spite of 

the insistence of the House Leader of the government to deal 

with issues that have upset us, that have been irregular to say 

the least. 

 

It has been upset in a very serious way by a whole lot of 

changes that have been made to rules in this Assembly.  And I 

want to point out to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that that is 

also unprecedented -- where this Assembly takes the 

opportunity with the massive majority on the part of the 

government to unilaterally change the rules, and I would say 

specifically to deal with an action that is not legal. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a challenge on democracy.  It's a 

challenge by this Assembly on democracy.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that as we go through this debate we will reiterate 

over and over the value that this Assembly is and the freedom 

to discuss being curtailed, whether it is directly in this 

Assembly or it is with our constituents in the constituencies 

that we serve. 

 

So I say to the members of the Assembly that this is a historical 

debate.  History is going to show that this Minister of 

Agriculture knowingly and deliberately made the decision to 

do what he is going to do in the introduction of this Bill.  And I 

say he's going to jeopardize his own conscience in relation to 

this by the action he's taking. 

 

There have been times when I have adamantly disagreed with 

the NDP party; there are times when I've agreed.  But at this 

point in time, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that I've ever 

disagreed with actions taken as much as I do today.  And the 

reason is because of this historical action taken by the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

What I cannot understand is how the Minister of Justice, who is 

sworn as well as the Minister of Agriculture to honour Her 

Majesty and uphold the law, will take away 

evidence in a court of law that if he as an individual would do 

that would have serious, serious implications in relation to the 

conduct that he would have.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the way 

the law works; however in this case, it is not the way it's going 

to be. 

 

(1115) 

 

The minister is going to deem to have done things that he never 

did.  The minister is going to deem actions that he never did.  

He is going to say that history will record a pattern of events 

that took place in a process of time from the 1st of January this 

year.  And systematically, day after day, history will show that 

certain events occurred. 

 

And this minister, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly is going to 

change all that, rearrange the days.  And I only know of one 

person in history that ever changed or stopped time, but this 

minister is going to rearrange time by 15 or 20 days.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're talking about in this kind of 

historical debate.  And, Mr. Speaker, I find this very, very 

disturbing. 

 

I came to this Assembly with a certain degree of awe and had a 

certain dignity to the individuals who represented the various 

parts of the province in this Assembly because they had been 

selected and chosen by the people from their constituencies.  

And what I have found here today, Mr. Speaker, is a slight . . . 

a very, very significant, pointed, deliberate change in that 

pattern. 

 

And I'm going to say to all the members of the Assembly that if 

you have the courage to vote yes on this subject all the way 

through the system, you are in fact accomplices to this change 

in history in providing legal documents to a court of law that 

are going to change the historical events that occurred in that 

period of time.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very serious.  In 

my mind it has significant impact, and I'm going to talk about 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This has a dynamic within this Assembly.  It has a dynamic 

outside of this Assembly, and it has a dynamic in the court of 

law.  It will make precedent to establish a law to change the 

order of events that occurred.  History will be rewritten to 

define for the Minister of Agriculture that certain things 

happened.  And in a court of law, Mr. Speaker, where facts are 

supposed to be facts and decisions are supposed to be based on 

fact, we will have those facts altered. 

 

The court of law is here and the Minister of Justice is in this 

Assembly to protect truth, to protect individuals, to protect the 

innocent.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, this court of law . . . or this 

court in this Assembly is going to tell the Minister of Justice 

and justice officials across the province and across Canada that 

they don't have to tell the truth.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's 

perjury -- that's perjury in the most serious sense of the word. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there would be ample evidence provided by this 

minister if he would have done it right.  He could have taken 

the opportunity to say, what are the time lines in all of this that 

I have to meet?  And yet he neglected to do it.  And now in 

order to correct that focus, we are finding out that he's going to 

change the historical events that occurred, and specifically the 

March 15 date line that he neglected. 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this is a historical debate.  We 

can talk about potash.  One way or another people can have 

differences of opinion.  We can talk about SaskEnergy and 

people can have differences of opinion, Mr. Speaker.  We can 

talk about health care issues; we can talk about senior citizens 

and have different points of view. 

 

But when we come down to this one, Mr. Speaker, this is 

historical because in this Assembly all of us are going to vote 

to change the order of events that occurred, and change it back 

so that history will say it didn't happen -- or it did happen. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I go through the details of the 

individuals who were on the committee that provided the 

introduction of the safety net program to the Minister of 

Agriculture, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of 

Agriculture would tell them that they would be aligned with 

not telling the truth to a court of law, whether the Minister of 

Agriculture would get them to agree to signing the changes to 

the GRIP Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's where we're at.  And that's what this 

discussion is about.  Would Barry Senft from the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, vice-president of the Sask Wheat Pool and the 

chairman of that committee say to this minister, you, sir, have 

my complete support in dealing with moving that historical . . . 

history in the making back to the 15th and rewriting that 

history? 

 

Would he say that?  Would he say to his deputy minister, who I 

know to be a very respectable person, his deputy minister, who 

I know to be a credible individual . . . he said in point 5 in a 

submission to the justice that he wrote: 

 

 I am aware and do verily believe, having been advised by the 

Hon. Mr. Wiens, that in addition, he intends to introduce 

legislative amendments in the current session of the 

legislature.  These amendments will include a provision in 

which notice of the '92 changes will be deemed to have been 

given to producers by March 15, 1992 as required in their 

individual contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be deemed to have been done.  I have a 

letter here sent out by the Minister of Agriculture.  And let's 

move this deeming a little further down the road.  And I would 

say that, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in Committee of Finance on 

interim supply we saw where the Department of Agriculture is 

being cut back $47 million.  Rural Development is being cut 

back, Crop Insurance is being cut back, Transportation is being 

pulled back. 

 

All of this, and then the minister, with his deeming action, can 

have the clear opportunity to present the evidence as facts for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan in a letter he sent 

to the farmers.  And, Mr. Speaker, he didn't tell the truth there 

either. 

 

And so he says to the province, the people of rural 

Saskatchewan: 

 

 The province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, has 

taken on a dramatically increased 

 role in providing income support to farmers. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is another one of his deeming actions.  He 

deems to have thought that he put more money in the budget to 

supply more benefits to farmers.  He deems to have his actions 

being supported by rural Saskatchewan.  He deems to have all 

of this action take place.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we 

have this Minister of Agriculture doing. 

 

It's a historical debate on that basis, Mr. Speaker, because we 

have had significant interference by this Assembly in the 

democratic role of procedure and involvement.  We have had 

unprecedented in this Assembly, interference in many respects 

in our capacity to have the public become aware of this onerous 

legislation.  And we feel that, Mr. Speaker, is also a part of this 

historical aspect of this Bill.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are very, 

very serious about why the minister would do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have Roy Piper from Elrose, vice-president of 

United Grain Growers.  Would he take the opportunity to stand 

behind this minister in a court of law, swear that the events that 

he's going to say in this Assembly are going to be deemed to 

have happened?  Would Mr. Roy Piper from Elrose do that?  

And I would suggest to this minister that that is an honourable 

man.  And he would not do that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this issue is all about.  Would an 

individual perjure himself to honour the Minister of 

Agriculture with his vote of approval?  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is what we're talking about in this historical debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Stabler from the University of 

Saskatchewan, would he stand in his place in a court of law 

when the judge says:  Mr. Stabler, are you prepared to swear, 

like the Minister of Agriculture did, on the basis of his hand on 

the Bible, and say to Her Honour and this Assembly that he 

would honour her and uphold the law?  And I would suggest to 

this Assembly, no he would not. 

 

But you're asking, Mr. Minister, every one of these people to 

perjure themselves as well as everyone in this Assembly to 

perjure themselves in relation to this Bill to deal with it and get 

it off the record.  And that is, Mr. Speaker, why this is a 

historical debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brett Meinert from Shaunavon stood in the 

Shaunavon Arena.  When the member from Canora stood up to 

say a few words, 1,200 people in that arena and Brett Meinert 

was choked up.  He said:  if anybody wants to talk to me about 

why the changes were made, you come and see me. 

 

When the member from Canora and the minister of Crop 

Insurance spoke, 400 of those people told everybody exactly 

what they thought -- they walked out.  They don't want to be a 

part of saying in a court of law: you have the authority to 

change the events that happen, that change the opportunity for 

justice and truth to prevail in the province of Saskatchewan in a 

court of law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Brett Meinert would have a whole lot of 

difficulty standing in a court of law and saying, when 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

the judge asks him after he's sworn on the Bible, saying: Mr. 

Meinert, have you on the basis of the sequence of events, are 

they as portrayed by the Minister of Agriculture in the province 

of Saskatchewan?  And I doubt whether he would say yes. 

 

He would not perjure himself or his reputation to do that.  But 

what you are doing, sir, is you're asking members of this 

Assembly to do exactly that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

the truth. 

 

And then I want to talk a little bit about Sinc Harrison.  I want 

to talk about him because he told you, sir, that he was not in 

favour of doing what you're doing.  He wrote a letter to you on 

February 10, I believe it was, and another one on the 16th or . . 

. in February anyway.  He told you that SARM, as outlined by 

the options that were presented in the GRIP review panel's 

recommendations, that they were not in favour.  They had five 

legitimate points that they were not going to be involved with, 

and they told you that.  You didn't acknowledge that in any 

way, shape, or form, Mr. Minister.  You didn't. 

 

In fact he stood in the Agridome and read that letter to you so 

that people would clearly understand that SARM and people in 

the rural municipalities -- representing rural municipalities -- 

would not stand in a court of law and say yes, Mr. Minister, the 

change of events that occurred were as you described them and 

not as they really happened.  And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Harrison 

would not do that. 

 

(1130) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They won't lie for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would like to ask the Leader 

of the Opposition to please withdraw those words of saying 

that they would not lie for him.  He knows that's 

unparliamentary, even from your chair.  You cannot do from 

your chair what you can't do when you speak.  So I ask the 

Leader of the Opposition to withdraw those words. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I withdraw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Harrison would not do that.  

Mr. Speaker, he could go to jail for perjury -- serious, serious 

criminal offence.  And we in this Assembly are going to be 

talking about that.  And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that no one, 

absolutely no one, will have the courage to stand up and defend 

that except with a little word -- yes -- when this minister has 

the Bill brought before this Assembly.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is exactly why this is a historical debate. 

 

Gordon Cresswell from Tisdale is now beginning to have 

second doubts about whether he should have supported it in the 

first place.  And you know why?  Because, Mr. Minister, all of 

the things that we have talked about in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when I went around this province and held 

meetings for close to 60 days with seven ministers of the 

government meeting 40 to 50,000 farmers, the incidence of this 

being said over and over 

again was that when drought occurs, this will be the first time 

-- the first time, Mr. Speaker -- that we will have 100 per cent 

coverage on our average production, which we have never ever 

had before.  And Mr. Cresswell today is beginning to find out 

what no rain can do in the Tisdale area of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I said at ministerial 

conferences across this country and what I said in this 

province, across this province, a little over a year ago. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that what you are asking 

individuals in this Assembly to do -- as you are going to ask 

Mr. Cresswell to do -- is perjure themselves when they go to 

that court of law and say did you recommend that the minister 

back date, change history, and deliver this mandate.  Would 

these people stand up and say, Mr. Minister, you're right?  Or 

would they say, Mr. Minister, you're wrong? 

 

And I believe, Mr. Minister, they would say unequivocally 

you're wrong.  I will not perjure myself as you are, sir, in 

delivering this Bill to this Assembly, breaking contracts to 

50,000 contract holders in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Leonard Kehrig from Bjorkdale, a very 

honourable person -- I know him personally -- wouldn't do this, 

wouldn't stand in a court of law and do that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I'm talking about, over 

and over again, reiterate that people in the province of 

Saskatchewan have been told that you have a contract, and 

therefore I can agree to that and I will hold myself to that. 

 

I want to bring up an important point, Mr. Speaker -- the 

contrast to this.  What would this minister have done if he 

would have believed the facts as presented by history were 

accurate and were in his best interests?  Would he have said to 

every one of the 50,000 contract holders in the province of 

Saskatchewan that you're wrong, if they would have broken the 

contract? 

 

Would he have taken them to court to get every nickel, every 

cent, out of every contract, out of every farmer?  Mr. Speaker, 

he would have had a legal right to do that.  But did he in this 

instance, Mr. Speaker, have that legal right to do this?  No, he 

did not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why the options that we're 

discussing here today are historical.  Because, Mr. Speaker, this 

member is doing something I believe that is absolutely against 

every action of a member of this Assembly, and the conduct 

that he is raising here today and what he's going to do is against 

every moral, legal, binding, ethical process that would enable 

him to deal with on a regular basis.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly why this is a historical debate. 

 

We don't have legal . . . lawyers on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, but they do on the other side.  And I would like to ask 

every one of them to seriously consider when they took their 

oath before the bar whether they would be prepared to perjure 

themselves in this Assembly as well as outside of this 

Assembly. 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

We cannot be held legally accountable for suit for what we say 

in this Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, when that minister steps 

out of this Assembly and says, I will say that history was not as 

I saw it happen, that I know what happened, and I will deem to 

have said what I didn't say, then this member and those 

members opposite will have to say in a court of law: that's what 

we did in the Assembly, therefore it is law, and that is right. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Pedersen from Cut Knife had other 

reasons why he disagreed with you, sir.  And you made some 

statements in your opening remarks, saying that '91 GRIP did 

not meet the needs of rural Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

the second statement you made was the province could not 

afford what '91 GRIP did. 

 

Now I want to ask you this question because it's a fundamental 

question to the GRIP and the philosophy of the '91 GRIP and 

'92 GRIP, the contrast.  You said it didn't meet the needs.  

That's clearly what Mr. Pedersen said: it doesn't meet the 

needs. 

 

You campaigned, and all of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who campaigned in rural Saskatchewan said, it's 

got to be the cost of production or nothing else.  And that's 

what Mr. Gil Pedersen says, the cost of production should be 

registered as a part of the input costs in dealing with 

agriculture.  And people should be paid accordingly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have here, as presented by the 

Minister of Agriculture, is a paradox.  He says on the one hand, 

it didn't meet the needs.  Mr. Pedersen says exactly the same 

thing.  And if this minister would have had the courage to tell 

the Minister of Agriculture what Mr. Pedersen was going for, 

the Minister of Finance would have had a heart attack because 

it would not have been '91 GRIP at $5.15 a bushel, 70 per cent, 

$4.08; it could have been 8, 7, 6, in some cases, $11 a 

cultivated acre. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why Mr. Pedersen didn't 

agree with you.  He wanted more money, not less.  He wanted 

more money for rural Saskatchewan, not less.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this minister and the Minister of Finance said you 

cannot have this money and therefore I have to cut the 

program. 

 

So on the one hand, the minister says, oh yes, it's got to be 

different, you got to have cost of production in it; and on the 

other hand, he says we can't afford it.  Now are you going to 

breathe in or breathe out?  That's the choice. 

 

It costs money to have the province support a 

cost-of-production focus in agriculture.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

and, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're talking about when we 

talk about this GRIP Bill.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what the members opposite have said over and over again -- 

yes, but.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're talking 

about here today, and that's why this is an historical debate. 

 

Nettie Wiebe from Delisle -- is she going to stand up in a court 

of law and say, Mr. Minister, you're right?  Those events that 

occurred said . . . The events that occurred exactly as you said 

they were, did occur.  Not in what you 

saw really happen, but they occurred in accordance with what 

you deemed to have happened. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the issue.  You will ask and 

I'm sure the court will ask, members of this committee to stand 

up and say, did these events occur as recorded in history?  Did 

these events occur?  And I will say, Mr. Minister, that they will 

have to swear that they occurred as they were.  But you, sir, in 

this Assembly are going to say no, they did not. 

 

We have a sworn affidavit that your deputy minister said that 

these amendments will include a provision in which notice of 

the '92 changes will be deemed to have been given to producers 

before March 15, 1992.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what 

we're talking about. 

 

And are these people who sat on your GRIP review committee, 

are these people going to endorse that?  I hardly think they will.  

And what you have done under . . . No, I'll say that different, 

Mr. Speaker.  In this Assembly you cannot do indirectly what 

you can do directly.  And that's a process of discussion and 

actions in this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this minister is going to do indirectly what 

he cannot do directly.  And I believe it's against the principles 

of this House to do that.  So I've outlined to you why this is a 

historical debate.  Because we will for the first I believe in 

legislative history change the order of events that occurred in 

dealing with this issue.  I'm not struck by that.  I feel, Mr. 

Minister, that this committee has been betrayed.  I feel that they 

have been let down.  There was an agenda in the mind of the 

minister that was different than the agenda that was placed 

before these committee members.  And that's why I believe this 

is a historical debate. 

 

The people in the province of Saskatchewan listened 

throughout October to what these people were going to do.  

And I have quotes from the now Premier that we can govern 

this province and do it on the basis . . . we don't have to have 

any new taxes.  We can provide more health care.  We can get 

more jobs.  We can increase education funding.  We can 

increase all of these aspects.  And yet what we've had here 

today, Mr. Speaker, and to date, is exactly opposite to that. 

 

(1145) 

 

In contrast, one of the things that the Premier said as late as 

February this year, is he said, I don't need any more money to 

raise . . . I don't need to raise taxes.  In fact GRIP and NISA 

(net income stabilization account) won't cost any more because 

we don't need any more money to run that program.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, what they've done is they've cut it. 

 

The people in the province of Saskatchewan have registered 

this complaint to me over and over and over again, unsolicited, 

Mr. Speaker.  I have had calls from people across this province, 

and I didn't go chasing them.  But I have had calls from all over 

this province of individuals who have very, very serious 

concerns. 

 

And I want to go into that and the reason why, because it 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

deals with the very essence of the GRIP, gross revenue 

insurance plan '91 and gross revenue insurance plan '92 -- the 

difference and the variable between them. 

 

They've talked to me about a number of things, Mr. Speaker.  

One of them is, I want my farm to be insured exclusively on 

my farm.  I don't want to pay insurance on my neighbour's 

farm; I want to pay insurance on my farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll give you an example of what this is.  If you 

took a city block in the city of Regina and said to the insurance 

company that was going to supply fire insurance for this whole 

farm . . . or for this whole city block, and you would say SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is going to cover this 

insurance and the average insurance that is being carried in this 

city block is $100,000, you will have 50 per cent under that and 

50 per cent over that.  Some will be $150,000 in their homes -- 

they would like to have that insurance -- some will be 50. 

 

Now farmers said they didn't want to be treated that way any 

more because they had been treated like that for years.  We 

want specific to my farm, we want it specific to my crops 

because I believe I fundamentally can do it better than anyone 

else. 

 

Now is that wrong, Mr. Speaker?  If you go to these . . . the city 

block and say to the owners of these houses in the city block, 

you're all going to have $100,000 insurance.  One guy's going 

to get his subsidized, the other is going to get penalized.  

Farmers said that to me over and over and over again across 

this province.  They've said it in many, many ways, Mr. 

Speaker.  They said it by phoning me, they said it in the 

meetings we had a little over a year ago.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

firmly believe they have not changed their mind. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this minister has come to this Assembly 

with a complete reversal of all of those initiatives that were 

outlined in '91 GRIP versus '92.  He came saying that he was 

going to do more and is providing less.  He says he is going to 

provide more money but in essence he's providing less.  He 

said he's going to do things right and yet he's doing it wrong.  

He's going to ask a court of law to deal with this, and he is 

going to do it on the basis that he thinks he's doing it right. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, there were a 

couple of things that struck me.  The Premier has indicated: my 

government is determined to restore the fundamental principles 

of democracy.  Now that was in the throne speech delivered by 

Her Honour, in view of what the executive branch of this 

government was going to do -- restore the fundamental 

principles of democracy.  And that, Mr. Speaker . . .What is 

democracy? 

 

It's a balance between what this Assembly does, it's a balance 

between that in the executive branch and the Department of 

Justice.  And why this all hangs together, Mr. Speaker, is 

because this Assembly is taking the opportunity -- wrongfully 

-- and will provide to the court of law statements that will not 

have occurred.  A sequence of events that will not have 

occurred.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think that's absolutely, totally 

wrong. 

Is that restoring the fundamentals and the principles of 

democracy?  No, Mr. Speaker, that is licence.  Where does this 

deeming go?  I will deem to have given producers notice by 

March 15. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, has a whole lot of significance.  That 

means, Mr. Speaker, that this House can deem anything.  It can 

deem that the Minister of Justice provided an opportunity for 

people to vote in the province of Saskatchewan.  I will deem 

that they had the opportunity to vote.  I will deem that they had 

an opportunity for fair and honest assessment before a court of 

law.  I will deem that they did, when they didn't.  And this 

Assembly, on the process of that, will have that opportunity at 

any time to say that to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they're wrong.  And that's why I say 

they are legally, morally, ethically wrong in what they're doing. 

 

Now I wouldn't have had this substantive argument if the 

Minister of Agriculture had done it right.  I wouldn't have had 

it.  I could have disagreed on the basis of a philosophy.  He 

believes that '92 is better than '91.  We could have debated that, 

Mr. Speaker.  But on this basis that we are being asked in this 

Assembly to provide changes to things that happened in a court 

of law in the province of Saskatchewan, I believe are 

absolutely totally wrong. 

 

The Premier said he is going to establish principles for 

democracy in this session.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we have had 

principles of democracy established, very, very stringent and 

unusual.  We have had a Rules Committee that made unilateral 

changes in this Assembly -- unilateral, Mr. Speaker.  And it 

happened not once, Mr. Speaker; it happened at least three 

times. 

 

This Assembly made changes unilaterally on the basis of a 

majority in the Rules Committee when that, Mr. Speaker, has 

not been done before.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think that's wrong.  

I think it was wrong right from the very beginning. 

 

And as these members across the way when they were in 

opposition said over and over again, and we have a variety of 

those kinds of speeches that they gave, that said the 

constitutional right of an individual to uphold democracy is 

there in my being able to speak to issues, but also be able to 

register my complaint, to have democracy speak from rural and 

urban Saskatchewan, from outside of this Assembly to the 

members of this Assembly. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, has been curtailed by this Assembly, 

and I believe only and specifically to deal with the rules so that 

people in this Assembly could choose to vote to perjure 

themselves in a court of law.  Mr. Speaker, they are going to 

deem items to have happened that didn't.  And I say that that's 

wrong. 

 

Legislation would be brought into place to have elections every 

six months . . . or every six months after a vacancy.  Fine.  

That's already a law.  No problem with that. 

 

Second initiative will provide for the legislative and public 

consideration of the ward system in municipal 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

election.  We've done that.  Additional democratic reforms will 

be introduced in the spring session after public consultation. 

 

Now what did the Premier have in mind?  Did he have in mind 

that the opportunity for the bells to be struck from an 

opportunity to bring members to this Assembly? For 

opportunity for people in the province of Saskatchewan to 

recognize that the executive branch of government was 

overstepping their limit?  That, Mr. Speaker, was provided on 

the basis of precedent; precedent was established to provide 

that opportunity. 

 

It wasn't established by me.  I didn't put it in.  It was 

established by the historical events that have occurred in the 

passage of various kinds of legislation -- very, very tough 

legislation. 

 

Why have other jurisdictions done away with it, and what have 

they provided as an alternative?  Mr. Speaker, in Ontario, after 

serious problems with their . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I hope the member can relate some of 

that to the Bill, as to why the motion before the Assembly is: 

that immediately after the adoption of the motion, the 

Assembly shall proceed with the vote on first reading of a Bill 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation.  I fail to see how his argument of detailed changes 

to the Rules Committee either here or in Ontario has anything 

to do with the motion that is before us.  So I ask the member to 

get back to the motion that is before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, we're talking about the reform of 

this Assembly in a relationship to deal with the process of 

making this legislature run better.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that from the very, very start it has been the focus of attention 

because the Minister of Agriculture made a mistake, that he 

would have to have changes in the rules in order to have his 

agenda brought before this Assembly.  And those rules, Mr. 

Speaker, were changed. 

 

And I believe it was only, it was only there to provide an 

opportunity for this minister who knew that he was not doing 

things legally.  He did not have the moral backing from the 

people out in rural Saskatchewan, and on the basis of his own 

ethics didn't have the right to do it.  So he chose to suggest to 

the House Leader they change the rules to make it happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province said, oh I'm 

going to make them better.  Better for what?  Democratic 

reforms for what?  To have democracy be eroded -- the 

fundamentals of this Assembly eroded so that this minister 

could bring forward his Bill that is going to illegally do things.  

He's going to perjure himself before the court. 

 

And I would like to see this minister stand in a court of law and 

say that events occurred that did not occur.  And I want to see 

him say that.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that he would not be able 

to do that. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have listened for 

some time now to the member opposite speak about what is 

and isn't in the Bill and how he assumes the minister . . . not 

assumes, but is accusing the minister of perjuring himself.  I'm 

surprised that he would do that, not having seen the Bill. 

 

I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to make a ruling as to how the 

member opposite can make those kind of accusations against 

the minister and debate the Bill -- what might or might not be 

in the Bill -- when we haven't seen the Bill.  And I just think it's 

totally inappropriate that he would be making those kind of, I 

believe to be, unparliamentary accusations against the minister 

when he hasn't got a shred of evidence to prove that, because 

there's no Bill before the House.  That's the point of the debate. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, what the Government House 

Leader says is absolutely not true at all.  We have affidavits 

that have been presented in a court of law, which I understand, 

Mr. Speaker, are public, open to everyone, by the deputy 

minister of Agriculture stipulating that the legislation will 

contain certain things.  One of them is that this deeming will 

have occurred.  Now that is a sworn affidavit by the deputy 

minister of Agriculture in this province.  And I would think 

that this legislature would respect that court affidavit. 

 

The member from Morse is simply referring to that affidavit as 

sworn in the court of law.  And I think that's quite appropriate 

for him to discuss that matter as evidence. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened to the points of order, and I 

have listened also very carefully to what the member has said.  

I've having a little bit of trouble with the words that he uses, in 

"perjuring". And I think if he looks up the definition of perjure, 

he will find some difficulty exactly with it also in what he just 

said to the Legislative Assembly: that you can't do indirectly 

what you can't do directly.  I think those were his words.  And 

by using the word perjuring -- that the minister is perjuring 

himself -- I think he's getting very, very close to being 

unparliamentary, and I think he knows that. 

 

But speaking to the topic, I think the member has very 

carefully used evidence that has been used by the deputy 

minister and I've allowed that.  If he gets into the details of the 

Bill, then I will rule the debate out of order.  But I think on the 

generalities of the Bill, I think we simply can't avoid that in this 

debate.  But if they get to the details of the Bill, I will rule them 

out of order. 

 

Before I sit down, I do want to say to the member from Morse 

that I think he should heed his own words about what you can't 

do indirectly . . . or what you can't do directly, you can't do 

indirectly.  And I think he knows what I'm referring to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The role as it 

relates to this motion that we have before us today, deals with a 

number of things, and I want to point them out to you, the 

members of this Assembly. 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

That this Assembly proceed with a vote on first reading of a 

Bill respecting amendments to certain farm income insurance 

legislation.  And they have been established on a number of 

occasions by documents that have been presented to the court. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that as we go through this 

discussion . . . and I have tried to maintain it on the basis of the 

principles of this Assembly and the principles of law which we 

make to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and how 

we are viewed in relation to that.  That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what I'm trying to point out to this Assembly. 

 

Deeming action to have occurred when it didn't has serious, 

serious implications in this Assembly.  If that is allowed to 

happen on a regular basis, and I will say this as a person who 

has a great deal of respect for this Assembly, that you cannot 

do that on a consistent basis and have democracy continue.  

You cannot, you cannot deny access to the courts, which in 

essence is what you're going to be doing..  You cannot deny 

access to the court; the executive branch of this . . . of any 

government cannot deny access to the court.  That is a 

constitutional right of individuals in the province of 

Saskatchewan and across this country. 

 

And I, sir, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, would 

be seriously, seriously remiss if we did not speak out against 

deeming actions to have happened that didn't.  We would be 

remiss if we didn't say that we were irritated by it.  We would 

be remiss if we said we weren't angered by it. 

 

Because you know what, Mr. Speaker?  People have died in the 

province of Saskatchewan, fighting wars for those kinds of 

issues.  And when I spoke the very first time to the president of 

SARM about the actions being taken by the Minister of 

Agriculture and the statement made by his deputy, those are 

exactly the words that he told me. 

 

Mr. Kirwan said that people have died and gone to war to 

defend that opportunity before a court of law.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what we're talking about.  This Bill will be 

in the court the minute it's introduced here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is also evidence that has been provided 

in the court in Yorkton.  It was provided . . . the information 

was provided by the president and chief executive officer of the 

Crop Insurance Corporation.  He said in a letter to the justice 

that he considered . . . he was considering that one of three 

items that he was going to bring to the court to prove that the 

farmers didn't have a case.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what this whole thing is about. 

 

This minister is going to take this Bill and say these things 

didn't happen.  And I say to this Assembly and to the members 

of this Assembly that we have serious, serious problems with 

this.  It isn't constitutionally right, Mr. Speaker.  It isn't 

ethically right, legally right, or morally right.  The 

constitutional basis by which he is going to impose this is the 

very fundamental rights that the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

when he was attorney general in 1981, agreed to, to have the 

constitution reinforce in a court of law the opportunity to never, 

ever disallow anyone from 

the appearance in a court.  And now, Mr. Speaker, he is the 

head of a government, of the executive branch of government, 

that is going to authorize the Minister of Agriculture to change 

facts in a court of law. 

 

I find that, Mr. Speaker -- well I can't use the word here -- very, 

very serious.  Mr. Speaker, it is serious to the place that the 

people of this province need to recognize that this minister and 

this Premier are doing that.  And I don't believe it's right.  I 

have never believed it's right to do that. 

 

When law does not become a requirement of a Legislative 

Assembly to follow that pattern, then the law and democracy is 

at risk.  I want to show you, Mr. Speaker, how serious this risk 

is.  I read a book by Leon Jaworski who was the prosecutor in 

the Nixon Watergate scandal.  And in that conclusion his 

remarks were this: 

 

 It doesn't make any difference who the individual is in a court 

of law in the United States, that individual will be tried on the 

basis of his right, number one, and his own consequences of 

not following the law and the Constitution. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, you said that in the 

constitutional debate in 1980-81 and into 1982.  You were the 

attorney general at that time and you said, we will base the 

fundamental rights of individuals to have their day in court. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly, who are here 

to defend the rights of individuals, are going to take that right 

and throw it in the garbage when this Bill is passed.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, in my mind, is absolutely, totally wrong.  We 

have been dealing with, Mr. Speaker, with the individual rights 

in a court of law, that need to be addressed.  And this Minister 

of Agriculture is not doing that.  He is not allowing that free 

access, uninhibited by executive branch of government. 

 

And that's a key in this point, Mr. Speaker.  In the case where 

Mr. Nixon was tried for Watergate, the court had ultimate 

authority on a president of the United States.  And as a Premier 

and as a Prime Minister and any premier in the province of 

Saskatchewan or any person . . . other than that should have 

that same right not only protected, but also enshrined.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is what the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan did in 1982 with the placement of the 

constitution, where rights of individuals were respected. 

 

And we're going to take, Mr. Speaker, the law and the court 

and make the executive branch of this government superior to 

that by deeming to have done things that did not occur.  And I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that's wrong.  I have a serious distaste for 

what that means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's two points I want to make in relation to 

that and why I feel so strongly about this.  One of them deals 

with the history of my family, Mr. Speaker, where rights of 

individuals were not respected.  In the history of my family, we 

came from where the majority of people from the province of 

Saskatchewan came from, and that's the southern part of the 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

Ukraine and Russia.  And, Mr. Speaker, my family came as 

many of the people in this Assembly parents have come, from 

that same part of the Soviet Union, the former Soviet Union.  

And why did they come to this country, Mr. Speaker?  You can 

basically pin it down to two things.  One is the right to own 

land or property, and the other one was the freedom of religion.  

And they are encased in a constitutional right of individuals to 

appear without encumbrances before a court of law to be heard. 

 

To defend that, to uphold that is the responsibility of this 

Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Agriculture is 

going to deem before a court of law that history was not as it 

happened but as how he says it happened.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly why we feel so strongly about this. 

 

The second reason I want to point out to the members of this 

Assembly and why I feel so strongly about this, is that people 

from across this country were seriously threatened when people 

decided to take it in their own hands that they knew better than 

the court.  They knew better than the constitutional right given 

to individuals, and we had serious encroachment on that during 

the Second World War by two individuals. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, why those two 

individuals will stand out in history -- and they're Mussolini 

and Hitler.  And I want to point out to this Assembly that they 

were wrong. 

 

And the reason I want to point out is simply this.  I have a 

gentleman in the town of Morse; his name is Heinz Zilch.  And 

he drove -- Mr. Speaker, he told me this -- he drove many of 

the commanders in the German army around during the Second 

World War.  And he said, why did I do it?  Why did I do it?  

He said, I'll tell you why -- because, he said, I saw my friends 

suspended from the power poles for days on end.  He said, I did 

it because I was afraid for my life.  That's why. 

 

Because someone had decided that he had more authority than 

the court; he had more authority than the Assembly.  And the 

executive branch of this government is saying that to us today 

-- we have more authority than the court.  And I say no, sir.  

You should not ever have this Assembly have more authority 

than the court.  Equal to the court, but never above. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, who was the minister of Justice and 

the attorney general at the time, said I want individual rights 

enshrined so that people can have their day in court.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, what we've had and what we've seen here today is 

evidence that it will not happen. 

 

Those two things, Mr. Speaker, stand out in my mind, and why 

I have a serious problem with how and what this government is 

doing in relation to this. 
 

And we could stand here and talk about the differences 

between '91 and '92 GRIP and we could stand here and debate 

that a long time.  The government would win and I would lose, 

but the farmers would lose too.  However that's not what we're 

talking about here.  We're talking about the availability of this 

Assembly and the capacity of this executive branch of 

government to pass a law saying things happened when they 

didn't.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is why I have a problem with this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, farmers from across this province have 

phoned me over and over again and said, I don't want to have 

this.  Mr. Speaker, five of them decided to take this 

government to court.  And when the judge ruled whether they 

had a prima facie case to place this before the court, she said 

yes they do -- they do have a case. 

 

And you know the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker?  The 

government didn't put up a defence, because you know what?  

They didn't have one.  They didn't have one until the deputy 

minister of Agriculture, under the instruction of the Minister of 

Agriculture and the executive branch of this government, said 

we will deem to have done it.  And we will deem to have said 

what happened and sent out this information, when it didn't 

happen. 

 

You know, I find this ironic.  I really find this ironic.  The 

people opposite have said that they are the defender for the 

little guy.  They have said that they are the defender for all of 

those people who are pressured from society, who do not have 

the capacity to stand on their own.  They said that over and 

over and over again. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, they're going to set a precedent in this 

Assembly that says the court will not hear the evidence as it 

happened.  It will be as presented and laid out by this Minister 

of Agriculture through this Assembly.  And all of you are 

going to have to vote for it or duck. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why this side of the House 

has such a serious, serious problem.  And that's why, Mr. 

Speaker, we had a serious problem with how the rules were 

changed.  Because these two items are tied together as secure 

as the constitution and the Bill of Rights in the country of 

Canada.  They are tied together. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why we are against this 

legislation.  The rules were changed to expedite the opportunity 

for this Minister of Agriculture to deem what he's going to do.  

And that is why we have such a serious problem with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make another point dealing with this 

Assembly, that has significance to me.  My family have 

worked in this building and for government for a long time.  

I've had members of my family who have been the engineers 

who worked in this building in the '50s.  I wasn't in government 

then.  I wasn't even old enough to vote.  I had an uncle that was 

the engineer looking after this whole building.  I've had aunts 

that worked in this government, and said, it is a legitimate right 

and it is a privilege to work for this government, whether it's 

Liberal, Conservative, or NDP.  I have had family members 

that have worked under those conditions throughout this 

province, from La Ronge to Shaunavon, and all over. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I see this Minister of Agriculture 

stand in his place and say he is going to deem something to 

happen when it didn't, I have a great deal of difficulty with that, 

Mr. Speaker, because it flies in the face of the very roots of 

why my family came to this place in the first place. 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot of other things that I want to 

bring in here.  And another point I want to make is that the 

deputy minister of Agriculture said this:  I have been advised 

by the Minister of Agriculture and Food, the Hon. Mr. Wiens, 

that he has obtained the verbal agreement of the federal 

government and sufficient number of other provinces 

participating to amend the agreement and therefore to effect the 

changes to the '92 GRIP program. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The verbal agreement, as 

stated by Judge Hunter, said that has no value because that it 

not an agreement.  And that, Mr. Speaker, comes from a person 

who knows.  It comes from the court.  It comes from the court.  

And the court is determining and is going to determine who in 

the long run is right. 

 

The other thing that bothers me in this determination that the 

court is going to be involved, is that this minister is taking the 

issue and forcing people to sue.  And that, Mr. Speaker, has an 

interesting connotation.  There are 62,000 farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan, according to the last census; and 

50,000 contracts were there under the control of the Crop 

Insurance Corporation.  Those 50,000 will have to sue for 

damages if this minister proceeds in the fashion that he's going 

to. 

 

What a horrendous cost to the farmer, what a horrendous cost 

to this government, and what a horrendous cost to the 

taxpayers.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, what a horrendous cost to 

the political life of this government. 

 

When all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, and the judge says no, 

Mr. Minister, we won't allow that in a court of law, for you to 

change law, change events, what is the province going to do 

then?  Will the province say to the farmers that have sued 

already, and said, $27.30, I believe, an acre is what they 

projected their losses to be.  They will say to the court, that is 

what you owe.  And the judge will say whatever they want to.  

They will determine what that value is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992 in the year under review, we have 

significant costs to this province if that judge finds out of order 

the Bill before us today.  We have significant costs to this 

province. 

 

And as outlined by the volume of dollars that were presented in 

the court as evidence, we have significant impact on the 

economics of this province.  At $30 a cultivated acre, Mr. 

Speaker, that has horrendous impact.  Thirty million cultivated 

acres times $30 an acre is $900 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, do 

you think the federal government is going to protect that 

investment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think not.  They're not bound by law to do it 

because they have shown over and over again that the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Saskatchewan are not acting responsibly in dealing with this 

issue.  They will have a very, very difficult time, Mr. Speaker, 

selling to the people of Saskatchewan their loss of freedom in 

relation to this Bill. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan were 

told that they were going to get a benefit of democratic reforms 

in this Assembly.  We've had reforms, 

Mr. Speaker.  We've had curtailment of bells.  And now we 

have a new reform, a deeming Bill, deeming things to happen 

that never happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a code of ethics is going to be established in this 

Assembly, in this session, a code of ethics.  Now doesn't that 

fly in the face of the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier 

bringing forward a Bill deeming things to have happened that 

didn't happen?  A code of ethics.  Are you going to bring that 

forward before you introduce this or after?  Is it as a result of, 

or before?  A code of ethics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a code of ethics that says: I will deem this to 

happen when it didn't.  However, our code is going to be an 

establishment of a standard.  Mr. Speaker, that standard -- my 

question is -- is it going to be before this Bill is dealt with or 

after?  The code of ethics deals with a standard and where is 

that standard going to be in deeming events to have happened 

that didn't? 

 

Oh well, Mr. Speaker, we can say, we have deemed to have 

sent out cheques for Social Services.  We can deem to have 

sent out the opportunity for the province to have an election.  A 

code of ethics established by the precedent established in this 

Assembly by the Minister of Agriculture deeming things to 

have happened that didn't.  And, Mr. Speaker, I find that 

repulsive.  That, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely totally wrong. 

 

A code of ethics, a stringent conflict of interest guideline, a 

code of ethics with stringent guidelines -- what does that say to 

me, Mr. Speaker?  It says to me, Mr. Speaker, that the standard 

that is acceptable in the public is here and what we have this 

Minister of Agriculture doing is stooping right to the bottom in 

a stringent standard of a code of ethics.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

in my mind, is wrong.  It has never been right. 

 

And history will record that this Assembly during this period of 

time had a curtailment of the opportunity to speak; had a 

curtailment of an opportunity to register the complaint with the 

public of Saskatchewan; and will have registered that this 

minister flaunted the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier will also have to carry that.  He -- and 

this is what I find . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Probably the Speaker too. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I would ask the member from 

Kindersley to please withdraw those remarks stating that the 

Speaker also has flaunted . . . will be flaunting the law, or 

inferring that the Speaker also flaunted the law.  I ask him to 

please withdraw those words. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I withdraw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, this statement, the statement that 

was made by the Lieutenant Governor in this Assembly at the 

beginning of this session said: my government has also 

initiated the development of a comprehensive code of ethics 

and stringent conflict of interest guidelines. 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

Where is the standard, Mr. Speaker?  Where is the standard?  Is 

the standard to get away with as much as I possibly can in 

order to deliver my political agenda in as expedient fashion as I 

possibly can?  That is the lowest form of a standard you could 

ever want to have.  The code of ethics -- stringent, Mr. Speaker 

-- as represented by the Minister of Agriculture and performed 

by the executive branch, the Premier being the head, are both 

bad. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why we have a serious, serious 

problem.  We have a contrast between what needs to be there 

and what is being delivered.  And, Mr. Speaker, a code of 

ethics is a standard.  It's a standard set by who?  It's set by this 

Assembly.  And there is an old, old proverb that says, more 

things are caught than are taught, Mr. Speaker.  And what is 

important to understand in this Assembly and for the members 

of this Assembly is this: that what is caught by inference in the 

actions taken by the Minister of Agriculture in dealing with this 

item before us today is that more things are caught than taught. 

 

When the standard that the Premier said in the Speech from the 

Throne was going to have a code of ethics and stringent 

guidelines for both elected representatives and public servants, 

I took it at face value, Mr. Speaker.  I took it at face value. 

 

And what have we had?  We are going to have placed before 

this Assembly a Bill, a Bill that says I will have deemed to 

have done it.  What's being taught, Mr. Speaker, what's being 

taught is that if the law is there, I can go to whatever length that 

the government goes to, I can go to.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly right.  That means when my dad speeds, I can speed.  

When my teacher speeds, I can speed.  When my teacher steals, 

I can steal.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the standard of the code of 

ethics.  Code of ethics should be followed, not by what they're 

seeing happen here in the Assembly today. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what we are talking about today.  We are 

caught in a role here today, Mr. Speaker, in describing the code 

of ethics and the problems in relation to what we are seeing 

here today.  So what we are being taught, Mr. Speaker, is not 

what the standard is, as outlined by the Premier, but what it 

really is, as outlined by the Agriculture minister. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, we are here discussing this motion.  

That's why it had to come to this, Mr. Speaker.  It came to this 

not on the basis of whether we had a philosophical 

disagreement between members opposite.  It's not here because 

we have an economic difference between the members 

opposite and ourselves, although that definitely would be 

argued. 

 

But there is a legal problem here, Mr. Speaker, and this 

minister is going to demonstrate in this House that he is going 

to deliver that.  The House Leader has said, we're going to do 

it.  Yesterday on the news he said, we're going ahead with it, 

straight out.  The news said: GRIP war on decks, PC's guns 

muzzled.  Okay? 

 

So that's democracy.  You muzzle the opposition so they can't 

say anything when the very strength of democracy is in the . . . 

in the validity and the capacity of the opposition 

to defend the democracy.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we're 

doing here today.  And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

serious, serious problem with how this is being dealt with. 

 

The people in the province of Saskatchewan expect us to set a 

standard that is somewhat higher than is being set by the 

Minister of Agriculture.  The Minister of Agriculture is setting 

a standard for people in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

more is caught by that than taught by what he sees in a 

class-room situation, and taking this Assembly as being leaders 

we should be teaching and following by example. 

 

What's the significant difference between one who doesn't live 

by the standard that he says and does something different?  

What's the individual called, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, the 

individual is not living to the standard that he has set. 

 

I have a great deal of problem with that from this Minister of 

Agriculture.  On the one hand he says, I will uphold the law.  

And he swore that on the Bible when he became a minister and 

when he became a member of this Assembly.  He swore that he 

would uphold the law. 

 

And on the other hand, he crushes it.  He will uphold the law 

and on the other hand he delivers this kind of a Bill for this 

Assembly to vote on.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  It has 

always been wrong.  It has always been the improper thing to 

do.  And it is the role of this opposition and any opposition, if 

they would not bring to the attention of this Assembly that 

responsibility for that individual to maintain the law, it would 

be a pox of our houses. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why we're raising this issue.  

That is why it's incumbent on us as an opposition to deal with 

it.  It's incumbent for us as an opposition to have this Assembly 

hear the reasons why we are against the court of law being told 

what they have to do -- and by the executive branch of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it really difficult in the framework of 

parliamentary language to express to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan the negative anger that is in me about this.  

And I find it very difficult.  And I'm not a person who uses 

vulgar language, Mr. Speaker.  But it is very, very difficult for 

me to classify this, this action by the minister, in a way that 

isn't vulgar.  And I'm not going to use them -- those words, Mr. 

Speaker -- don't worry about it.  I'm not going to use them.  But 

I find it very, very difficult.  Because the conduct and the 

sensitivity of this issue is extremely important to this 

opposition. 

 

It's important for a whole host of reasons.  They are historic.  

They're historic in the context that I've talked about earlier 

about how the emphasis ought to be, the standard individuals 

expect of us, and the conduct of what it really is.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is why this opposition is so much against it. 

 

I want to raise a point that was quoted in the paper, and I want 

to talk about this a bit.  The NDP establishes a review 

committee which fails to consult widely with farmers.  The 

committee recommends some changes, warns Berny 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

Wiens about March 15 deadline problem at the time Wiens told 

committee, "We can get around it somehow."  A quote from 

the Leader-Post on June 17, 1992. 

 

We'll get around it somehow, he told the committee.  Now I 

want to point out to this Assembly, did Barry Senft agree to 

getting around it somehow -- to this somehow, as we are going 

to be presented in this Assembly by the Bill that we object to 

stringently?  Is the deputy minister going to be a part of, "We 

can get around it somehow"?  Is Roy Piper going to get around 

it somehow when he is asked in a court of law to say, I am 

going to get around it because the Minister of Agriculture said I 

should? 

 

Am I going to get around it somehow?  Is that what the 

professor at the University of Saskatchewan, Jack Stabler, is 

going to be saying to the court of law? -- we're going to get 

around it somehow. 

 

Why?  The question, Mr. Speaker, is why does this Minister of 

Agriculture put this Assembly to this torture because of his 

incompetence?  Why?  We'll get around it somehow.  Mr. 

Speaker, get around it somehow, for what? 

 

The representation made by the Minister of Agriculture for 

Canada to the province of Saskatchewan said on the 

combination of $94 million -- province, farmer, and federal 

government -- which would be equivalent to 23 or $24 million 

by the province of Saskatchewan, this Minister of Agriculture, 

through his incompetence and how he handled the issue in the 

first place, he is going to get around it somehow when it will 

only take probably $24 million, Mr. Speaker, to deliver that 

somehow in a very pragmatic way to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That is how he should be doing it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we have here today is the somehow that is absolutely, 

totally different than that.  And it's disgusting because for all of 

the very same reasons that I presented earlier, for all of the 

historic things that are there, for all of the justice things that are 

there, for all of the ethical things that are there . . . He can take 

and say I have made a mistake, Mr. Speaker, I have made an 

error, and to the Assembly . . . and go to the Minister of 

Finance and say to the Minister of Finance, we made a mistake.  

And for $23 million, I think the farmers would accept that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why we're here talking about 

it.  Where in this whole Assembly does the individual right of 

that individual who is the minister and the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, where does he have the right to say in this 

Assembly, somehow we'll deemed to have sent a letter out and 

then ask this Assembly to vote on something that is not the 

truth.  That is, Mr. Speaker, why we're here today.  We can 

argue about the value and the impact in an economic way, but 

you cannot argue the facts that have been presented to this 

Assembly aren't legitimate. 

 

One of the things that stands out so significantly in this 

discussion is the time line in this discussion.  It's extremely 

important to this debate.  It has been relevant through the 

process of this session.  But the time line on the information 

being provided to rural farmers is significant.  I want to point 

out why that time line is there. 

Mr. Speaker, a year ago the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan told me over and over again, we cannot defer 

making decisions to a point in time that is beyond the middle of 

March for coming to some conclusion as it relates to what we 

are going to do and what the government is going to do.  So 

what did we do, Mr. Speaker?  We said, according to their idea, 

that March 15 was a good time to have it. 

 

And if the rural members in this Assembly would think back, 

they would probably understand the significance of March 15.  

March 15 has some significance in rural Saskatchewan, and it's 

this.  People consider that if you were making financial 

arrangements to lease or be involved with a farm it was usually 

done before March 15.  In my part of the world, March 15 was 

a standard date.  You signed your agreements with 

leaseholders, and March 15 was the day that you did that. 

 

So our conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as a part of this overall 

strategy to say we'll protect the farmers so that in the middle of 

seeding he doesn't have to make changes to what he's doing 

because of changes that were implemented by a government, 

we said the time line on the March 15 is a significant date. 

 

(1245) 

 

And what we have happen this past year, Mr. Speaker, is that it 

is exactly proven right.  Changes have been made throughout 

the summer and the farmers tell me over and over again, it is 

not a responsible thing to do.  March 15 has significance 

because the minister said on June 17, oh, we can get around it 

somehow.  He told that to his committee.  He told that to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And when he gets 

around it, he's going to ask this Assembly to deem actions to 

have happened that didn't, in a court of law. 

 

How do I get around it?  Would he take the honourable thing to 

do and say, I will accept the offer made by the Minister of 

Agriculture for Canada that puts, even as an example of 

compromise, an item before this Assembly that deals 

consistently with what the producers of the province of 

Saskatchewan want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose changed his 

mind about tearing up gravel roads.  He changed his mind 

about that, Mr. Speaker, because the people from Beechy said, 

we don't want to have that road torn up; we fought, Mr. 

Speaker, for years to have that road paved. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, he changed his mind.  He changed his mind, Mr. 

Speaker, and today we have him standing in this Assembly and 

saying, I am not going to change my mind; I'm going to get 

around it somehow. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we're talking about here today.  

Somehow we have tried to explain to this minister.  We have 

given options on compromise. The federal minister has given 

options on compromise. But the single, solitary focus on this 

minister from Rosetown-Elrose is focused so intensely on this 

issue that he can't see the solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we'll get around it somehow.  And yet when it 

directly impacted in his constituency on tearing up 



July 31, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

roads, he said, we'll get around it somehow.  And he didn't . . . 

isn't going to do it. 

 

The offer by the Minister of Agriculture for Canada stands, and 

every producer knows what that stand is.  And you know what, 

Mr. Speaker?  The Minister of Agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan sends out a letter too.  He sends out a letter too.  

And in that letter he says well, we've had things tough in this 

province, really tough.  And nobody denies that, Mr. Speaker.  

Nobody denies it -- the province in spite of its limited financial 

capacity.  Well we know that. 

 

We tried yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to get the Minister of Finance 

to tell us what the difference was between what the cost of 

tearing up roads was and what it would have been if they were 

left.  The difference in costs, plus or minus, what would it be?  

No idea of what was coming forward from the Minister of 

Finance.  And yet the Minister of Agriculture could change his 

mind because he's the minister responsible for Highways.  He 

could change his mind about that, but he cannot change his 

mind about the changes to the GRIP program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the economic impact of that changing his 

mind on those gravel roads was probably less than $2 million.  

And the impact in Saskatchewan to him changing his mind 

about that is probably equivalent to that. 

 

And yet we have him stand here and say, somehow I'm going 

to get around it.  Somehow I'm going to ask members of this 

Assembly to say, somehow I'm going to deem to have done 

what I didn't do.  Mr. Speaker, I find that repulsive, absolutely 

disgusting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in response to the offer made by the Minister of 

Agriculture from Canada, the minister in the province of 

Saskatchewan sends out a letter.  The province, in spite of its 

limited financial capacity, has taken on a dramatically 

increased role in providing income support to farmers.  

Increased role?  Here's where we had the deeming magic come 

back into play -- deeming things to have happened that didn't 

happen, and farmers wished they had. 

 

Mr. Minister, the federal offer is still on the table.  Why don't 

you take it?  Mr. Minister, the federal offer to offer an 

opportunity for you to compromise, to be a man, the 

honourable thing to do . . . and yet, Mr. Speaker, somehow  

_- somehow, we will get around it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what this is all about -- somehow getting around it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had so many changes to the process in 

this evolution of what we have for GRIP '92.  We have had so 

many changes in the dates -- this is when you can do this; this 

is when you can't do this; this is when it's going to be the final 

day; and then this is going to be the final day; and then another 

date is selected for the final day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, farmers are fed up with that.  They are so 

fed up with that, Mr. Speaker, that the SARM said, get out of 

politics.  Quit talking politics.  Quit talking politics and let's get 

down to business. 

An Hon. Member: -- Your good friend Bernard. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Humboldt says, our good friend Bernard.  Yes, sir, Mr. 

Speaker.  He's a friend of the farmer; he's a friend of rural 

Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why we're 

here to discuss this, is because somehow, somehow we're going 

to get around it.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why we're here 

talking about it. 

 

Mr. Minister, the compromise is in your hand.  The opportunity 

to have this Legislative Assembly reach a conclusion that is 

honourable, within the framework of the court of law, and 

acceptable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

you ignore it.  Your Premier said in this House here the other 

day, he said, well it's the beginning of a negotiated position.  

And yet the legislative agenda keeps trucking down that same 

hard, absolutely stubborn path of no compromise at all. 

 

Your leader said . . . Why don't you listen to him?  Your leader 

said the other day that compromise . . . this was a question of 

negotiation between two parties on what it would be.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this government keeps trucking and trucking, 

hard-nosed, straight down this railroad track without any kind 

of compromise at all.  People in the province of Saskatchewan 

are asking him for that compromise.  The people of the 

province of Saskatchewan said, quit playing politics. 

 

Mr. Minister, quit playing politics.  You put compromise on the 

table in this Assembly and you will have the values established 

by the country when it was set up.  Consensus and compromise 

are the two things that you, sir, need to do it.  But you say, oh, I 

am going to get around it somehow.  I'm going to get around it 

somehow.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we are here today. 

 

The president of the SARM says, Mr. Minister, we're here to 

have compromise.  Allow us an opportunity to discuss this.  

Will you defer it to some later date?  No, Mr. Speaker, as I say 

to this Assembly here today -- and I'm going to say it across 

this province over and over again -- this minister is doing 

things in this Assembly that breach all forms of democracy.  

They breach them.  Because the court in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which defends my rights as an individual, are 

being jeopardized by a minister who has no feeling for that at 

all. 

 

If he did, Mr. Speaker, if he did at any point in time want to 

say, I acknowledge that there is a better way to do this than to 

jeopardize the courts and jeopardize democracy, there is a 

better way to do it, Mr. Speaker, he would have had the 

opportunity presented to him last weekend to do that.  His 

leader said yes, we should negotiate from that position.  And 

what do we have?  Straight-ahead focus on a minister who has 

absolutely no realization of what he's doing to, number one, 

democracy, and to the rural people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why we say to the 

people of Saskatchewan, this is the minister that does it. And I 

want to point out and I want to make the point absolutely clear.  

He is being led by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 

who undoubtedly, in my 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard July 31, 1992 

mind, must be telling him that this is what he has to do.  There 

is absolutely no doubt in my mind. 

 

This is not a single-handed effort by the Minister of 

Agriculture.  It's on the executive branch of this government 

and the Premier is the head of that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

flies in the face of all of the kinds of things that he 

systematically said when he was attorney general, that he was 

going to uphold the law and that constitutional right of the 

individual will be upheld in the court on the basis of law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is going to 

display for all of Canada and all of the Commonwealth to see 

that he is going to flaunt the law.  Mr. Speaker, I find that 

repulsive. 

 

Mr. Kirwan says, quit playing politics.  They also said, Mr. 

Speaker, why don't you go send the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Prime Minister out to take a look at how 

serious the problem is?  That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what 

we're asking this minister to do.  Come from the Canadian 

principle, come from the depths of what makes Canada work.  

That's consensus and compromise.  And, Mr. Speaker, neither 

one of them, neither one of them are being followed in any 

shape, fashion, or form in this Assembly here today.  This is a 

unilateral, undemocratic process that the Minister of 

Agriculture is dealing with here today.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, 

he is absolutely, totally wrong.  That is what, Mr. Speaker, we 

have against what's going on here today. 

 

The various people that have been invited to attend to see what 

the problem really is, Mr. Speaker, are Mr. Premier and Mr. 

Prime Minister.  They've been asked to go out there.  Would 

this minister defer making a decision on this issue until, Mr. 

Speaker, the opportunity is presented to itself for our Premier 

and for the Prime Minister to attend a meeting in the 

drought-stricken areas?  Would he do that? 

 

No, Mr. Speaker.  We have him focused and bent specifically 

for dealing with an issue, Mr. Speaker, that is undemocratic 

and illegal.  And that, Mr. Speaker, in my mind is not what 

hon. members in this Assembly should do.  Hon. members 

have taken an oath of office to uphold Her Majesty and honour 

the law, and he is totally disregarding it in every shape and 

form that I have seen in this Assembly on this basis.  And I say 

that's wrong. 

 

I have said it is wrong right from the very start.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, when this was brought to my attention, I said there is 

something the matter with this.  And I have said consistently, 

and I have not deviated from that point from the 15th of March 

on, to say to this Assembly and to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that this is wrong.  It's a breach of contract.  It's 

an action that is illegal, immoral, unethical. 

 

And I think that the Premier needs to take the offer made by the 

Minister of Agriculture for Canada and take it to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and say, would you be prepared 

to accept this in a basis of consensus and compromise?  Would 

you be prepared to accept it?  And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker?  I believe, I honestly believe for $24 million, this 

Minister of Agriculture could save some face and save 

democracy.  I honestly believe that. 

Take an opportunity, seize it, and go with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my mind the president of the SARM is 

absolutely right.  Quit playing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 1 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until Monday at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


