




















































Hansard: August 10, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2151 

 August 10, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 
 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 73 -- An Act 

respecting Certain Services with respect to Co-operatives, 

Credit Unions and Names of Homes be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  On this 

particular item we as the opposition have been wondering all 

morning exactly what the business of the House was going to 

be.  And we just heard now, two minutes before the 9 o'clock, 

exactly what the business of this House was going to be.  So 

we have now a situation where the opposition is trying to do its 

job but finding it extremely difficult to do so -- and their 

members opposite are yacking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are finding it very, very difficult to work 

under circumstances like this, to do a credible job.  And right 

now the critic on Bill 73, An Act representing Certain Services 

with respect to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes, be now read a second time, it's going to very difficult 

for us to operate under a situation like this, Mr. Speaker, where 

we're not sure what's going to happen from one moment to the 

other. 

 

Now I accept the promise of the House Leader on the 

government side that from here on in, we are going to get the 

agenda the night before, so at least we have some time to 

prepare for the proceedings of the House.  But this way we 

cannot operate.  It's not going to be possible for us to do our job 

under these kinds of circumstances. 

 

So on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, I move that debate be 

adjourned. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:04 a.m. until 9:14 a.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Toth 

Boyd Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Bradley 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Calvert 

Simard Murray 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Scott 

Solomon McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Langford 

Hagel  

-- 31 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I realize that this is 

a rather short-looking Bill.  But just having checked it over 

very quickly, I see that just like everything else that this 

government has done that the people out in Saskatchewan are 

complaining about, this administration goes on to turn open the 

valves, to open the doors for increased fees with absolutely no 

direction and no guidance and no limitations. 

 

Under 4(2) of section 4 it says: 

 

 . . . "fee of $5" and substituting "the fee prescribed in the 

regulations". 

 

Which means that the regulations can be set up by opening the 

door wide open, in my interpretation here.  And it looks to me 

that you could just about set this fee at any price you want. 

 

Now I wonder how the folks in the co-operative systems and 

the credit union systems are going to feel when they find out 

that they maybe get a 100 or a 200 or maybe even a 700 per 

cent increase, like a lot of other things are being increased in 

this province.  And I just wonder how happy they're going to be 

about a simple little two-page Bill, that maybe turns the doors 

wide open to increase their costs by hundreds of per cent and 

have nothing to say about it and no recourse whatever in 

legislation, just having a decree ordered and they start to pay. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is symptomatic of everything 

that this government is doing in every Bill.  Every Bill that they 

come up with, they come up with some little, sly little sentence 

that is going to really hit people hard and affect their lives in a 

major, major way. 

 

And you've increased costs on every front to every person in 

this province.  No matter where you live or what you do, you 

can't escape this administration from getting into your 

pocket-book.  They're straight into your bank account, straight 

into your pocket-book, and they're just doubling and tripling 

and quadrupling all of your costs, all of your expenses, all 

through the whole system. 

 

And here is another plain example of that, so bright and early 

on a Monday morning, trying to slip through a quiet little Bill 

that they say is non-controversial, not telling the opposition 

what's coming up.  Two minutes before we walk in the door 

they say, we're going to give you this nice, non-controversial 

Bill and let you pass it through; just swoosh right through 

under the door, no problem at all.  And everybody's costs will 

just go sky-rocketing up, 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

and nobody's supposed to say a word. 

 

Well I said a word, and I don't like it.  And that's what I've got 

to say about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill was spoken to in 

second reading on July 23.  Now my math is not that red-hot, 

Mr. Speaker, but I think that's probably something like 18 days 

that the matter has been adjourned.  So I think it's a bit . . . And 

notwithstanding the remarks from the hon. member from 

Maple Creek, anyone on studying the Bill would recognize that 

it is innocuous to put it at its maximum. 

 

In light of that, it's a little puzzling why my friends opposite 

have taken the position that they have this morning, as though 

we had laid on them some stunning tactical move that caught 

them by surprise, left them with their trousers down.  I want to 

assure my friend from Rosthern that I am certainly not . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that the Minister of 

Justice has the floor and I ask all members to please give him 

that right, on both sides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will just . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have just said, give the Minister of 

Justice his chance to speak.  I'll ask all members.  I wasn't 

pointing out anybody.  I'm just saying, all members, give the 

Minister of Justice his due. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We of course 

want to get on with this because we've got to get some work 

done in this House.  It's day 62 and we're sort of knee-deep in 

maple syrup here and not making any progress at all. 

 

So I just want to assure my friend from Maple Creek that there 

is nothing sly about the Bill, that we will have an opportunity 

in committee I would hope, to discuss the rather disastrous 

scenario that he raised during his second-reading intervention.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 74 -- An Act 

to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think we 

all realize it's early Monday morning.  It was a very short 

weekend.  A lot of MLAs have been on the road very early.  

And I don't know if we've seen a time where this legislature has 

seen a time when a government has tried to flex its muscle as . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member to get 

immediately to the Bill.  I don't think we need any more 

reflection on what is happening in this House from one side or 

the other.  Order!  I've got the floor, I want to remind the 

member from Rosthern.  I have the floor. 

 

All members know that you are not to reflect, when you're 

talking about the principle of a Bill, on what is happening on 

the floor of the House as such.  Let's get to the principle of the 

Bill, and I think we can make some movement. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Bill presented 

before the House, and in light of Bill No. 74, An Act to amend 

The Land Titles Act, and they understand from second reading 

and following the minister and looking through the Bill, this is 

more of a Bill to clean up and give the Land Titles the ability to 

clean up some of their files. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about cleaning up 

files, maybe we need to talk about some of the clean-up 

regarding the whole legal system and the whole parliamentary 

and legislative system in this province. 

 

I find it amazing that the opposition would be reprimanded for 

talking in broad terms, and yet the minister can stand up and 

speak fairly broadly.  But I think, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 

about the Bill we have here, as I indicated the other day, I think 

we must also acknowledge the fact that when it comes to . . . 

there isn't anyone that doesn't approve or . . . doesn't like the 

idea of having paperwork pile up. 

 

And certainly as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 

I think we all realize that if we endeavour to file every piece of 

information that came across our desks, we would certainly 

build quite a file.  And I can appreciate the fact that the Land 

Titles Office must find their files growing in record numbers as 

well.  And this Bill, I believe, was created to address the fact of 

cutting down on the paperwork. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, it does away with the fact that the Land 

Titles would have to go before a judge.  And even though a lot 

of information has expired and just allowed to collect, the Land 

Titles themselves could just go and do away with this 

paperwork other than just keeping a file of one copy, rather 

than the exorbitant files that continue to build.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I must indicate that . . . as I indicated the other day, 

we really don't have anything against the intent of the Bill, and 

we will allow it to go to committee at this time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 75 -- An Act 

to repeal The Bulk Sales Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, here again is another one of the Bills 

that have been introduced by the government.  As we've 

indicated in the past number of months, there are a  



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

number of Bills that have been brought forward that are more 

of the housekeeping type of Bills.  And we've allowed a 

number of these Bills to move forward without any major 

obstructionism or debate on them.  And this Bill, at the same 

time, is one of those Bills that really doesn't have a lot in it that 

we, as an opposition, should hinder. 

 

I see the purpose of the Bill was to protect wholesale and bulk 

suppliers against retailers who sell their stock in bulk without 

paying creditors first.  And I think that was appropriate.  And at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, we would certainly allow the Bill to go 

to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(0930) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Business Corporations 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Justice to introduce 

his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me today Mr. Tony Koschinsky, who is a Crown solicitor with 

the Department of Justice; Mr. Doug Moen, who is the 

co-ordinator of legislative services in the Department of 

Justice; and Ms. Mary Ellen Wellsch, who is the Public Trustee 

and is with me today in connection with the following Bill that 

the committee will be considering. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister would take the time for us to explain the intent of this 

Bill, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member knows, 

the Bill is somewhat lengthy, covering as it does 10 pages, and 

it has a number of purposes.  And I will touch on the 

highlights. 

 

For the most part, the amendments are housekeeping in nature.  

For example, in a number of situations the amendments reduce 

filing requirements to ensure that corporations are not being 

required to file the same information or documentation with the 

government more than once. 

 

The policy proposals in the Bill update the legislation to reflect 

current business practices.  For example, where a person is 

granted a corporate name in error and the director requires it to 

change its name, the director is given the authority to 

compensate the corporation for actual expenses incurred 

without the need for it to resort to a court action.  I think that's 

more of a housekeeping provision than it is one that reflects 

current business practices, but let me carry on with some that 

do. 

 

Provisions dealing with loans and guarantees that may be 

provided by a company to its directors, employees, and 

shareholders, are modified to provide clearer directions 

to corporations as to what is and is not permissible.  In 

addition, full disclosure of financial assistance granted to such 

persons will be required to be given to the shareholders. 

 

Extra-provincial corporations are given the option of adopting 

a second corporate name for use in Saskatchewan where its 

registered name outside the province is too similar to the name 

of a Saskatchewan corporation.  This is a practice that has 

worked well in Alberta and serves to reduce public confusion, 

and we propose that it be incorporated into our Act as well. 

 

The requirement for Saskatchewan companies to have at least 

one director resident in Saskatchewan is being eliminated.  

This will, for example, allow corporations to remain registered 

in Saskatchewan even if the principals move out of 

Saskatchewan.  To protect the public, such corporations are 

required to appoint a representative in Saskatchewan who can 

be served with documentation on behalf of the corporation, but 

the company will not need to have a resident director. 

 

These changes, Mr. Chairman, have been put together in 

consultation with the Canadian Bar Association, Saskatchewan 

section, to ensure our corporation law is kept up to date.  As I 

said, they are largely of a housekeeping nature. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would you 

give us an explanation of the Indian reserves being able to use 

this kind of a process as it is described here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the current definition of 

municipality means a city, town, village, rural municipality, or 

northern municipality.  That does not include an Indian reserve.  

And I think that my friend understands that Indian reserves 

would not fall within those definitions at all. 

 

Everyone in the province lives within a municipality in the 

sense that they live either in a city, town, village, rural 

municipality, or northern municipality.  But we were troubled 

about the status of Indian reserves and we want to make certain 

that the Indian reserves are included in the term "municipality" 

as that term is used in The Business Corporations Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could you give us the definition of the 3(c) 

item: ". . . permanent resident as defined in the Immigration 

Act (Canada)".  Can you define why that's there and give us an 

explanation for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the term "landed 

immigrant" was a term under the Immigration Act of the 

federal government at the time that The Business Corporations 

Act was drafted.  That legislation has now been repealed and 

the term "permanent resident" is defined under the Immigration 

Act and we have had to adjust our definition to take into 

account the federal 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

change. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Through these explanations you have more 

than one place where it says that the corporation is not going to 

be required to register its office location in a municipality.  Is 

that as I understand it or as I read it, or is that how you're going 

to define it?  And if so, then where are you going to define its 

location to be a permanent address? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, at 

the time of the incorporation of a business corporation, the 

articles set out an address, set out the location of a corporation.  

A corporation has to have a location.  There has to be 

somewhere where the public can go to serve documents and 

make inquiries but that need not always be the location. 

 

A corporation, like any of us, can move from time to time.  

And what we're trying to make clear is that they don't have to 

amend their articles of incorporation.  They don't have to go 

back to the incorporating documents and amend those in order 

to give effect to . . . or give notice of their relocation.  They can 

simply file a simpler notice under the Act that doesn't require 

that kind of formality of amending the articles. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So when a business moves from Regina to 

Saskatoon, they wouldn't have to amend their articles.  They 

would just have to send notice to the business corporations 

section of Justice and notify them of the change, so that that 

would be the method used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to go back 

to section 3(b).  Mr. Minister, as everyone knows, there are 

certain differences between an Indian reservation and other 

municipalities, the fact that the federal government still holds 

jurisdiction over the farm land . . . or land. 

 

And I go to the case of aboriginals who farm, for instance, who 

don't have access to bank financing because they can't have a 

mortgage or a caveat placed on them.  And I'm wondering how 

the changes that you're defining here are going to affect, for 

instance, the setting up of a gambling casino incorporated on an 

Indian reservation that will have shareholders, I presume, from 

both within and without perhaps on that reservation, and how 

these changes may affect something like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

provision is not intended in any way to facilitate any 

corporations having to do with gambling or anything like that.  

The idea of municipality in the Act has to do with the location 

of a corporation -- where its office is, as I was discussing a 

moment ago with the hon. member from Morse.  And Indians 

are perfectly entitled to set up corporations under this Act.  

While they themselves may be under federal jurisdiction under 

section 91, subsection 24 of the BNA (British North America) 

Act, none the less they are entitled of course to access to the 

idea of business corporations and to form a corporation under 

this Act and to become subject to its provisions. 

And the change in the definition will make it perfectly clear 

that they are entitled to have a registered office on a reserve, 

even though at the moment a reserve is not included, or 

arguably not included, in the term "municipality" as it's defined 

in the present Act.  By including the term "reserves" in the 

notion of a municipality, we make it perfectly clear and beyond 

argument that they will be able to have registered offices on the 

reserve. 

 

(0945) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, nobody was taking issue with 

their want to do that or their right to do it.  But because of the 

set-up there is questions on liability and limited liability to a 

corporation, as I would understand the present laws governing 

an Indian reservation and assets.  Any other municipality in this 

province or anywhere else, I have access as an individual or as 

a corporation to liability because of owning or leasing or 

various things. 

 

Indian reservations have a different criteria attached to them.  

And I'm wondering if you're going to either come in 

regulations or with a subsequent Act that will try and define for 

me as an individual or as a company dealing with a company 

registered on an Indian reservation in the question of liability.  

Because you're obviously extending the right, I'm wondering 

about some of the other things that will go along with the right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the changes that we're 

proposing will not affect the situations mentioned by the 

member.  The jurisdiction over Indians and Indian lands will 

remain entirely with the federal government.  It may be that 

coming out of the self-government negotiations that are 

described in the July 7 constitutional document, assuming that 

that document is adopted, or at least the part we're talking 

about is adopted, that situation may change.  I have no way of 

knowing whether it will or not. That will be a matter of 

negotiation between the three levels of government. 

 

But nothing that we're doing in this Bill is intended to, nor will 

it, affect the situation of Indian farmers, for example, wanting 

access to loans from the bank.  Those kind of problems remain 

there and are not being addressed in this legislation. 

 

And at the moment, we in this legislature are powerless to 

address that situation because Indians and Indian lands are a 

matter of exclusive federal jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate the problem you 

have, and that process may take a number of years to rectify 

itself.  We may be to the end of the TLE (treaty land 

entitlements) process before that issue is addressed. 

 

But with this change as I read it, and maybe you can tell me if 

I'm wrong, that for instance you could have someone with a 

pool of immigrant investment money looking for a suitable 

location to invest.  Along comes an opportunity like a gambling 

casino, or like any other business that would need to be 

incorporated.  This pool of capital is then invested with 

shareholders, perhaps some in the province, some outside the 

country even. 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

You then have that entity doing business with a whole lot of 

other folks, suppliers -- I can think of all sorts of things.  And 

then someone says, whoops, I've got a problems here and I'm 

going to have to go to court or I'm going to have to seek redress 

for that problem.  You've extended the ability to register these 

corporations here, but all of a sudden I have an asset that I can't 

put a caveat against. I've got an asset that I don't have any 

ability to seek mortgage money on. 

 

Now I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, when you grant the 

privilege to anyone in society -- aboriginal, non-aboriginal, 

whoever -- you've got to have the ability for the rest of us to 

interact on a solid basis.  And I don't think you want that 

situation arising. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member raises 

a question that is a problem, and we know it to be a problem 

because of past experience.  It is, as I said earlier, a problem 

that we in this legislature are powerless to address.  And we 

couldn't address it in this Bill in a direct way if we wanted to. 

 

I might just add, Mr. Chairman, that the address of a 

corporation, the location of the head office, whether it be on an 

Indian reserve or whether it be in Regina, would not affect the 

situation that the member poses.  If immigrant investors, to 

pick up on his example, were to incorporate a company in 

Regina to become involved in a gambling operation on an 

Indian reserve, they would run into the same security 

difficulties, the same commercial difficulties as mentioned by 

the member. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, once again, I appreciate the 

problem you have.  And it doesn't necessarily have to be a 

gambling casino.  You could incorporate something to make 

widgets.  The fact is that as we go through this process, you 

may find a different taxation regime, so I'm told, that that is not 

outside the realm of possibility, that we may have a different 

set of taxation rules applying that may make these jurisdictions 

more amenable to people to incorporate companies there. 

 

And I'm really wondering . . . Perhaps you could tell the 

Assembly where the drive was coming from.  Which area of 

the business community was sort of beating on the doorsteps of 

the Minister of Justice to change this, considering that we have 

this very large change occurring in our province with our 

native community, and where the push was coming from? 

 

You must have a list of companies or individuals or someone 

who is beating on your doorstep to bring this forward, given 

the fact that you know you're going to have to make changes as 

this other process unfolds.  Maybe you could give us that, and 

we would understand your need to do this at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry I'm not able to 

answer the member's question precisely.  This amendment, as 

is the case with many other of these housekeeping 

amendments, were part of a group that arose over the years, 

usually from the legal community writing to the department, 

drawing to the department some problem or deficiency in the 

Act, and many of these 

amendments -- and I believe this is one of them -- that arose in 

order to clarify what was seen to be a defect in the Act. 

 

We could find . . . You know, we could go back and check out 

our files to see who actually brought it to our attention.  It was 

certainly not the result of any clamour from the Saskatchewan 

Chamber, for example, or anything like that.  None of these 

changes that I can think of arose in that fashion; but rather 

arose because of experience under the Act and deficiencies or 

problem areas that lawyers and accountants identified as they 

worked with their clients under this legislation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I find it a little strange, Mr. Minister, that the 

legal profession would be recommending a change such as we 

see in 3(b) as sort of a housekeeping thing, given attention that 

TLE has achieved across the piece.  And we're talking major 

change here and we're talking . . . well, the realm of possibility 

is very large. 

 

And I would think that before one got into that area you would 

want to have sort of a game plan laid out of where corporate 

law was going to go before we start granting the ability to 

launch off without any redress or back-up.  And I'm just 

wondering at the wisdom perhaps of bringing forth that area 

without some further sections of a Bill to address some of those 

concerns. 

 

I realize that some of this other stuff is indeed probably 

housekeeping, that legal areas need cleaning up, but we're . . . I 

believe, Mr. Minister, you're opening a can of worms here that 

you might not be able to get the lid back on.  And I just think 

maybe it's time to take a sober second look at what you're 

doing before we bring a supposedly housekeeping Bill forward 

that's going to do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect, it is not 

correct to characterize this as a major change.  I have described 

it as a housekeeping change and I suggest to the member that 

that's exactly what it is.  Keep in mind we're dealing with the 

idea, with the definition of municipality.  And I will cite to the 

member a couple of sections in which that term is used which 

are relevant to the discussion that we're having here.  In section 

6 of the Act, it is provided as follows: 

 

 6. -- (1) Articles of incorporation shall follow the prescribed 

form and shall set out, in respect of the proposed corporation: 

 

  (a) the name of the corporation; 

 

  (b) the municipality within Saskatchewan where the 

registered office is to be situated; 

 

There's an example of where the term municipality is used, and 

all we seek to do by this amendment is to clarify that the 

registered office of the corporation can be on an Indian reserve, 

and the problem is that the present definition of municipality 

does not include Indian reserves.  So it opens the question for 

controversy as to whether a registered office can be given as a 

reserve. 

 

Also in section 19 of The Business Corporations Act, it is 

provided as follows in subsection (1): 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

(1) A corporation shall at all times have a registered office in 

the municipality within Saskatchewan specified in its 

articles. 

 

Well again, all we're seeking to do is to make it clear that a 

registered office can be located on an Indian reserve.  And by 

that change, we will then have made it possible for a registered 

office to be set up anywhere in the province and not merely in 

the places now included in the definition of municipality.  So I 

take issue with the member in characterizing this as a major 

amendment of any substance. 

 

It has been the law, and certainly the law under this Act, that 

Indian people have the same rights as anybody else, including 

the right to incorporate companies.  And we want to make it 

clear here that if they do that they are entitled to use their own 

homes or their own offices on Indian reserves as their 

registered office. 

 

(1000) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well my only . . . my final comment, Mr. 

Minister.  There's no one taking issue with that and that right.  

I'm just saying to you that the world is changing and there are 

going to be circumstances arise that I don't think perhaps you 

might . . . or maybe you do -- but others might not fully 

appreciate; that you are going to need something, I suggest, in a 

law, that is going to protect the rights of everyone, given the 

substantive difference in jurisdictional authority and power that 

resides with aboriginal people on an Indian reservation.  And 

that authority has already been tested in other parts of Canada 

vis-a-vis our taxation and legal procedures.  And I would 

suggest to you that when we do these changes, that we are also 

going to have to look at the future and what's going to happen 

now. 

 

You seem quite confident about launching off into the future 

here with this change, with no worries that they will facilitate 

other things.  So I guess all we can do, Mr. Minister, is leave it 

at that and watch very closely.  But I don't want to be standing 

in this legislature two years from now saying, I told you so, 

after somebody gets burnt potentially. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I respect the member's knowledge of 

this policy area.  And I want to tell him, Mr. Chairman, that I 

recognize the complexities that we are faced with, made all the 

more interesting by the fact of the treaty land entitlement 

settlement which is coming down upon us, and infinitely more 

so by the self-government agreements which will flow from the 

constitutional changes that we all hope will take place. 

 

These will set up a third order of government in this country.  

That government, as I've said in this House earlier, will take 

different forms and different shapes in different parts of the 

country.  But certainly one of the root questions that has to be 

addressed is the one raised, or the group of issues raised by the 

member in his interventions this morning -- access to credit, 

being able to secure credit, having the same commercial 

abilities as are enjoyed by the population at large. 

These are matters that must be addressed and in the long run 

must be addressed by this House as well as the federal 

government, because there will be many situations in which 

there will be a shared jurisdiction.  And it won't be available for 

us any longer I think to simply stand and say, Indians and 

Indian lands are a matter of federal jurisdiction and therefore 

we in this House can't do anything. 

 

I've said that twice today already.  But my ability to say that in 

a couple of years, considering self-government negotiations 

which are likely to take place, may be . . . the situation may be 

dramatically changed.  And we will have to take a fresh look at 

some of these ideas. 

 

But for now our objective is a very limited one.  The scope of 

the amendment is very limited and quite technical.  And I feel 

confident in telling the House that the problems raised by the 

member, while they are serious problems, ought not to concern 

us in connection with this particular amendment of this 

particular Act. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister mind giving us an 

explanation of when this provision would come into place and 

how it would work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, there 

is no change of policy with respect to section 14(1).  Let me 

begin my answer by referring to the section 14(1) as it now is 

in the Act.  It provides that: 

 

 . . . a person who enters into a written contract in the name of 

or on behalf of a corporation before it comes into existence is 

personally bound by the contract and is entitled to the 

benefits thereof. 

 

Now that seems clear enough and you wouldn't think that there 

would be any problem with it.  But there has been.  A court 

decision has dealt with section 14 and has weakened the idea 

there . . . has cast doubt, I think is the correct terminology -- 

has cast doubt on what section 14(1) is trying to achieve. 

 

And so we have recast it in the terms in section 7 of the Bill to 

make it clear that: 

 

 (a) a person who enters into, (a written contract) or purports 

to enter into, a written contract in the name of or on behalf of 

a corporation before the corporation comes into existence: 

 

  (i) is personally bound by the contract; and 

 

  (ii) is entitled to the benefits of the contract; and 

 

 (b) the contract has effect as a contract entered into by the 

person mentioned in clause (a)" 

 

So it's an attempt to make perfectly clear the point of 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

policy that has previously been expressed in section 14, 

subsection (1).  So that in the future, the court, faced with this 

kind of a situation, will continue to hold the way that the Act 

has always intended them to hold. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would this also include a Crown corporation 

in a contract in a similar fashion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is no, Mr. Chairman, for the 

reason that Crown corporations are not business corporations 

within the meaning of this Act, and are not covered by the 

provisions of this Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I find it a little interesting, Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, that this item would come into existence today, 

because we have just witnessed a breach of a contract, in my 

view, with 50,000 farmers with a Crown corporation.  And here 

we enhance the opportunity for a corporation that isn't in 

existence and define for it an example of if it happened to do 

business as a process of incorporation . . . even took place, that 

they would be responsible for the contract that they had entered 

into. 

 

And I just find it somewhat amusing, ironic, that the Minister 

of Justice would bring forward an amendment to solidify the 

opportunity for a corporation to get its articles incorporated.  

And as it's done some business, perhaps just before that, that 

that would be included in its responsibility.  And they would 

have to live up to the agreement of the corporation.  And we 

have in this Assembly, just talked about a Bill that makes void 

all of the contracts that are entered into by 50,000 farmers. 

 

And I find that somewhat strange and amusing.  And I'd like to 

have the minister comment on that, if you may. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well it's my understanding, Mr. 

Chairman, from what I have seen and heard, that we are going 

to have a very adequate opportunity, in this legislature, to 

debate the point that the hon. member raises, the situation that 

he refers to. 

 

I just want to say, in response to his question, that this has been 

the law with respect to business corporations and the promoters 

and organizers of business corporations for a long time.  This is 

a provision that is common to legislation of this sort right 

across the country.  And what we're seeking to do here is to 

clarify what we in this House would say the law has always 

intended, what the policy has always been behind the Act, so 

that the courts will interpret the section in accordance with the 

wishes of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I agree with 

this section; I don't disagree with it.  I just disagree with the 

content of other pieces of legislation coming in.  And the intent 

of the law and the motivation of the law, I agree with it.  I just 

would wish that the government would abide by its own 

philosophy in relation to the contracts entered into.  Even if 

they were already a corporation and had made the contracts, 

whether they would . . . or I feel that they should honour them 

and do what was . . . as a part of their responsibility. 

 

I agree with this section and just wonder if the 

government would continue in its other areas and you, sir, as 

the Minister of Justice would support those contracts that the 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan have with the Crop 

Insurance Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said to my 

friend, we are going to have an opportunity, as I understand 

him and his colleagues, to debate that question at some length 

in the near future.  And I think that I'll find an opportunity 

during that debate to make my views known to the member. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

minister: as I interpret this clause, you're saying that it's 

important that a corporation honour its contracts.  Do you agree 

that it's important that contracts be honoured?  And what 

implications is there if those contracts are indeed not 

honoured? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the premise is a bit 

off the mark.  What is being addressed in section 14, which is 

being amended in part by section 7 of the Bill, is not a 

corporation's liability with respect to contracts but rather the 

position of a person -- that is an individual -- who acts before a 

corporation comes into existence.  That may be a promoter or it 

may be a principal who is getting the company organized. 

 

It very, very often happens that that person enters into 

contractual arrangements before the corporation comes into 

existence.  For example, a law firm is retained, a firm of 

accountants is retained.  It may be that some arrangements are 

made with respect to a patent or a franchise or a licence which 

will form the substance of the business that the corporation will 

carry on. 

 

And prior to the enactment of section 14, it was an open 

question as to whether or not that person was liable on the 

contract.  That person could always say, and indeed frequently 

did say -- I remember handling a case where that was the 

precise point raised -- that this person was not acting in his own 

right; that this person was acting rather as an agent for a 

corporation that was to come into existence, and that the other 

party to the contract knew, knew that this was the case, knew 

that this individual was not undertaking personal liability but 

was seeking to bind a corporation which wouldn't come into 

existence for several weeks.  And that used to be a good 

defence. 

 

Now section 14, as it was enacted in uniform legislation across 

the country really, grabbed a hold of that problem and said:  no, 

no, promoters who do that can't hide behind the fact that they 

intended to incorporate the company later on.  They enter into 

these contracts, they are bound by them, so that the other party 

that was an innocent party to the arrangement doesn't suffer 

any loss or damage. 

 

And section 14 said:  not only are you bound by these 

contracts, but you're entitled to the benefit of them as well.  

You know, the coin has two sides.  If you're going to absorb the 

consequences or the down sides, you're also entitled to the 

benefits, the up sides. 

 

And so we're not . . . this is not concerned with the 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

liability of the corporation, but rather the liability of promoters 

or other people who will be principals in the corporation which 

is to be incorporated later.  It's quite a limited idea. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

(1015) 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, if you give me an explanation 

of section 42, along with section 8, we could maybe talk about 

the two together, because they relate; and how it deals with 

pulling together loans made to individuals for personal profit in 

a corporation.  And how that handles itself within itself there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the member asks a 

complex question in the sense that it is complicated to answer. 

But let me take a crack at it. 

 

By section 42, a corporation is prohibited from giving a loan to 

a director or officer.  It's actually cast wider than that.  It's a 

shareholder, director, officer or employee. 

 

And then section 18 provides that a corporation may not assert 

against a person dealing with the corporation a number of 

matters including the financial assistance referred to in section 

42.  Do you follow that?  A corporation may not assert against 

a person dealing with the corporation, the financial assistance 

referred to in section 42. 

 

So along comes the amendment that we're proposing to section 

18, which deletes from clause (f), the words "the financial 

assistance referred to in section 42" and goes on to add a clause 

(g) which adds the words: 

 

 the disclosure of financial assistance required pursuant to 

section 42 was not given. 

 

And that leaves us in a situation where a company may provide 

a loan and a guarantee to its directors, employees, and 

shareholders provided that full disclosure of that financial 

assistance is made.  And as I said to the member when I started 

my answer, it's complicated in the interplay between the two 

sections.  But the net result of it is that corporations will have 

this additional flexibility. 

 

It is in a closely held corporation, say, where you and your wife 

are the shareholders in a corporation, it is absurd that the 

corporation cannot loan you money or guarantee a loan of 

money.  And obviously in some circumstances that's 

appropriate, like the example I've just given, and it ought to be 

allowed. 

 

At the same time, in more widely held corporations where the 

shareholders would not be aware of the day-to-day business of 

the corporation, a loan to directors is on a somewhat different 

footing.  And so we require the full disclosure to the 

shareholders to ensure that the fact of the loan is made. 

 

But the last example is less obvious, and the one that I cite 

with you and your wife as the officers and directors of a 

corporation, is an obvious one.  The shareholders of a large 

corporation . . . or the directors of a large corporation are on a 

somewhat different footing.  The case is not so obvious for 

them.  But if the proper disclosure is made, then why not?  And 

so we offer this amendment in that spirit. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are there requirements under (g) that -- and I 

understand the difference very . . . there is significant 

difference between a small four or five people in a corporation 

and, let's say, hundreds.  Is there a method that you're going to 

suggest be used as a part of the disclosure of financial 

assistance? 

 

And let's just take the new Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

as an example which is widely held.  And the board of directors 

may have a significant different relationship to the shareholders 

than they would in a small farming corporation or something 

like that, where it would be defined.  What kind of process do 

you need to give the notice of assistance on?  Or should we 

wait till 42 to talk about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that we ought to wait till section 

42 to discuss that; 18 is just simply . . . 18 provides . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I'll ask members to allow the minister to 

provide his answers in an uninterrupted manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Section 18 says when a corporation can 

erect the shield; when it can say, you know, I didn't comply 

with the Act or the Act was not complied with.  So you're right, 

the discussion is best held under section 42. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the amendment is to 

section 12 of the printed Bill, as you have observed.  And it 

will read as follows: 

 

 Amend section 25.1 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

12 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering it as subsection (1); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

  "(2) Section 170 applies, with any necessary modification, 

to a special resolution mentioned in subsection (1) 

as if the special resolution was a proposal to amend 

the articles." 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That amendment was on section 12?  Could 

you give me an explanation of how the corporation 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

and its directors could change a class of shares.  Would they 

have to have notice of that in writing to their shareholders?  

Would you give me an explanation of how they can change 

those classes of shares and how it would be done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the House 

amendment is to make clear the situation that the member's 

question is addressed to.  And it brings section 170 into 

operation with respect to the changing of shares or any class or 

series of shares into a different number of shares.  And 170 has 

very extensive provisions that apply to these situations, 

including notice requirements and limitations with respect to 

the right to make changes with respect to the share structure of 

a company. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just so I have this straight, Mr. Minister, 

you're saying . . . And I'll use my own company as an example, 

where we have preferred A shares -- my mother has so many, 

my father has so many, I have so many -- and then we have B 

shares which both my father and I hold because of the transfer 

of machinery and other assets into the corporation at the time, 

and there was a value assigned to them that over time the 

company has paid back . . . or paid out to the shareholders. 

 

Are you saying now that you could switch those, for instance 

those A and B shares, without having to go through a redrafting 

of the articles of incorporation, say from preferred B to 

preferred A now without . . . and you just attach an addendum 

at the time of your annual meeting rather than redoing your 

articles? 

 

(1030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I may have misled the member by an 

earlier answer I gave.  The change here is within a class, so that 

you can change the number of shares within a class.  Say you 

have 100 class A shares and you want to increase the number 

of those class A shares to 200.  You could proceed by special 

resolution under the amendment, provided of course that you've 

complied with the requirements of section 170. 

 

You couldn't change from class A to class B or change the 

class in some other fashion, relying upon this clause.  There are 

of course ways to do that under the Act, but not under 25.1. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, would you explain for us, I 

believe it is 13(2)(c), these provisions under the Income Tax 

Act.  Once again in a corporation you will have different tax 

rules with different types of shares.  I want to understand 

clearly what you're getting at here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 

currently subsection . . . section 26, subsection (1.2) allows a 

person who does not deal with the corporation at arm's length 

to transfer property to the corporation on a roll-over basis -- on 

what's been described to me as a 

roll-over basis under the federal Income Tax Act. 

 

The person transferring the property takes back shares in the 

corporation, and the amount that is added to the stated value of 

those shares can be less than the fair market value of the 

property transferred into the corporation.  That's allowed. 

 

The addition of this clause (c) in the Bill that we're considering 

this morning, will allow the same procedure to be followed 

where the shareholders are not related.  To protect the other 

shareholders, their consent, and the consent of the corporation, 

is required before this procedure can be used.  But that is the 

purpose of the amendment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what you're saying now, Mr. Minister, is 

that in a family situation on, say, a transfer of assets that the 

roll-over provision was in place.  In other words you could take 

the value of premises, property, that maybe had a market value 

of 150,000, but because of the roll-over provision you could do 

it within at 100,000 with some type of a preferred C share 

attached to it for the future that was never collected upon. 

 

Now what you're saying, is that another individual has also that 

same ability with property or assets and that . . . See what I 

envision here, Mr. Minister, is that you could draw a number of 

people into your company with that roll-over provision that . . . 

Well it certainly might enhance the company, but I'm not sure 

what it would do on the tax side.  Because at some point, 

capital gains and recapture depreciation occur in here. 

 

And I understand clearly why it was the roll-over provision 

was there, for instance, in a family farming corporation or most 

small businesses.  But I don't quite understand where you're 

trying to get to with the at-arm's-length individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, sorry 

to take a while, but the member understands very well how 

complex it is.  And I don't purport to be an expert on these 

matters and so I'm not entirely comfortable tossing out some of 

these symbols. 

 

There is, as the House knows, an obligation on directors to act 

prudently and fairly and in the best interests of the corporation.  

The question of roll-overs, which the member has described 

better than I did, are permitted in non-arm's-length situations 

for valid reasons, I think, and allows the directors to accept less 

than full value. 

 

What this provision does . . . By the way, the Income Tax Act, 

section 86, deals with those situations in a sympathetic way.  I 

think I can summarize it by so describing it.  This provision, 

which was requested by the Canadian Bar Association, where 

the situation is not at arm's length, allows the directors to 

accept less than value where there may be other business 

reasons to do that, and is set up in such a way as to prevent 

abuse but still permit them to do that and avoid conflict as a 

result of their so doing. 

 

How that will square with the income tax situation depends on 

the circumstances.  It obviously won't enjoy 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

the same kind of protections as the arm's length . . . the 

non-arm's-length transactions, but it will be a matter for the 

taxpayer and the income tax people to sort out.  But this 

proposal permits the transaction, as I've indicated. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, is this provision then bringing 

Saskatchewan in line with other jurisdictions in Canada?  Is 

that why the bar association was hot on it, if those type of 

corporations lived under that different set of rules elsewhere? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a relatively new idea and it's being 

proposed, as I said, by the Canadian Bar Association.  It is 

permitted under The Income Tax Act and as far as we know, 

we're the first jurisdiction to move it into actual legislation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is my 

accountant now has another excuse to up my bill.  I wonder, 

Mr. Minister, if you could just give us a brief explanation of 

how your officials would see this consensual thing occurring.  

How would the directors of the corporation grant consent to a 

person that was at arm's length? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we would see this 

consent as being given in the way that consents are given, in 

writing.  Depending on the circumstances, it may require a 

resolution.  In the case of individuals, it will require a 

document that will be signed and dated.  And good practice 

would require them to be witnessed in an appropriate way, but 

nothing special. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would this also be allowed 

where a company was taking some of its shares and moving it 

into another company, a subsidiary of the main company?  

Would it be allowed to do the same thing and set it up under a 

shareholder's loan so that that could be dealt with as a 

subsidiary of the main company?  Is that a possibility under 

this section too? -- a section also, I mean. 

 

(1045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The specific example given by the hon. 

member would not be at arm's length because it would be a 

subsidiary company, and that is one aspect to the problem.  

This is largely an accountant's tool, as I think you can 

appreciate.  It allows in effect less than the full value to be put 

into the capital account, while other portions of the value are 

put somewhere else, like retained earnings or that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just out of 

curiosity, Mr. Minister, in your many responsibilities, the 

question that was just posed by the member from Morse in fact 

is what we have seen in some parts of the construction industry 

with spin-off companies.  And you have a very stated opinion 

about that sort of thing. 

 

And I'm glad to see that Saskatchewan is launching off into 

new worlds here ahead of everyone else.  But I'm wondering, 

Mr. Minister, if that isn't why some people in the province find 

your government sort of one of mixed signals, because that in 

fact is what occurs in that area -- sometimes at arm's length, 

sometimes not. 

And in fact you may be encouraging people to do that very 

thing because you're right, it is a mechanism where you can 

keep retained earnings, perhaps better than you would under 

another structure.  And I'm wondering if it should not give you 

hesitation in some other areas with the enactment of this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's a very interesting question, Mr. 

Chairman.  I have -- in putting on my other hat for a moment -- 

I have absolutely no objection, legal or policy or otherwise, to 

people organizing their affairs through the use of subsidiary 

corporations or whatever it is. 

 

What I say, wearing my other hat, is that that can't be used in 

order to defeat the right to bargain collectively and to enjoy the 

fruits of freedom of association.  And so long as the integrity of 

the labour relations law is properly cared for, then I think that 

corporate mazes may be as complex as one wishes and I have 

no objection to that at all. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this is the 

section that deals with loans given to individuals.  I guess one 

of the questions that I have is why is it done after the fact?  I 

believe that what you should be doing here is involving the 

consent of individuals to have . . . require this disclosure before 

the event occurs.  You have to do it, as I read it in here, after . . 

. or in each case the following year you have to give notice of 

it. 

 

I was wondering why -- and maybe I missed it -- but why you 

have it only after the fact and not as a part of the fact and 

during the movement of a loan or a guarantee to a person that is 

in the corporation.  Can you give me an explanation for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question, Mr. Chairman, is again a 

good question.  And I don't mean to patronize the member; I 

mean it is a valid point. 

 

The position of directors of a corporation under this kind of 

legislation has always been a serious position, a very important 

position, and one of trust, carrying with it fiduciary 

responsibilities for the director to act prudently and in the best 

interests of the corporation. 

 

And the extent of that obligation has grown very significantly 

over the last few years.  I think the member knows that.  But I 

can say from my own experience that the potential liability of 

directors as it has developed under the common law and under 

legislation has grown remarkably. 

 

It used to be considered that there really wasn't much that one 

could do by way of a claim against directors of a corporation in 

practically any circumstances short of outright fraud.  And that 

was the state of the common law a mere 15 years ago. 

 

And that situation has changed dramatically now so that 

directors have all sorts of responsibilities that they must 

discharge, failing which they can face very significant 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

liabilities, very significant claims.  And I think that's a healthy 

development of the law. 

 

So the Act is set up in such a way that it is assumed that the 

directors will act prudently and in the best interests of the 

corporation.  That's why they were elected as directors.  They 

are the sorts of people who can be expected to act prudently 

and in the best interests of the corporation. 

 

And the Act throughout allows the directors to make the 

decisions that directors make without prior approval from the 

shareholders.  They account to the shareholders in general 

meetings that are required by the Act, and they are subject to 

replacement and removal and other remedies that are described 

in the Act.  But they're sort of like we are, you know.  They're 

elected and then we act in this legislature.  We do what we do, 

and you do what you do.  And at the end of our term, we go 

back and report, and it's either accepted or not. 

 

Now we go back every four to five years, three to five years, 

something like that. The directors have to go back more 

regularly and report under the Act.  But the whole structure of 

the Act, the scheme of the Act, is that the directors are elected 

to act, and act without having to obtain prior approval from the 

shareholders. 

 

So in connection with section (1)14, the structure again is that, 

as the member observed, it's not a prior approval, but it is a 

matter of full disclosure of the acts of the directors reporting to 

the shareholders on what they have done generally and what 

they have done specifically with respect to section 42. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Section (6) under section 14: 

 

 A contract made by a corporation in contravention of this 

section may be enforced by the corporation or by a lender for 

value in good faith without notice of the contravention. 

 

Does that mean that the contravention doesn't have to be 

reported to the shareholders, or is that a different kind of a 

notice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, subsection (6) is 

intended to deal primarily with guarantees.  It's not easy to 

envisage a circumstance in which you would deal with loans.  

And what it means is that so far as the lender is concerned who 

is on the receiving end of the guarantee, they are entitled to 

enforce their contract for repayment.  Even if section 42 hasn't 

been complied with, even if the disclosures haven't been made, 

the lender is still entitled to take action on the contract to 

enforce repayment of the loan.  And so long as the lender 

doesn't have notice that the Act hasn't been complied with, the 

lender is on safe and solid ground. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In other words, a 

shareholder or a group of shareholders in contravening the Act, 

enter into a contract with a bank or someone else -- I suppose a 

bank would be the most onerous under 178 -- that the other 

folks in the corporation are then stuck with coming back on 

that director or group of directors in a liability action.  And 

meanwhile the bank is totally free to do whatever to that 

corporation.  Is that basically what you're telling me? 

 

(1100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The shareholders are of course protected 

in other sections -- section 113 and 117 -- in the sense that they 

will be able to claim against the directors.  The loan that we're 

talking about is . . . and the examples we've been using at least, 

have been loans to directors.  And they will be liable to the 

bank anyway. 

 

But the bank will be able to proceed against the corporation 

even if the corporation hasn't complied with the requirements 

of section 42.  Provided that the bank didn't have any notice.  

Provided that the bank is acting in good faith and didn't know 

that section 42 had not been complied with. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, in earlier sections here, I mean, 

it talks about the ability of the company to go from one 

financial statement to the other pursuant to clause 149(1)(a) 

about disclosure. 

 

In other words, you could go almost an entire calendar year 

with either a shareholder's loan or a guarantee being given by 

the company to one of its shareholders who then enters into a 

subsequent agreement with somebody else.  The rest of the 

folks don't know about it.  Something happens.  The bank 

comes back on that particular shareholder or a group of 

shareholders for redress.  You're right -- the other shareholders 

can come back against that individual or group of individuals. 

 

But I would suggest, under the bankruptcy proceedings, that it 

isn't all that difficult for that obligation to be negated in almost 

its entirety.  And quite rightly, the person then goes through his 

trustee and has a period of -- it's getting shorter every year -- 

penance time and then we're back on our feet again. 

 

I just find this 6 a little bit wild and wonderful.  Is this the same 

in other jurisdictions?  I mean, are we copying anybody?  Or is 

this, once again, the bar association asking us to sort of be the 

front-end? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I make two comments, two points in 

response.  The first is that this specific section or subsection, 

subsection (6) is carrying forward the old subsection (3). So it 

in itself is not a new idea.  And that provision is in the 

legislation of I think all of the other jurisdictions, speaking 

specifically and only to subsection (6). 

 

Now the context is different, as the member says, and that's my 

second point.  And we are moving at the head of the line rather 

than somewhere later down the line. 

 

I might also mention for the member, Mr. Chairman, that the 

Alberta law reform commission -- I don't think they call it a 

commission -- but their law reform agency has recommended 

the proposed section 42 to their government, to the 

Government of Alberta.  And it is our information that Alberta 

plans to move in the same direction that we are. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to. 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

Clauses 15 and 16 agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, as I read this, this would be the 

section entitled, the make work for Saskatchewan lawyers 

section.  Have I read that correctly?  That's different than it was 

before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's not the purpose, Mr. Chairman.  

The requirement of having a director resident in Saskatchewan 

is seen to be an artificial requirement and is often, in certain 

situations, an awkward requirement that is not easily capable of 

sensible resolution. 

 

And so you have a lawyer acting as a director without really 

having any stake in the company or really owning any share in 

the company, or a member of the chartered accountant firm 

similarly acting as a director when that person does not have 

any substantial reason for being a director and at the end of the 

day is not in reality a director.  The affairs of the company are 

directed by the people who will have an interest in the 

company and not by this person who is named only to comply 

with the requirement that one director must reside in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we're proposing to take that out and leave it to the people in 

these corporations to determine who will be their directors.  

And we do require, as I think I said earlier, that the corporation 

have a presence in Saskatchewan, that they have a presence 

here so that people can serve notices or processes upon the 

corporation by serving it or delivering it to the office of the 

representative who may be a lawyer but who doesn't have to be 

a lawyer -- can be, again, an accountant or can . . . will 

probably be the same people who are now serving as directors 

under the requirement that we have in the existing subsection 

(3) of section 100. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, it clearly says the corporation 

shall appoint an attorney pursuant to section 268 and comply 

with section 268.  And that tells me that even though we don't 

have to have a director any more, you're going to have a 

Saskatchewan lawyer.  And there's no sense . . . You did a great 

dance, but just call a spade a spade and say that's exactly what 

we're doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well my answer is the same.  The term 

"attorney" as used in this legislation is not the American idea of 

an attorney being a lawyer, but is rather a person named under 

a power of attorney as attorney for the company.  So it wouldn't 

have to be a lawyer -- might be, but wouldn't have to be. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I'm not exactly sure where my question will fit in -- 

it's either in 34, 35, or 36 -- dealing with name 

changes.  And I'm wondering in the Act what priority is set out 

as to who is entitled to use a corporate name? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Section 34 deals with a situation where 

a corporation from outside Saskatchewan seeking to be 

registered in Saskatchewan, as what we call an extra-provincial 

corporation, runs into the problem that its name is the same as 

or similar to the name of a Saskatchewan corporation. 

 

In those circumstances the Saskatchewan corporation takes 

precedence.  The extra-provincial company registering into 

Saskatchewan has to accept the situation in Saskatchewan as it 

finds it.  And if there is in fact a Saskatchewan corporation that 

has the same or a similar name, then the extra-provincial 

company has to give way. 

 

What we are seeking to do for them, in order to smooth their 

way and not make . . . you know, not tie them up with 

unnecessary red tape is to permit them to register under an 

alternate name, retaining their same corporate structure outside 

of Saskatchewan but operating in Saskatchewan under an 

alternate name.  And then we deal with that alternate name in 

the way that the member sees under section 294.1 which gives 

them the same situation as they would have if they had been 

able to register their name without any difficulty. 

 

So that the specific answer to the member's question is that 

Saskatchewan corporations have precedence and the 

extra-provincial companies have to give way to the names that 

are already on the books in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, therefore we would not 

run into the situation that occurred in Manitoba where a family 

business known as the Brick's Fine Furniture ran into 

complications with The BRICK corporation which also sell 

furniture, which was an out-of-province corporation moving 

into the city of Winnipeg.  That will not happen in this 

province then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I'm 

advised that The BRICK was successful in using its name in 

Manitoba in spite of a conflict because it was a registered trade 

mark.  And its rights as a trade mark, with that trade mark, 

overwhelmed or overtopped the right of the Manitoba company 

with respect to the name.  So that The BRICK can operate in 

Manitoba using The BRICK, but they can't use that corporate 

name. 

 

They can call their store The BRICK by virtue of their trade 

mark, but the returns that they file with the Manitoba 

government and the name they legally use in registering and in 

keeping registered and satisfying the requirements of the 

Manitoba business corporations Act as the different . . . it's got 

to be a different name, as it would in Saskatchewan.  The same 

situation would pertain here.  They could operate as The 

BRICK by virtue of their federal registration as a trade mark 

but they would have to use an alternate name as the corporate 

name in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I'm also advised that there are negotiations at the officials' 

level between Ottawa and Manitoba and The 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

BRICK in order to try and sort that situation out in a more 

accommodating way.  But that situation at the moment could 

happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well since The BRICK corporation 

could continue to use the name The BRICK as a trade mark, 

what happens to the other company, say in Saskatchewan that 

was also using Brick in its name as a furniture company?  

Would they then be disallowed from continuing the use of that 

name? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the situation was a real 

mess in Manitoba.  The court's judgement resolved some 

questions but didn't resolve it all.  It's still a mess.  And we 

have no way of sorting it out because we have not the 

jurisdiction with respect to trade marks.  And the courts have 

found, at least appear to have found, as a matter of 

constitutional law that The BRICK can use its trade mark. 

 

So the situation in Manitoba is that The BRICK and Mr. Brick 

operate both with those names.  The corporate situation is as 

we have it in this Bill, but so far as the public is concerned 

there is great confusion.  And it is that confusion that is 

apparently being addressed in these discussions and 

negotiations that I referred to earlier. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, at the present time that 

kind of confusion could actually take place in Saskatchewan.  

In the Manitoba case Mr. Brick and his fine furniture store is 

receiving phone calls with people aiming at The BRICK, either 

for service or with complaints, and yet he has to field all these 

phone calls with no return.  So the circumstances could actually 

occur in Saskatchewan in a similar manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes they could, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think while you're 

going through a Bill like this, which includes name changes 

and the problems, I think it would be advisable to take a serious 

look at finding a manner in which to solve that problem.  And 

perhaps the discussions that are taking place currently will do 

that.  But I think it should be done expeditiously if possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have taken a very aggressive 

position with respect to this question, and have aligned ourself 

with the Manitoba government, which are aligned with Mr. 

Brick.  And the Alberta government is part of the group also.  

And we're doing what we can to try and assert a primacy in this 

area. 

 

And there's a good argument for doing it of course.  These are 

the corporations . . . this is the legislation which gives life to 

corporations, which takes incorporating documents and 

registers it as a corporation, and thereby gives life to a new 

person -- really a new person in law, which is the new 

corporation -- and gives it its name, and then goes to some 

lengths to protect its name as you see in the Act, including the 

provisions that we're talking about this morning. 

 

And then to have a federal law extending a trade mark come in 

over the top of the provincial law and create the situation that 

you described in Manitoba, is not good at 

all.  It's just a terrible mess, and a potential mess.  And we're 

trying to fight our way through to a solution. 

 

We can't pass anything in this House that would affect the 

constitutional result in the Manitoba case.  There is just no law 

that we could devise that would clarify it.  We've protected the 

names to the extent that we can, but we can't change the 

trade-mark law nor the constitutional primacy which that law 

apparently has under the Manitoba decision.  But we're in there 

fighting about it and being as aggressive as we can. 

 

Clause 34 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 35 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act, 

repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts resulting from the 

Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and the Court of 

Queen's Bench 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister has any other officials to 

introduce, I'd ask that he do that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before I do that, Mr. Chairman, can I 

thank the officials that were here on the consideration of The 

Business Corporations Act for attending this morning and for 

assisting us in our deliberations? 

 

The Chair: -- You certainly may.  And the Chair joins you in 

thanking the officials.  And, Mr. Minister, if you'd like to now 

introduce the new official that has joined you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, that everyone 

was introduced.  Doug Moen, who is the co-ordinator of 

legislative services in the Department of Justice.  And Ms. 

Mary Ellen Wellsch, who is the Public Trustee, and has 

assisted me on a number of Bills.  And I'm glad that she's here 

this morning. 

 

The Chair: -- Thank you, Minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And first of all, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, I'd like to extend my thanks on behalf of the 

opposition to the members who were assisting the minister just 

a few moments ago.  And certainly appreciate the staff that we 

do have working in the legislature regarding Bills and being 

able to be here to answer the questions we have. 
 

I was just thinking a moment ago, as we were going through 

the former debate, that when you get into some of the technical 

matters and the legal jargon that a lot of the Bills have that 

come before the Assembly, and as you enter into the debate, 

the immediate debate, sometimes I wonder if the opposition 

wouldn't be . . . it'd be a little handier if the opposition was able 

to have a person with a legal background helping them as well, 

getting into some of the discussion.  Because a fair bit of the 

questions and answers sometimes draw up, raise other 

questions, and it's difficult when a person doesn't have a very 

intensive 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

background in legal matters, to have someone there. 

 

But I appreciate the fact that we do have people here to respond 

to the questions that . . . and I'm sure that even as we discuss 

the Bill No. 67 that's before us at the present time, Mr. Speaker, 

regarding The Queen's Bench Act. 

 

I believe the significant importance of this Bill is to tie in or, I 

believe, sets down, or closes out The Surrogate Court Act, and 

then puts all the responsibilities or places all the responsibilities 

of The Surrogate Court Act under The Queen's Bench Act.  

And I'd like the minister to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is 

exactly right.  The Act will amalgamate the Surrogate Court 

with the Court of Queen's Bench.  And it repeals The Surrogate 

Court Act.  That latter Act, Mr. Chairman, contained quite a 

number of substantive provisions with respect to wills and 

estates, and those provisions are being transferred into The 

Queen's Bench Act so that they're not lost.  And I believe that 

all of the changes, or all of the provisions of this Bill, are 

directed to that one purpose. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- For the sake of the House, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

I'm just wondering, why would the government make a 

decision at this time to amalgamate the two Acts under one 

Act?  Would the minister give the reasons for the 

amalgamation of the Acts. 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, it is a streamlining 

provision.  The district court and the Queen's Bench court were 

amalgamated by legislation in this House in 1978 or 1979 -- 

I've forgotten which -- and the Surrogate Court was left off to 

the side.  And there has not proven to be any valid reason for 

that.  It is a court without a specific judiciary of its own.  The 

duties of the Surrogate Court are carried out by judges of the 

Court of Queen's Bench.  In effect, it is an unnecessary 

complication of the system.  It has more historical significance 

than it has modern day significance. 

 

If you were named as the executor in a will of a person who 

has died and you wish to prove up that will and obtain letters 

probate confirming your appointment as executor, and 

administer the estate and pass your accounts, in other words, to 

do your duties as an executor, you would go to the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  You would actually . . . you or your lawyer 

would go to the office of the registrar of the Court of Queen's 

Bench, you would make the application with the registrar of the 

Court of Queen's Bench, and your application would be 

reviewed by a judge of the Court of Queen's Bench and that 

judge would sign letters probate, but sign over the words: a 

judge of the Surrogate Court. 

 

Then your applications that you may have to make to the court 

in connection with that estate would come up in Queen's Bench 

chambers and your final passing of accounts, if indeed you had 

to do that, would also be done before a Queen's Bench judge in 

Queen's Bench chambers. 

The idea of preserving a distinction between those courts has 

turned out to be an idea that had no purpose, no merit.  And in 

this day and age when I think all governments are trying to 

make legislation more readable and make the instruments of 

government more accessible to ordinary people, more 

understandable, it makes sense to meld these courts together 

and simply make all these functions, functions which are 

performed by the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that even 

though there was a specific Act to cover probation of wills, that 

technically, through the process, people still ended up . . . they 

had to approach the Queen's Bench court to in fact follow 

through with the purposes of the Act.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's exactly right.  And in effect what 

we were just preserving -- fiction, that there was another court 

there, the Surrogate Court.  Because all of it, every step, was 

actually being made and cared for and administered by Court 

of Queen's Bench personnel, including judges. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- When you're talking of efficiencies in the system, 

then I would gather that by amalgamating the two Acts, that we 

will have a . . . Firstly, will this speed up the process of 

probation of wills?  Does this speed this up at all -- the fact that 

you just go, can go directly to the Queen's Bench versus 

following through on The Surrogate Court Act as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, it's not likely to make 

any difference at all.  It simplifies the forms.  And it is a 

simpler concept, removes the complexities and the obscurities 

of an historical court which has always had jurisdiction . . . 

well not always -- but for hundreds of years literally has had 

jurisdiction over these matters and brings a large dose of reality 

to the situation because it is in fact the Court of Queen's Bench 

who is performing these functions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, does the amalgamation of the two 

Acts create any monetary gain or have any monetary value on 

the government and the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, there 

are two budgetary aspects to what we're doing here.  One is 

indirect and one is direct.  The direct move . . . The direct 

change that is being made has to do with the official 

administrator, the official administrator at the various judicial 

centres.  In the past, that has been a function carried out usually 

by a trust company that's appointed as the official administrator 

for a particular judicial centre. 

 

It is proposed under this Bill that the Public Trustee for 

Saskatchewan will be the official administrator at each judicial 

centre. 

 

Now the official administrator comes into action, comes into 

play, when there is a will that doesn't name an executor, or 

where there's no executor prepared to act, or where there is no 

will.  And that happens reasonably often.  And that is a change 

of significance, of course, to the trust companies who had been 

acting as official administrators. 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

The indirect budget consideration is the following. Members of 

the Court of Queen's Bench and the Court of Appeal have 

received an honorarium of $3,000 per year, paid by the 

province, for acting as judges of the  Surrogate Court.  This is 

in addition to the regular salary that they receive from the 

federal government as a result of being federally appointed 

judges.  We have notified the judges of the Court of Queen's 

Bench and the Court of Appeal that this amount will no longer 

be paid.  And that is part of the budgetary adjustments that 

were announced by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, or 

flowed from his announcements in the budget speech.  So there 

are those two budgetary implications. 

 

There is another one that is less obvious, less capable of 

quantification, and that is the money that will be saved because 

we don't have to print a separate set of forms headed: in the 

Surrogate Court for Saskatchewan, any more.  Those forms 

will be redundant, and we will be proceeding with Queen's 

Bench forms. 

 

Now that's not much of a factor, and there's not a lot of overlap 

because many of the documents used in the Surrogate Court 

were particular to the Surrogate Court.  But to the extent that 

there was overlap in the documents used by the court, there 

will be a very small saving there.  But I think I should say to 

the hon. member that that amount would be insignificant.  It 

would cover things like subpoenas for witnesses and those sorts 

of forms that would be in use. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you mentioned a figure, I 

believe, that was available of 3,000 per annum for duties 

performed.  When we're talking about that 3,000 per annum, is 

that per individual?  And secondly, we're talking of . . . you've 

mentioned the Public Trustee then becomes the official 

administrator throughout the province.  I take it then what 

you're . . . In placing the responsibility of the administrator in 

the hands of the Public Trustee, the Public Trustee will be 

doing with the same remuneration he or she presently receives.  

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to confirm that 

the $3,000 per year was paid to each judge, and there were, I 

think, 44 of them.  So the amount involved is 132,000 per year. 

 

With respect to the second question, the Public Trustee will not 

be receiving any salary increase in respect of having taking on 

these additional functions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And that's what I was 

indicating, that by having the Public Trustee involved, the 

Public Trustee, that would become another one of the 

additional duties without extra remuneration for that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm just wondering what, if any, the consultative 

process was taken between judges or what kind of response the 

government or the department had had from the judicial 

community regarding the elimination of this per annum, $3,000 

per annum, that they were receiving -- the refund for duties that 

they were performing? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 

notified the chief justices of the two courts, Queen's Bench and 

the Court of Appeal, before the matter became public.  I met 

with the Queen's Bench judges at their annual meeting in North 

Battleford in June, I think it was, and I confirmed that this 

would happen. 

 

And I can tell the member that there were no negative 

comments with respect to this matter from the chief justices or 

from the judges.  Some of them actually said that they felt 

everybody had to make a contribution in these circumstances, 

and they, that is the people who were speaking, were more than 

happy to do this as their contribution. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that you 

did have the time to communicate and speak to the . . . You're 

talking about the Queen's Bench judges.  And then they would 

have . . . and you were then asking or asking them to relate the 

changes that would be taking place to the rest of the court.  I'm 

not sure how many Queen's Bench judges there are in the 

province of Saskatchewan, but through your office you did take 

the time to at least inform people of the fact that this monetary 

change was taking place. 

 

And I look at the total amount of $132,000, and I guess if we 

look at it on the basis of an individual person or a small 

company, 132,000 might mean a significant amount of money.  

Certainly when we look at it in respect to the provincial budget, 

it's a very minuscule amount.  And I'm sure the Minister of 

Finance would be needing to find more amounts such as this, in 

fact an enormous amount to have any significance in his 

budget. 

 

But I think the process we need -- and I think a lot of people 

around Saskatchewan realize that we all are going to have to 

work a little harder and realize that the services we're 

demanding must be paid for and that we may have to pull our 

belts just a little tighter, and as long as I think people are given 

the ability to have at least some input, be made aware of the 

changes, so that changes coming that affect people are not 

related to them after the fact. 

 

I also, I believe I was looking through the Bill here, and I 

mentioned a little earlier the fact that the Bill before us is 

amalgamating the two services.  I noticed that after clause no. 

9, we do have a substantial -- from clause 9 to I believe it's 

clause no. 10 -- there's a substantial number of clauses added in 

there.  Are those specific clauses related to the Surrogate Court 

and that's just adding the responsibilities of that Surrogate 

Court now to under the Queen's Bench Act?  Is that the purpose 

for that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right.   The Queen's Bench Act as 

it now reads goes up to . . . or at least after section 99 will 

include the sections beginning on page 4, new section 100, and 

from there on.  Those are provisions that are now included in 

The Surrogate Court Act.  They are not new. 

 

They don't all read exactly the same because we've taken 

advantage of this opportunity to tidy up some of the language 

and to simplify some of the language.  But in 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard August 10, 1992 

substance there have been no change, with the exception of 

section 132 dealing with the official administrator, and I have 

already explained that situation to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I also notice there was . . . I believe when we're 

talking of, in the Act . . . and I'm just  . . . find it right off hand, 

but we're talking of an increase . . . I guess section 103 where it 

talks of increasing from 5,000 to 10,000 the value of the estate. 

 

Am I taking from that, Mr. Minister, that the Surrogate Court 

prior to the amalgamation of the Act didn't really get involved 

in estates that were above $5,000, and now you've increased 

that to 10, the Queen's Bench court will not really be involved, 

that there are other channels available?  Is that the purpose for 

the increase in that monetary fund? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It is rather the reverse, Mr. Chairman.  

And the member is correct -- the $10,000 figure is a change 

from 5. 

 

And what it means is this: if you are the executor of an estate 

where less than $10,000 is involved -- the value of the estate is 

less than 10,000 -- you can actually go in yourself to the 

registrar's office and the registrar will help you prepare the 

necessary forms. 

 

And they used to do that up to a limit of $5,000 and they are 

now going to do it up to the limit of $10,000.  So anything 

above $10,000 has to go through the more formal application 

which is filled out by you or your solicitor and which is 

presented to the registrar, which then goes before a judge and is 

dealt with in a formal way.  But this other procedure is the less 

formal and much less expensive. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So I take it then that this should allow for a 

speedier processing of, especially, smaller claims that would 

come before the court.  And at least, what it does then is 

eliminates the necessity for those small estates to even proceed 

to the court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, it certainly simplifies the process.  

I was just asking my officials if we had any idea how many 

such cases there are that are handled each year and they don't 

know.  We just don't keep track of how many go that way as 

opposed to the lawyer, the law firm route. 

 

The chief advantage of the provision is that it's much cheaper 

because it can be done without the intervention of a law firm. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 

 

The Chair: -- An amendment, House amendment on clause 26.  

If the minister would like to move the amendment. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the amendment is a 

technical one.  With respect to section 26 of the printed Bill, 

amended: 

 

 (a) by renumbering subsections (4) and (5) as subsections 

(5) and (6); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (3): 

 

  (4) clause 172(1)(a) is amended by striking out "Surrogate 

Court" and substituting "Court of Queen's Bench". 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 27 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 31 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what is The Survival of Actions 

Act?  How does that fit into . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, The 

Survival of Actions Act deals with the question of what actions 

survive the death of a plaintiff or claimant.  Some causes of 

actions die with the claimant; others survive.  Example, a libel 

or slander action would die with the claimant.  On the other 

hand, a claim under a contract would survive.  This Act that is 

referred to here deals with that and provides what survives and 

what doesn't survive. 

 

Clause 31 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 32 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

officials for coming here today and assisting us in the 

committee's consideration of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I wish to also 

extend on behalf of the opposition our appreciation and thanks 

to the minister and his officials for spending this time with us 

this morning and answering our questions.  Thank you. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins the members in thanking the 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Being that it's pretty well 12 

o'clock, I would suggest that we rise and report progress and 

come back again in the afternoon. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Business Corporations 

Act 



August 10, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the House I 

move that Bill No. 45 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act, 

repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts resulting from the 

Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and the Court of 

Queen's Bench 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 67 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 

 


