




















































Hansard: August 28, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3219 

 August 28, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to Provide a Charter of 

Environmental Rights and Responsibilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, prior to the election last 

October, our party made a commitment to initiate an 

environmental strategy for the '90s based on the fundamental 

principles of sustainability and stewardship to be achieved 

through public participation. 

 

The Charter of Environmental Rights and Responsibilities, 

recently introduced in this House as Bill No. 48, is intended to 

facilitate public stewardship and thereby enhance existing 

environmental protection legislation. 

 

We believe that a public review and consultation process, 

conducted by the new Standing Committee on the 

Environment, will also serve to confirm and clarify the 

provisions in the charter itself. 

 

I therefore move that Bill No. 48, An Act to Provide a Charter 

of Environmental Rights and Responsibilities, be not now read 

a second time, but that the subject matter of this Bill be referred 

to the Standing Committee on the Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Having 

been persuaded by the eloquence of the member from Melfort, 

I'll now take the opportunity to formerly move The Charter of 

Environmental Rights and Resolutions for second reading. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd just like 

some clarification if I could please.  I believe the minister was 

moving it to go to committee, the new committee that was 

struck.  So I'm just wondering why we are going to be going 

through second reading now. 

 

The Speaker: -- Just a brief explanation. There was a little bit 

of a foul-up this morning.  What should have happened is that 

the Deputy House Leader should have moved second reading, 

we should have been in debate of second reading.  The 

Minister of the Environment then should have gotten up and 

moved the amendment.  So we will not consider the question of 

second reading, but I will ask the Minister of the Environment 

to move her amendment again and then we will vote on the 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 48, An Act to Provide a Charter of 

Environmental Rights and Responsibilities, be not now read a 

second time, but the subject matter of this Bill be referred to 

the Standing Committee on the Environment. 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Because one of the Bills is under 

private members' agenda, leave must be asked to go to that 

particular item. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 

co-operation, I would ask for leave to go to the Scottish clans 

day of appreciation Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of co-operation, 

leave is granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well in the spirit of co-operation, I'm going to 

leave the chair. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a Day of Appreciation for 

Scottish Clans in Canada 

 

The Chair: -- There is no minister, and I believe . . . so I'm not 

quite sure who questions might be asked of, other than those of 

Scottish background, if there are any questions. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My colleague 

that brought the Bill forward will be here in a few minutes. 

 

But being by the name of Muirhead from Scotland, I'm quite 

proud of this.  Muirhead's the name of a Scotch plaid in 

Scotland.  And I'm very, very proud that it's being brought 

forward because I think that the Scotch people were some of 

the more stubborn people that ever were on the face of the 

earth.   They came across from Scotland in the early days. 

 

And I know my great, great uncle came over in 1854 with four 

brothers and they settled in Ontario; and the farm land that they 

got, all they could see they could touch tree to tree.  And in 12 

years they had about 10 acres.  In 12 years they had 12 acres to 

clear.  And I'm very proud of my ancestors.  I've been back to 

Ontario.  Naturally I followed through because that's where my 

father came from.  I've seen the grave where this here uncle of 

mine came from in 1854 over here, and he died in 1858 from 

hard work.  And I'm just very proud of my ancestors, as I know 

many people here with a Scottish background are proud of the 

people from Scotland. 

 

And I think that's it's nice that if we could bring this forth, that 

we declare a day special for the Scottish people.  And also 

anyone that comes from the island -- from England, Ireland, or 

Scotland -- there's a lot of them got a Scottish background.  

And I'd like to say thank you to the member from Kindersley 

that brought this here forward. 



3220 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

So I'm sure he's got a few words he's going to say on it, and I'll 

let him respond. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of the 

Scottish clans, I'm very proud to be able to bring this Bill 

before the House.  And we had received requests from people 

in letter form asking for a day of appreciation for the Scottish 

clans in Saskatchewan.  April 6 is a significant date in the Bill, 

and the reason why it is a significant date was that it marked 

the signing of the declaration of Arbroath at Arbroath Abbey, 

written by the Scottish nobles to the Pope in which the line is 

written: it is not for glory nor riches nor honours that we are 

fighting but for freedom, for that alone, which no honest man 

gives up but with life itself.  These moving words were used . . 

. is the reason why this date was chosen -- April 6. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be moved forward. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a Day of Appreciation for 

Scottish Clans in Canada 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Health 

Vote 32 

Item 1 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to please 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To my left is Mr. 

Duane Adams, the deputy minister, and behind me, Mr. 

Lawrence Krahn whom I've introduced here on several 

occasions. 

 

The Chair: -- I would like the members to please come to 

order and respect the fact that we have business to conduct 

before the committee.  If they have other business to conduct, 

to do so quietly. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And 

good morning, Madam Minister and officials.  Last day, 

Madam Minister, we were talking about the diabetics and the 

situation that has been opposed on diabetics.  And I notice that 

the answers were slow in forthcoming.  And I gave you an 

indication, Madam Minister, the last time that we were talking 

about the Estimates in Health, gave you an idea of some of the 

questions that I would be asking this morning. 

 

Just to refresh our memories, Madam Minister, could you bring 

us up to date as to how many diabetics there are in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 14,800 families. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And that translates into how many diabetics? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are unable to determine the number 

of individuals from our data bank, but you had suggested it 

might be about 16 or 17,000.  And we're prepared to accept 

that.  It sounds like it might be about accurate. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'm holding a newspaper 

article in my hand now from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, May 

22, an article written by Randy Burton that says that . . . I'll just 

read the first paragraph: 

 

 Frustration and anger over higher charges for needed drugs is 

growing as the province's 20,000 diabetics learn about 

changes made to the provincial drug plan. 

 

Would you accept this newspaper article's figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The department has met with the diabetic 

association.  And I'm advised that we are unable to determine 

the number of individuals.  And apparently, the diabetic 

association aren't able to accurately determine that at all.  But 

we do know it's 14,000 families. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I can appreciate 

the quandary that you are in, in coming up with the specific 

figure, but I'm just trying to get it as close . . . nailed down as 

closely as possible.  So somewhere in that neighbourhood then 

is the number that we're talking about. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the expected generated income that 

you, as a government, are going to be getting through changes 

in the prescription drug plan and as they affect diabetics? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 1.4 million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What is the total generated income through 

your changes in the prescription drug plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 30.4 million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, I appreciate the 

alacrity of your answering here.  So, what we're doing now is 

we've changed the drug plan -- prescription drug plan -- 

dramatically.  We're saving the government $30.4 million 

because of that.  And $1.4 million is on the backs of the 

diabetics through your de-insuring of insulin for diabetics. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, why are you singling out diabetics? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- What had happened previously to these 

recent changes is that there was a price established in 1975 at 

$1 a vial that diabetics were paying for insulin.  The purpose 

was to bring diabetic patients under the drug plan in the same 

manner that other individuals are under the drug plan who are 

receiving life sustaining drugs.  The purpose of the change was 

to try and create equity within the system by bringing diabetics 

under the drug plan. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3221 

Mr. Neudorf: -- By bringing everyone down to the lowest 

common denominator is what you're saying; is that right, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Madam Minister, did you consult with the diabetic association 

in Saskatchewan before you decided to make that jump from 

$1 a vial to approximately $20 a vial --  I think we established 

last time, around $19 a vial would be an appropriate figure -- 

and the test strips and all these other things that cost about 

$180 extra per individual?  Did you consult with the 

Saskatchewan diabetic association before you made those 

changes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, is the 

Department of Health consults constantly with health care 

people.  They did not consult with respect to this particular 

budgetary item and they did not consult with many budgetary 

items prior to implementing the budget.  But the Department of 

Health has ongoing consultations with health care groups and 

stakeholders, and have been doing it for a number of years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Not only did you not consult, Madam 

Minister, with the diabetic association of Saskatchewan, you 

did not consult with the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

either, with the SMA, I know that. 

 

Why, Madam Minister, on such a crucial issue as to this high 

cost that diabetics are experiencing, would you not want to get 

some input from the diabetics themselves before you put this 

plan into effect?  Do you know, Madam Minister, the impact 

that your changes are having on diabetics in this province? 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if the members in the back could take 

seats, please, the minister, the member for Canora. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The government does know the impacts 

the changes are having on the population and on diabetic 

patients.  We are consulting with the diabetic association on an 

ongoing basis and we are looking at the changes that have 

occurred and what their impacts are, so we're very aware of 

what is happening. 

 

And I think it's important to point out to the member opposite 

that the Saskatchewan drug plan continues to provide a very 

reasonable level of coverage in comparison to other provinces, 

given that Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland do not 

provide any coverage for persons under 65. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you speak glowingly of the 

things that you've done to the Saskatchewan prescription drug 

plan.  Madam Minister, you've more than tripled the cost to 

these people on the drug plan.  And now you're standing in 

your place and saying you're doing wonderful things for the 

people of this province as far as health is concerned, when you 

are systematically dismantling much of the health program. 

 

And that is coming from the minister who has consistently said, 

we'll be spending more on health.  Health is something that the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) have always been so proud of.  

Now, Madam Minister, you're 

doing just exactly the opposite. 

 

And I want to make something very clear to the public here.  

You are saying that you are doing it on . . . consulting on an 

ongoing basis.  Let the record show, Madam Minister, that you 

did not consult with these people, with the diabetics, before 

you made that change.  You did not consult.  Now you are 

saying you're consulting with them on an ongoing basis as an 

afterthought.  Let that be very clear, Madam Minister. 

 

Now you also said just now that you understood the impact that 

your changes were having on diabetics.  What is your 

understanding of that impact? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The average total cost with respect to a 

diabetic with insulin and glucose test-strips -- we're talking the 

average cost -- comes to approximately $50.67 a month.  I've 

had the department figure that out in more detail. 

 

That's with the one-third reduction in price that the department 

negotiated.  That doesn't include syringes, and of course they 

were responsible for that prior to the drug changes.  So we have 

. . . we are aware of what these impacts are on individuals.  

We're monitoring the situation. 

 

I think it's important to point out at this time as well that the 

government is facing an extremely difficult debt load, as I 

know you are aware.  We have spoke about it repeatedly in this 

House.  And it's important to note that Saskatchewan's drug 

plan is still relatively one of the better plans in the country. 

 

(0930) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It is a poor shadow of what it was, Madam 

Minister, before you took control.  That is a fact; that is a fact.  

I notice however that when I ask about the cost to diabetics, 

Madam Minister, that you skillfully avoided the true cost.  I'm 

not talking only about the monetary cost, as you should be well 

aware.  Because you indicated in a previous answer that you 

understood the impact that your changes are having on 

diabetics. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you speak glowingly of your wellness 

plan, your wellness model.  How does this increase to the cost 

of a diabetic fit into your wellness plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The department has informed me that out 

of that $50.67, the cost to the patient is 38.32.  That's a regular 

beneficiary.  If it's a senior family, it's 25.85; and if it's a single 

senior, it's 23.15 - 

_ that's the cost to the patient on the average, on a monthly 

basis for insulin and glucose testing strips. 

 

Now I think that it's very important to make this point, and I 

have made it in this Assembly before, that when we move to a 

broader concept of health, to the wellness concept, this does 

not mean that the government is going to be fully funding 

every health care service that is available in the province.  The 

government can't afford that.  We have a $15 billion debt.  

We're struggling to try and get the annual deficit under control 

in order to 



3222 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

preserve our programs for future generations.  And the 

government simply cannot fund endlessly programs and all 

programs that are available. 

 

The government has had to make some difficult decisions.  

They've been hard to make but nevertheless we have made 

these decisions.  There's no question that many of these 

decisions we would rather not have made.  And had we not 

faced the kind of debt situation that we do, many of these 

changes would not have been made.  But the reality is, as we're 

faced there with the debt, we've got to get it under control and 

we're doing what we can to do that. 

 

And wellness does not mean that the government is going to 

fund every single health care service that is available in the 

province.  It does not mean that there will be additional funding 

for all sorts of health care programs under the budget. 

 

I think it's important to note that there are aspects such as 

controlling the disease of diabetes.  And the diabetic 

association agrees with the wellness approach being taken 

toward health care, and with diabetics taking more 

responsibility to control their disease. 

 

And we've spoken to them about that, and we're looking at 

ways that we can encourage diabetics to take more 

responsibility to control their disease.  So we have had 

discussions with the diabetic association on the wellness 

approach, and they agree with it.  And they agree with diabetics 

taking more responsibility to control their disease. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you very much, Madam Minister, 

for that answer.  You make my point quite eloquently. 

 

This is not about wellness.  This is not about health.  It's simply 

a case of cut-backs to health because of the deficit.  This whole 

thing is budgetary driven.  It's driven by your Minister of 

Finance who has said to you: cut.  And now you are hacking 

and slashing your way through the Health department to save 

money for your Minister of Finance.  That's what this is about.  

And that is what you have just confirmed, Madam Minister. 

 

You are saying now that we have to cut back because there is a 

deficit.  You have just said now that you could not be expected 

to put in additional funding.  That's what you just said.  And I 

agree with you, Madam Minister.  That's not what I'm asking 

about. 

 

I'm not asking about why are you not making additional 

funding, although that was your promise during the election.  

That's why you were elected.  You were elected because you 

said you would spend more on health.  So we're not talking 

about additional funding here. 

 

What we're talking about is your wellness program which is 

supposed to be a preventative program, prevent sickness.  Yet 

you just finished saying now that you wanted the diabetics to 

be more responsible.  You wanted them to accept more of the 

responsibility for this deficit.  So you're singling out diabetics.  

And you're removing them from the insurance program.  That's 

essentially what 

you're doing.  That's essentially what you're doing.  And yet we 

find out that the diabetics have not been consulted about that. 

 

Wouldn't you agree, Madam Minister, that the impact that you 

so skillfully avoided answering, the impact question, is that 

many of these diabetics now -- to save money, because they are 

no longer being covered by your plan -- to save money they 

will not do what is right for their disease.  Their disease, would 

you not admit, Madam Minister, is a life-threatening disease?  

But what you're essentially saying is, take care of it yourself; 

the government is not going to accept any responsibility for it 

simply because we have a deficit. 

 

Now you fight your own illness, is what you're telling the 

diabetics.  But on the other hand, you talk so fondly about your 

wellness program, Madam Minister, which is preventative.  

And that's well, that's fine.  But at the same time you're 

removing support for a process so that diabetics can forestall 

serious illness.  And you do the same thing on the other hand.  

We know that one of the . . . not the causal, but the effects of 

diabetics is on the eyesight.  And yet because of the potential 

impact that it can have on eyesight, you're removing optometry 

as an insured service at the same time. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what I'm asking you is why are you 

doing so many things that are so counter-productive -- 

counter-productive to your own wellness program?  I cannot 

see how the two jibe.  Could you explain that for me? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, is 

that we do . . . When we speak in terms of accepting more 

responsibility for controlling their disease, we're talking in 

terms of the monitoring of the illness, for example.  The 

diabetic association recognizes that that's necessary.  The 

wellness approach . . . One of the aspects of the wellness 

approach is more individual responsibility, where that's 

appropriate and possible, for one's own health.  That's one of 

the aspects of the wellness approach. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is within the health care system it's 

also important for us to repriorize our spending in order to 

direct more funding, for example, to community-based services 

and more funding to other programming in health care such as 

therapists, for example. 

 

There are still substantial benefits to diabetics under the health 

plan, under the drug plan.  They're not being cut off.  They are 

put in the same position that asthmatics and coronary patients 

are who are dependent on drugs for good health and to live.  

And asthmatics and coronary patients are under the drug plan 

and pay as much as diabetics do and in some cases more, on 

average. 

 

Now the diabetic patients will still receive substantial coverage 

under the drug plan.  And if they take other drugs in their 

family, they will receive even more substantial coverage 

because the figures that I gave you, of 38.32 a month for the 

average individual who is diabetic -- that's their cost for insulin 

and glucose testing strips -- that does not take into 

consideration if that family or that individual takes more drugs 

under the drug plan because it would be 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3223 

less than that, if that's the case. 

 

Now with respect to the issue of wellness, I think that even 

though we have our huge deficit in this province, even though 

it's important for us to take tough decisions to try and preserve 

programming such as this for future generations so that we can 

still have a drug plan that's amongst the best in Canada -- we do 

have to get a handle on that deficit -- but that doesn't mean that 

we can't look at health in a broader sense and look at 

preventative programs that require individuals and society to 

take more responsibility and be more conscious about those 

things that can affect a person's health. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, thank you for that 

answer.  I will let the diabetics of the province of 

Saskatchewan determine themselves how much solace they are 

receiving from the Minister of Health in the province of 

Saskatchewan this morning. 

 

You say you want to teach responsibility; that's what you said.  

So you want to teach responsibility to diabetics; that's what you 

said.  I'm sure they are grateful for that comment. 

 

You also said it that is up to us to repriorize our spending; that's 

what you said.  And I'm sure that the diabetics in the province 

of Saskatchewan take much solace in the Minister of Health 

saying that they are no longer a priority because you have 

repriorized.  That is what you're telling the diabetics of the 

province of Saskatchewan this morning, Madam Minister.  I 

just want to point that out to you very, very clearly that that is 

the message you have sent to them.  And that's . . . 

 

The article that I referred to previously, there's a Janette 

McDonald of Regina, this article says, and I'm referring to the 

May 22 article in the Star-Phoenix: 

 

 Janette McDonald of Regina is one of those upset with the 

changes.  Her 15-year-old son Dylan has been diabetic for 10 

years and needs to regularly monitor his blood sugar level. 

 

 He needs four to six insulin bottles a month, an expense of 

more than $100.  He also needs two packages of blood test 

strips for another $90 a month, which also are no longer 

covered.  Needles cost another $25. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you can do your own math on that.  

And if you're going to tell me that this individual is giving the 

wrong figures, then you tell her that she's wrong. 

 

But she also continues, Madam Minister: 

 

 "This is life-threatening (especially) for kids.  If they don't 

get it (insulin), and they don't get the testing and all the other 

things that are necessary, this health system is going to be 

paying a lot more than they think for all the medical care that 

will be required" . . . 

 

Madam Minister, that article summarizes what I've been saying 

to you over the last couple of weeks. Too many of 

your programs are being counter-productive.  You want to 

obey your Minister of Finance's orders, who gets his orders 

from the Premier, and you're trying to cut the deficit.  But by so 

doing, you're causing a lot of grief, misery, and apprehension in 

the people of the province.  And on top of that all . . . It's not 

my words.  These are the folks out there that are saying that 

you are being counter-productive.  You are being 

counter-productive, Madam Minister.  That's the concern.  I 

have lots of letters.  I only have a few here.  But I've got lots of 

letters from people who are writing in expressing their concern 

to me.  From Kim Fisher from Warman writes to me: The 

recent announcement by the Government of Saskatchewan 

related to insulin and glucose monitoring supplies puts the 

management of diabetes at risk. 

 

This is a letter that I got in, totally unsolicited.  It's a concern 

they have.  It goes on and on for three or four paragraphs.  

Then she says: We urge the Minister of Health and the 

Government of Saskatchewan to reconsider their stand on this 

matter and to meet with the Canadian Diabetes Association to 

address these concerns. 

 

Now that is a concern from an individual in Warman, and we 

could go on and on and on.  I have another one here from 

Kindersley and so on. 

 

You are meeting with the diabetic association as an 

afterthought, Madam Minister, to do some damage control.  

But won't you admit that what you're doing to diabetics now is 

not consistent with your wellness approach.  Won't you admit 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

(0945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, no one in this province who 

has a hardship situation and can't afford their drugs will do 

without them.  If they make an application to the government 

we will provide them with assistance.  There's absolutely no 

need for anyone to claim that they cannot do without their 

needed medication, because the government has set up a safety 

net that will help people in low income brackets to pay for their 

drugs. 

 

So the fact of the matter is, is diabetics are still receiving 

substantial relief under the drug plan.  And the second fact is, is 

those who cannot afford their drugs will be taken care of. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, it must be awfully 

frustrating for the diabetics out there to hear an answer like 

that.  You talk glowingly about a safety net.  We know that the 

90,000 people that are on social assistance and that are on FIP, 

the Family Income Plan are going to be covered.  I'm talking 

about the majority of people out there, the low income earners 

that don't fall within your safety net.  And please admit that.  

I'm talking about those people, relatively low income, that will 

also repriorize. 

 

You said you have priorized the spending and diabetics no 

longer count.  That's what you said.  Now these people are 

going to be forced to repriorize as well.  They may have 

money.  They don't fit into your safety net, but they're going to 

have to now make a decision.  And they're going to use fewer 

testing strips, you know that. 



3224 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

They're going to use less insulin.  You know that.  Those are 

the folks that we're talking about and then the result and 

complicating factors that are going to surface as a result of that. 

 

That's a fact, Madam Minister.  Please get up and admit that 

because there are people listening it us, and there will be 

people reading the results of these Estimates.  And I think that 

you're insulting these people when you just simply get up and 

say there's a safety net.  We know there's a safety net, but 

there's those that are not eligible for that safety net that are still 

going to have to make decisions. 

 

How does that fit into your wellness plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, there is a safety net to help 

people who can't afford their drugs.  There have been people in 

income brackets of 25 to $30,000 who have received assistance 

under the safety net. 

 

What happens is anyone who needs assistance applies for 

assistance, and the government looks at it on a case-by-case 

basis and takes into consideration, not only the income level, 

but also how many drugs the family has to pay for and other 

relevant factors to determine whether or not a person needs 

assistance. 

 

And there have been people with relatively reasonable incomes 

who have received assistance because of their individual 

circumstances.  We've repeatedly said that there is assistance 

for low income people and that there shouldn't be any hardship 

cases. 

 

So we urge people who feel they must cut back on strips or cut 

back on insulin to apply, and we will provide them with 

whatever help that we can.. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

think in light of the position that you now face and the position 

that you had as an opposition critic responsible for Health . . . 

and having been involved in this legislature for the last six 

years, I'm not sure if it's frustrating, but I find it very interesting 

that some of the arguments we're presenting today and some of 

the arguments that you are taking are totally opposed to what 

you raised as an opposition member -- continuously accusing 

the former government of not spending enough, not putting 

enough emphasis on the health care field, not putting enough 

money into health care to address the needs of people in 

general and specifically individuals who ended up in 

circumstances due to no fault of their own such as diabetics. 

 

The interesting thing you mentioned about the fact that people 

can contact your office or contact the department.  I'm 

wondering, Madam Minister, what process is used, or do you 

just wait until someone makes a complaint, raises a complaint 

through an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) or 

through an individual or have you . . . what kind of informative 

basis have you set out or set forth that people can follow up on 

so that they have access, whether it's 1-800 number or they 

have knowledge of the department, to the personnel to contact, 

when they find out that they are in situations where their 

income is being tested because of the added burden placed 

upon them 

through the changes to the drug plan, specifically diabetics? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now with respect to . . . the member 

opposite indicated that when we were in opposition we were 

taking one position and now we're taking another.  I would like 

to remind the member opposite that prior to the election we 

were assured that the annual deficit for '91-92 would be what -- 

265 million or was it 256 million?  It was somewhere in there. 

 

What happened is that it was substantially larger than that -- 

substantially larger.  And the fact of the matter is, is in order to 

. . . if we had maintained the status quo, the annual deficit this 

year would have been 1.2 billion -- 1.2 billion -- based on what 

you were spending and predicting. 

 

So I think it's really . . . the member opposite is being 

somewhat inconsistent in his approach.  The fact of the matter 

is, is the financial situation of this province came to full light 

after the election.  And the consequences of the way the pattern 

was going came to light, and are horrendous. 

 

This province is in a position where it'll virtually never get out 

of this debt -- never.  It is going on and on and on and 

escalating and escalating and escalating.  And what your 

government did to the future generations in this province is just 

absolutely unforgivable. 

 

This government has to make some tough decisions.  And that's 

what we're doing.  And the people understand it. 

 

Now with respect to the safety net, with respect to the safety 

net, I want to make this point -- that we sent a letter to all the 

diabetic families in the province advising them of the safety 

net.  Every diabetic family that is listed on the department's 

computers received a letter telling them about the safety net.  

We have notified all the doctors in the province about the 

safety net.  We have notified all the pharmacies in the province 

about the safety net.  We have left application forms at the 

pharmacies in the province for the pharmacists to encourage 

people to send in their application forms.  There is a toll-free 

government number that people can phone if they require 

assistance.  And there is a 24-hour WATS (wide area telephone 

service) line for emergency cases. 

 

So the government has taken a number of different steps to 

make sure that people have access to the application form and 

the government in the event they need assistance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I find it appalling that Madam 

Minister could stand in her place today and suggest that she 

had no knowledge or that her party had no knowledge of what 

the deficit of this province was prior to October 21, in light of 

the fact that the present Premier, as the NDP leader and 

opposition leader, even admitted in the public debate that there 

was more than $14.2 billion deficit in this province; in view of 

the fact that it was her government back in the '80s that didn't 

fund public pension plans and so decided to change the plans 

because the funding wasn't there. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3225 

And it's interesting to see the minister stand up today and put 

all the blame at the feet of the former government, the former 

Conservative government, when the deficit was already 

building back in the '70s, in the good times, and prior to that.  

And it's easy to just talk about a consolidated deficit on the side 

of the Consolidated Fund.  Any area of government in this 

province, any Crown corporation that's in debt, that's a debt to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  You can't just 

hide behind the fact that it was the Consolidated Fund. 

 

The minister talks about the former minister bringing in a 

budget in 1991 that predicted a target figure of $269 million 

deficit in the budgetary . . . on the Consolidated Fund.  She 

neglects the fact that since October the government has taken 

in a number of areas . . . they've transferred funds, deficits from 

the Crown corporations to the Consolidated Fund and written 

off substantial debt, therefore ballooning the 1991 deficit 

figures. 

 

And in fact, Madam Minister, in Crown Corporations the 

auditor even questioned some of the budgeting and the 

accounting factors that were being used by the government of 

the day regarding transferring funds and then writing off.  And 

his question was, he doesn't understand why the government 

would have taken long-term debt and written it off all in one 

year.  Why did the government take the recreational grants that 

were staged out over a three- and four-year period and all of a 

sudden pay them all off, put them under the 1991 deficit? 

 

Madam Minister, it's easy to sit down and transfer figures.  It's 

easy to take figures just to use for your benefit.  And we were 

into that argument last night, presenting the scenario: is it the 

intention of the government to put all the debt on the former 

government so that in fours years from now or three years from 

now all of a sudden we have this glowing report of money 

flowing into the Consolidated Fund and the government's going 

to be able to do all this for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'm not sure the people of Saskatchewan are ready to buy 

the argument.  The people of Saskatchewan didn't really want 

to accept the fact that the deficit must be met and be paid for.  

They didn't want to accept it because they believed the 

members opposite, when they were here in opposition, that 

there was so much money available that all they had to do was 

get rid of waste and mismanagement and they would have 

more than the 2 or 3 per cent for health that the provincial 

government put into health last year.  And this year it's a 

decrease. 

 

And we just take a look.  I think when rural people began 

looking at what the present government is doing and they look 

at the fact that they may not have a hospital in their community 

in the near future, they're going to ask themselves, well what 

did this government really mean. 

 

And if they did take a serious look, anyone . . . the one thing 

about it, Madam Minister, anyone who has a family member 

who is on substantial drugs and now realizes . . . and the 

questions are coming across my desk as well right now.  Many 

people did not realize the changes that took place in the drug 

plan until they went and made that extra purchase that all of a 

sudden they found when the receipt was laid across the counter 

that they were already at $150 

and they were wondering why they had to pay the full amount 

for the drugs.  And the druggist told him, well that's because in 

this year's budget, you're now . . . the deductible has gone from 

125 to $380 per family.  That's put an added burden. 

 

Now for the families that have the ability to pay for that, 

Madam Minister, it's fine.  For the individuals making the 

decisions, making the suggestions, coming to the minister and 

coming to the government saying this is what we should do, 

that's fine, because I suggest that the salaries they're living on 

are a lot higher than many of the people that have to pay the 

bill. 

 

And I find it very interesting, Madam Minister, that you would 

stand here today, and as always . . . mind you, we shouldn't 

find it interesting because as we have seen, as always, the 

government or any minister today always takes the view that 

we go back and we blame the former government even though 

we've  ballooned the deficit, we just blame the former 

government.  And I would find that even officials would find it 

difficult in justifying what has taken place at this time. 

 

So I'd suggest, Madam Minister, that we should have more of a 

direct policy that targets . . . well I shouldn't say targets people, 

because I believe, I've believed all along that we all must take a 

responsibility for our health costs, that we all must take a 

responsibility as to how we address the health issue.  And I 

think it's healthier for most of us, or for all of us, if we don't get 

into a strong dependency on drugs.  But there are some people 

who don't have the control over that because of problems, 

physical problems they face, that fortunately I'm thankful I 

don't face. 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, we should have an easier 

method whereby people can be addressed, their drug costs can 

be addressed, versus forcing the individuals to always come 

begging the government to help them out in a time of 

difficulty. 

 

(1000) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a 

question for the minister concerning diabetics and glasses.  If 

they are low income and are not collecting any social 

assistance but are low income and cannot afford to pay the fees 

necessary for all the checks for their eyes, will the government 

provide any support for that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, if they are on SIP (Saskatchewan 

Income Plan) or FIP, low income working poor, they will . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan). 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well SAP, SIP, or FIP -- they will 

receive full coverage.  Or if they're under 18, they are fully 

covered. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

I have another issue I'd like to bring up to you.  I sent you a 



3226 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

letter on July 21 and you responded on August 21, concerning 

a lady with trimandular muscular joint dysfunction.  And she is 

going to the doctors quite often for infections and other 

problems, and her doctor has referred her to a dental surgeon to 

help correct the problem. 

 

You cover part of the costs that are associated with this but 

there's other parts that are not.  If she doesn't get the work 

done, then she's going to be a continual burden on the medicare 

system.  If she gets the dental work done, then it's over and 

done with.  And she would like to have some assistance in 

getting the work done. 

 

And I would like to read to you from the letter that she sent.  

She contacted her dental insurance company but they won't 

cover the costs because it's not a dental problem.  TMJ 

(temporomandibular joint) is not a dental problem; it's a 

surgical problem.  She then contacted Saskatchewan Health 

and they say they won't cover it under the Saskatchewan health 

program because the treatment is done by a dentist and not a 

medical doctor. 

 

She writes: this is a medical disorder that never heals itself 

without treatment.  And I can honestly say, if I hadn't been 

referred to an orthodontist for treatment, I would probably be 

under care by medical doctors, being treated for infections for 

the rest of my life.  Now I really think that would be an abuse 

of the Saskatchewan health care system. 

 

So, Madam Minister, will you under your new wellness model, 

which is partially, in my mind, a preventative medicine type of 

thing that takes people out of the system by curing them before 

they have to continually spend all the money necessary to go 

through the medical procedures, will you provide some 

assistance for people who have TMJ? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, when the members opposite 

were in government they did not cover TMJ, and there were 

people at that time asking for coverage.  It was not covered 

under your government. 

 

The wellness approach does not mean that we will pay for 

every health care service that a person can possibly obtain in 

this province or the country.  The government cannot afford to 

pay for everything; the taxpayer cannot afford to pay for 

everything.  TMJ was not covered by the Tory government and 

it's not covered now. 

 

However, if a person is low income and requires assistance, the 

Social Services program will provide them either with social 

assistance if they're in the social assistance bracket as a result 

of obtaining medical services.  Or if it puts them onto FIP, 

there will be some assistance from social assistance. 

 

The many dental procedures are not covered by government.  

And I want to make the point that TMJ was not covered under 

the former government and wellness does not mean the 

taxpayer is going to pay for every service that's possibly 

available out there. 

 

Taxpayers can't afford it.  We've got a $15 billion debt created 

by the former government. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'd like to point out to 

you that it wasn't my government.  I was not a part of the 

government previous to this particular election. 

 

Your wellness model, you seem to be pushing the prevention 

part of medicine quite strongly in it; and I think this is one of 

the areas, Madam Minister, where if there is a method to save 

the health care system some long-term expenses, that it should 

be utilized.  And I believe this is one of the areas where that 

can be done. 

 

And I would strongly suggest, Madam Minister, that you take a 

serious look at this kind of an issue. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

have been listening to some of your answers in regards to 

diabetics and things like that.  Could you tell us in layman's 

language, the steps that have to be taken for some of my people 

who are diabetics and they haven't . . . they're in the low 

income bracket.  Would you tell me what I shall tell them on 

how to get this extra assistance you've been talking about. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The first thing they should do is go to 

their pharmacist and their pharmacist will have an application 

form.  They can fill in the application form and send it to the 

Department of Health and then someone in the Department of 

Health will get in touch with them. 

 

The other possibility is for them to phone this toll-free number: 

1-800-667-7581. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- My colleagues tell me that you've gone through 

this but I just wasn't here, so I'm going to ask you again.  I 

understood there was something about a means test.  Will this 

application take care of that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They will be asked . . . I don't believe the 

application form is detailed with respect to, you know, criteria.  

Because what happens is, is the Department of Health looks at 

the drug costs of the family, of the total family, what their drug 

costs are; looks at the income of the family and looks at what 

other expenses they have, and based on that makes a 

determination as to whether or not the family can afford to pay 

for their drugs or whether they need assistance and if so, how 

much. 

 

I have a copy of the form here that is left with the pharmacist.  

But my suggestion is that they phone the toll-free number -- the 

Department of Health will deal with them on the telephone -- 

or they go to their pharmacist and get a copy. 

 

And it's income tested in the sense that the Department of 

Health looks at all the criteria, all the income, the expenses and 

so on, and makes a determination as to whether or not any 

assistance is required and if so, how much; and attempts to help 

people pay for their drugs.  So there should be no need of a 

hardship case if you have any constituents who are having 

difficulty affording their medication. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

would this also then apply to people with 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3227 

glaucoma?  We have people who have glaucoma and we find 

that they are being referred from their optometrist to an 

ophthalmologist, and some of these are 2 and 300 miles away.  

Is there some assistance for those people who are not close to 

an ophthalmologist; they are suffering with glaucoma; they 

need periodic check-ups on their eyes?  Is there some 

assistance for those? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Any medical condition like people with 

glaucoma if they have a medical condition and they go to a 

physician or an ophthalmologist they're covered.  Now an 

optometrist cannot perform the services an ophthalmologist 

does with respect to a medical condition of that nature.  But if 

they have a medical condition, they're covered under insurance, 

under the medical care insurance plan. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Madam Minister, maybe I didn't put the 

question properly, but I'm asking you, for those people who 

suffer this and are not in contact or not close to an 

ophthalmologist is there any help for those who are . . . extra 

travelling costs and things like this where they have to get to an 

ophthalmologist, and how do we help those people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No, transportation costs are not paid to 

get to an ophthalmologist, but that's never been the case.  

There's never been funding to get from a community to an 

ophthalmologist in a situation like that.  Now if they're on 

social assistance, there is assistance for them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- You used to be able to go to their regular 

check-ups and then the . . . not the ophthalmologist the 

optometrist would then tell them they need the extra help.  

Now if they go and get a test, they have to pay for that.  They 

have to pay for that first test because the optometrist is not 

covered.  This is where we get into a little problem here.  We 

have the ophthalmologist in the larger centres and the 

optometrists in the smaller centres and it's been the custom of 

these people to have a regular check-up at no cost.  Now under 

this system they don't get that coverage. 

 

So I guess what I'm saying is they'll have to go to a doctor, find 

a doctor to refer them to an ophthalmologist and bypass the 

optometrist.  Now this can run into some pretty expensive 

manoeuvring.  And I'm wondering if you would take a look at 

that maybe and see if there's something could be done there. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Madam Minister, I'll ask you one 

more question which is in the same vein where seniors who are 

unable to pay for eye examination seems to be not coming in 

for their regular check-ups. These seniors are people whose 

eyes are failing and we find a situation where they're not 

covered and there's a danger that they could be driving on the 

road somewhere with impaired driving because they're not 

getting their regular check-up.  They used to be able to be paid 

for that.  Is there some . . . have you looked at that and is there 

some hope that you will take a look and make sure that this 

doesn't happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to advise the member opposite that 

the Department of Health is monitoring the 

situation and we don't have any evidence at this date that 

seniors are not using their best judgement as to when to go for 

an eye exam. 

 

Now if they are low income seniors, they're fully covered.  If 

they're on the senior income plan, they are fully covered -- all 

of their routine eye exams -- and they should be aware of that.  

Other than that we are not aware that seniors aren't using their 

best judgement as to when they go for eye exams. 

 

I think it's important to note also, the member opposite should 

note, that in some other provinces the coverage for optometric 

services, it simply isn't there.  We are covering low income 

seniors.  We are covering children under 18.  And I would 

advise the member opposite as follows. 

 

If he has a special case with respect to a senior with glaucoma 

that he was talking about or an individual with glaucoma, 

would he please bring it to our attention and we'll take a look at 

it and find out what entitlements this person has and we'll take 

care of it for him.  If he would just give us the individual's 

name and telephone number and address, we'll take a look at it.  

And if there are some services this person should be accessing 

and isn't getting, we'll do what we can to make sure they have 

access to the services they need. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, you've already been notified.  I have copy of letters 

that has been sent to your office and you haven't replied to 

them.  And what the other provinces do, Madam Minister, 

doesn't interest me at all.  We're talking about Saskatchewan. 

 

You have stood in your place, and I've heard you for all the 

time that I've been here, hollering about the previous 

government not looking after health.  Now you're telling me 

that because somebody else doesn't do it that you're not 

supposed to do it.  You have stood there and told us how great 

you were going to be.  How great and wonderful it's going to 

be under the NDP government. 

 

So don't try to side-track off to what Alberta's doing.  I'm not 

concerned about that.  I'm concerned, Madam Minister, with 

the people that are coming to me with these problems.  And I 

don't want to be too harsh but I just can't get interested in your 

rebuttal that Alberta or somebody else is not doing it. 

 

(1015) 

 

What I've asked you, Madam Minister, is concerns of people 

who have contacted you and then have contacted me because 

there's been no communication.  And as I say, I'm not 

concerned.  These are not just . . . I just didn't pick these out of 

the air.  These are people that have written to me and got these 

problems.  And I sincerely hope you'll take them seriously and 

get off the rhetoric about what we did and didn't do.  It's what 

you're going to do, is what our people are interested in. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They're also interested in what you did to 

devastate this province. 



3228 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

Now with respect to this individual case, if this person wrote 

and didn't get an answer, I will check into it.  I can't tell you 

why now because we get a lot of letters and I don't know the 

particular case.  But if there's no answer, I'll check into it.  Give 

me the person's name.  I'll find out why it wasn't responded to, 

and we'll respond to it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, as I listened to you giving 

answers to some of the questions being asked by my 

colleagues, it became abundantly clear that all of your answers 

are budget driven.  And it just amazes me how you could 

during the election time . . . And we've got countless numbers 

of quotes from you saying that you were going to be spending 

more on health, more on education.  That was your election 

promise, Madam Minister.  That was the promise that to a large 

degree got you elected. 

 

Now you're sitting there as the Minister of Health saying we 

must fight the deficit on the backs of the sick and the poor and 

the elderly.  That's essentially the message that you're 

delivering here. 

 

Now that, Madam Minister, is hypocritical.  To get elected, you 

say one thing; then after election you go and say, whoops, sorry 

there was a deficit that we didn't know about.  And of course 

Donald Gass, your own commissioner there has refuted that.  

And certainly, Madam Minister, your Premier was totally 

aware of it because even in the leaders' debate he made 

mention of the $14.2 billion debt. 

 

But in spite of your knowledge that there was this debt, you 

said, you elect us and we'll be spending more on health 

because, Madam Minister, when we spent 4 per cent more on 

health you chastised us, to put it mildly, for wrecking the health 

system in this province.  That's what you were doing. 

 

Now the first tenure, the first part of your tenure as Minister of 

Health, you cut it by that amount and are promising to do that 

next year again.  And I remind people who are listening:  this is 

only the first series of cut-backs in Health.  You are committed 

to another round of cut-backs like this next year.  So the people 

should be prepared right now to tighten their belts.  Or are you 

going to accuse me of fearmongering, that that's not the case? 

 

And, Madam Minister, if you can get up and assure the people 

that that will not happen, that there will be no further cut-backs 

whatsoever in Health, I would be pleased to apologize and 

accept your assurance that Health once again will be treated 

with the priority that it deserves. 

 

Madam Minister, we can cut this whole thing very short here 

on diabetics.  Madam Minister, will you get up and commit to 

the diabetics of this province that you will restore, that you will 

restore the cost of insulin to them to the rate that it was prior to 

your election? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Just for the sake of the record, because 

we've debated this here at length in this House and I am trying 

to be as co-operative as I can with respect to the Estimates, but 

I must just state this for the record. 

The fact of the matter is, is during the election what we said is 

that we would balance . . . try to work towards balancing the 

books.  Our health care programs were subject to the financial 

situation allowing us to work in that direction.  Every single 

pamphlet that was dropped in across my constituency, and I 

believe throughout the province, made it perfectly clear that 

spending and program improvements would be subject to the 

financial means being available. 

 

So it's incorrect when the member opposite says, during the 

election we promised to put more money into health.  It's 

inaccurate.  The promise was to get a handle on the deficit and 

to improve programming within the financial means of the 

province and as we could afford it.  And so I put that on the 

record. 

 

Now with respect to health care, I want to say that what the 

government is doing is implementing a long-term, strategic 

plan to try and reorganize the health care system and get more 

input from individuals in communities as we move to 

co-ordinate and integrate programming so that it is more 

effective and provides a higher-quality health care within the 

financial means of the province. 

 

The member opposite is quite right; we do have a huge deficit 

in the province that has to be taken care of.  He's right that we 

have to get a handle on the debt and that the government is 

keeping its spending down in order to do that.  That's quite 

right.  And that will be the government's approach next year as 

well as this year, is to try and maintain government spending in 

order to get a handle on the deficit so that we can preserve 

medicare and other social programs in this province for future 

generations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

what you have now told the people of the province, the reason 

you were elected is because you recognized that there was a 

deficit and you were telling people, elect us and we'll fight the 

deficit because we will cut spending in health.  We will cut 

spending in education if you elect us.  And if you elect us we 

promise that we will cut spending on universities.  And what 

you're saying, Madam Minister, is that the people of this 

province elected you because you told them that if you elect us 

we will increase the SaskTel rates.  We will increase the SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance)rates.  We will increase 

the SaskPower rates.  We will increase the commercial rate on 

income tax.  We will increase the education and health tax, 

E&H tax, from 7 to 8 per cent.  We will do all of these things 

for you folks, if you elect us.  That is what you're telling the 

people of Saskatchewan when you get up and make a comment 

like that. 

 

Madam Minister, I submit to you that the four or five years that 

you were the critic of health, you spent five years 

indoctrinating the people of Saskatchewan, raising their 

expectations of what you would do.  Now you're saying that in 

the dying days of the campaign you distributed a pamphlet in 

your constituency that said there is a deficit.  That's what you're 

saying, Madam Minister.  Now the credibility of that I leave up 

to the people who are listening and the people who will be 

reading the transcripts of this debate to make their own 

decision as to the credibility of what you're stating right now. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3229 

Madam Minister, the member from Morse has a question for 

you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I have a 

couple questions about health care that I want to talk about a 

little bit.  The first one has to do with diabetics.  A person often 

makes some very generic kinds of assumptions until some of 

these things begin to strike your own family.  And I have a 

member of the family who has, in the last year, discovered that 

they have diabetes.  He's been fairly well stabilized with one 

shot a day, and so he's not a major user on long-acting insulin. 

 

However what a person who has, let's say, four shots that he 

has to take a day would have a significant amount more of cost.  

This member of my family has also been able to reduce the 

volume of strips that he uses to check his blood sugar level to 

one a day.  And what that . . . the reason he does that is because 

before it was partly covered under the drug plan and each one 

of those strips costs a dollar.  So if you were supposed to do 

that four times a day, that's $4 a day, just on checking the blood 

sugar level. 

 

I just wanted to talk to you a little bit about the aspect of 

wellness in this.  It's the constant application of the checking 

that gives you an opportunity to maintain your blood sugar 

level at an adequate volume.  And if they don't check it, then it 

seriously could impair their vision later on; seriously impair 

their circulation in their feet and their hands later on.  And I 

know that they have no other option to take.  They have no 

other option that they can use to live. 

 

People may be able to change what they do in a life-style -- 

let's say a heart condition or whatever -- but a person who is a 

diabetic has no option on change.  And that will be very likely 

with them for the rest of his life. 

 

Then I also want to point out an individual who I played 

hockey with when I was a little younger.  He's had diabetes 

since he was a young boy.  And he comes from a large family.  

And his brother gave him a kidney about two years ago - 

_ a significant contribution to that individual's life because his 

kidneys were not functioning any more.  So we have a serious 

involvement on a contribution in a health sector that is very 

seriously impaired by the costs. 

 

Now I know that he -- the fellow that had a kidney transplant -- 

has had to have significant medical treatment in order to 

maintain his own life.  And the longer you can defer by very 

serious systematic analysis on a daily basis for a person like 

that, the longer the person stays out of medical attention that is 

far more serious.  And that is the kind of thing that I think that 

we need to take a serious look at.  Because there are people. . . . 

and you say, fine if they can't afford it, let them go get some 

help from Social Services or whoever. 

 

But there are a lot . . . and all of these people that I've talked 

about this morning are in agriculture and they don't have that 

extended opportunity to go to these other places.  The one 

family has a very small farm and they don't have any of that 

kind of opportunity to get that assistance from other agencies 

of the government.  In fact the community went together to 

assist him in the cost of 

 his operation, in the cost of doing all of the things that were 

required.  His brother who works for New Careers had to leave 

his job for almost a year in order for him to function properly.  

And all of those things. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there's a sacrifice being made by 

individuals who have this disease, who have this problem.  And 

people in the province, I don't think want to have these people 

cut off from being involved in . . . their very existence.  So I 

guess that's the kind of the problem that we see in what you've 

done with a drug plan, in relating it to diabetics, specifically 

diabetics. 

 

I want to point out one other thing about the . . . Another 

constituent of mine who is a registered nurse at the Swift 

Current Union Hospital, works in the operating room, and she 

has an injector that she wears on her belt.  That injector I think 

costs about $3,500 itself to not only to purchase it, which she's 

already done in order to maintain a constant blood sugar level. 

 

And I think that these people have sacrificed a whole lot in 

their life-style.  They've sacrificed a whole lot in their 

economic ability to pay for this problem they've got, and then 

to see this pull-back on that very specific one.  A heart patient, 

he gets all of his functions of recovery looked after in a health 

care system.  And he may have one or two . . . high blood 

pressure pills or those kinds of things.  He might have to pay 

for some of that, but the diabetic doesn't get those same 

opportunities. 

 

And I say to you that you should change your mind about this 

very, very important group who are at the edge of staying alive 

by the very fact that they have to have a continual monitoring 

of what they do and how they handle their own blood sugar 

levels. 

 

(1030) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With respect to 

this whole issue I want to simply say that it was, in the minds 

of the government, an equity issue.  And if the members 

opposite feel the way they do, I wonder why they didn't cover 

cardiac patients and asthmatic patients the way they did 

diabetic patients when they were in government.  Because 

cardiac patients and asthmatic patients have very high drug 

costs as well.  And if they require any gadgets or devices to 

assist them, they pay for those. 

 

And cardiac patients, asthmatic patients, and diabetic patients 

who have medical conditions arising as a result of their 

condition are covered under medical insurance.  Now if the 

member feels that way, I'd like him to tell the Assembly why 

they didn't cover cardiac patients and asthmatic patients when 

they were in government, who face very high drug costs and on 

the average face higher than what diabetics pay. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not going to argue with you; I'm just 

stating the opinion that I have.  We covered them.  You said 

you would do it better with less and do more with less, and 

now you're doing less and less and less with less.  And that's 

the difference. 

 

I just want to point out, you'll probably be able to pick out 



3230 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

one or two that you can say, oh this we didn't do or that you 

didn't do.  Well, Madam Minister, you can use those excuses.  

But those excuses don't impact on those families in that same 

way that you're talking about. 

 

And I just raise it for a matter of my opinion that I believe 

you're wrong in what you did.  We can talk about asthmatics 

and heart patients on a different agenda, if we want to talk 

about that, but don't compare the two of them.  And, Madam 

Minister, I just want to point out, a friend of mine just got a 

pace-maker put in, I think for $5,000 and he didn't pay -- 

maybe it was 7,000 -- he didn't pay for any of that.  And yet 

this woman who works at the OR (operating room), she has to 

pay for that whole apparatus that sits on her belt to give her 

insulin injections. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is the kind of thing we're talking 

about.  I really think that if you want to make comparisons, we 

can compare.  But I'm talking about insulin users, the diabetics, 

and I want to know why you took them off.  Why did you take 

them off?  And that's the question that I have for you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- As we pointed out earlier, it was an 

equity issue. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well equity to what, the lowest common 

denominator?  Equity to what?  There's a serious flaw in your 

argument, and that's why you always have to go back to: you 

didn't do this and you didn't do that.  But some day, Madam 

Minister, it's going to be your turn to say, well I didn't do it.  

And this is why we're pointing to the fact now.  You didn't do 

it; you didn't do it in diabetics.  And we're just saying why?  

You said equity, but that's not a good enough reason.  That's 

not nearly a good enough reason. 

 

And what I'd like to ask the minister is how much you saved . . 

. You told the Leader of the Opposition here the other day, 

when we were talking about the optometrists and the 

chiropractors, about the volume of saving.  How much did you 

save in the drug plan by moving the diabetics out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The 1.4 million with respect to . . . We 

didn't move the diabetics out of the drug plan; we moved them 

into the drug plan.  They were brought under the drug plan, as 

every other person in the province is.  The diabetics were being 

treated specially.  They were paying a fraction of the cost of the 

drugs, $1 out of a cost of I think it was $25 a vial, which was 

the price in 1975.  It was $1 out of the cost of $4.  It was 25 per 

cent of the cost in '75.  In 1991 it was substantially less than 

that.  Diabetics were being treated specially.  They were not 

taken out of the drug plan.  They were put into the drug plan 

and they received the same benefits of everybody else in the 

province who is under the drug plan.  That's what the facts are 

and that's the reason why diabetics were put under the drug 

plan.  That's why it occurred, because they were receiving 

special treatment and it was felt important to try and equalize 

the situation throughout the province. 

 

I want to point out as well once again, because I've said it 

earlier this morning, that with respect to the individual 

cases that you raise, if there are any hardship cases, the 

Department of Health has a safety net that will help these 

people pay for their drugs.  If they can't afford them, we will 

help them and so I want to urge people to contact us if there is 

a hardship case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, as I went through the 

various Estimates of other ministers, I ran into a number of 

categories that had ministerial discretion on miscellaneous 

things that would be coming in, and 1 million here and 3 

million there and 2 million in other places.  Have you got that 

in your budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Department of Health does not have 

a slush fund, if that's what you're talking about.  With respect to 

discretion within the drug plan, the discretion is with respect to 

the safety net.  There isn't 1.4 million floating around, if that's 

what you want to know. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm trying to find it under the Minister of 

Finance.  I think it was two and a half million dollars that he 

had for discretionary fund that was in a part of his budget.  

Why don't you go ask the Minister of Finance to do something 

for health care and ask him to give some of that money over to 

you in a warrant.  There isn't anybody that would complain 

about the 1.4 million extra cost it would provide to the 

diabetics so that they could have that service provided instead 

of having the Minister of Finance have this discretionary fund 

that he wants to run around the province with. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Department of Health does not have 

a slush fund.  And as to your suggestion that there is money 

floating around in the Department of Finance, I can't comment 

on that.  I don't know the details of the Department of Finance 

situation, but I'm sure that if the Department of Finance has a 

fund for certain purposes that it has been targeted and is 

something that is crucial to that particular department. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, you left $150 million 

in the Liquor Board.  You left $118 in Sask Power Corporation.  

That's in last year's surplus. 

 

You left 40 million in SaskTel.  You left 15 million in SGI for 

total of almost $400 million, and that doesn't include this year's 

income with a higher cost per unit and a higher payment by 

individuals.  You're going to have, Madam Minister, you're 

going to have a bigger surplus in each one of those utilities. 

 

And as much as the Associate Finance Minister wants to talk 

about it, I am saying to you, 1.4 million would be well spent in 

the drug plan for diabetics if you took some of that 150 million 

out and put it in there.  That's what we're talking about.  Your 

priorities aren't straight, and that's why we have a disagreement 

with you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Madam Minister, I just want to add a couple of 

points to what the member from Morse has said.  Last night we 

went through some of this with the Minister of Finance, and the 

Minister of Finance finally acknowledged that his so-called 

write-offs could actually end up in being capital gains, and he 

could make money on potash and Cameco. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3231 

We also found out that the large degree of tax increases were 

something that people did not expect, and in fact they're the 

very opposite to what they campaigned on.  And what's 

bothering a lot of people in Saskatchewan, and certainly 

bothering the official opposition, is that over and over and over 

and over and over again you kept telling us when you were in 

opposition that you needed more money for health care.  And 

you had to help people who were in health care and that much 

more was needed to make sure that people were protected 

because you believe in universal health care. 

 

And I'm going to read you some of your quotes because today 

you're saying the very opposite, and the people know that it's 

the very opposite.  And so not only your taxation has been 

flip-flopped, because you promised to cut taxes and then you 

increased the taxes.  When you look at the deficit you use an 

accrual accounting method and you've made a sham of a debt 

that the minister admitted last night that is not valid.  In fact 

you could actually have a net increase and it could be 

profitable.  And now we find out today that you are doing the 

very opposite again in health care compared to what you 

campaigned on and what you promised. 

 

In 1988 in the Star-Phoenix you are quoted as saying this, the 

hon. member, and I quote the newspaper:  Simard suggests the 

province is moving towards a fee-for-service system where 

quality health care will be available only to those that can 

afford it. 

 

And you complained, and complained bitterly, Madam 

Minister, when you were in opposition about any kind of fee.  

And now you're in government and obviously you've raised the 

fees considerably; larger than we've seen in any administration 

in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you go on to say in Hansard in 1989: the opposition is 

going to fight these health care cut-backs and these changes to 

medicare.  It's going to fight the erosion of the principles of 

medicare.  I feel rather certain we'll have change of government 

next time around and then the public isn't going to have to 

worry about these problems. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, we've seen the public worrying about 

these problems more than they've ever thought possible, not 

only because of insulin, but because of prescription drugs, 

higher taxes and higher fees.  And as we find out now, Madam 

Minister, you're even going to impose these higher taxes on 

rural municipalities.  And they have an opportunity . . . if they 

want to save their health care system, they're going to have to 

raise taxes.  And it could look at 50 to 100 mill rate increase 

because of your new-found system. 

 

And the minister yesterday acknowledged that was a 

possibility, and what did he say?  Well under the wellness 

model they have a choice.  So you could look at 100 mill 

increase in municipalities in rural areas to defend keeping up 

their health care system, when you promised the very opposite. 

 

The Leader-Post, 1992: as the party which pioneered 

universally accessible health care in this province designed to 

respond to need, not ability to pay, we categorically reject the 

concept of health care deterrent 

fees. 

 

Well you're charging fees for virtually everything now.  And 

you promised you'd never do that. 

 

And then you go on to say that, time and time again, that we 

didn't provide enough money to the health care system and that 

we allowed people to pay.  And what we see now is you've cut 

back in health care all across the board; you've broken every 

promise that you've ever been into, and now you're charging 

people fees -- incredible fees.  And you're picking up $13.6 

million just with respect to people who are looking at eye 

problems or back problems, and you campaigned against that. 

 

(1045) 

 

So like the Minister of Agriculture, like the Minister of 

Finance, like the Minister of Education, like the Minister of 

Highways, on and on and on, there's this tremendous flip-flop 

where you promised one thing but you're doing another. 

 

Listen to this.  This is the NDP leader, March of 1988:  New 

Democrats would continue to fight to restore social programs 

such as medicare and the dental and drug plan to their former 

place of leadership in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now when he campaigned on that, do you think that he kind of 

slipped out and said, but we're not going to charge you $125 a 

family; we'll charge you $380 a family.  And that's what you've 

done.  People are upset.  They're disappointed.  They feel like 

you've let them down. 

 

Add then it goes on to say, in 1991 the NDP leader said he 

doesn't believe health care costs in the province are 

sky-rocketing:  the cost of medicare is well within the budget, 

but Romanow said there needs to be more of an emphasis on 

prevention and community clinics to reduce present costs. 

 

So he's saying costs are not out of line.  They're going to help 

people on lower income.  They're going to make sure that they 

restore the prescription drug program.  And what do we get, 

Madam Minister?  Exactly the opposite. 

 

He goes on to say in '88:  the Conservative's record of cuts to 

health care and education and unfair tax increases out of 

wasteful spending will be among the key issues in the 

upcoming campaign. 

 

Well what have you done?  You've raised taxes.  You've raised 

fees.  You've charged people who have diabetic problems.  

You're charging them if they have eye problems.  You're 

charging them if they have back problems.  You're doing 

exactly the opposite to what you said you'd do. 

 

So the Minister of Finance is questioned in here and he admits 

he has to raise taxes when he promised to lower taxes.  We go 

to the Minister of Agriculture and he admits he has to cut 

agriculture spending when he promised to give them the cost of 

production.  We go to Education, and we find out that they're 

cutting in Education when they promised to do more. 



3232 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

And the member for Swift Current says there's $14.2 billion, 

and we find out last night from the Minister of Finance that it's 

the same debt that was there is there today and it's because of 

accounting.  And he admits it.  And he said, all we have is a 

different accounting method.  All we have is a different 

accounting method, and in fact a good part of the debt that's 

there is just as a result of the fact that they've brought it all 

together under a different format.  And he said, actually we 

could make money on this if the share values go up. 

 

What a sham.  And now we find out from the Minister of 

Health that really they didn't promise universal access and care 

for people who are sick and the elderly, they're going to tax 

them. 

 

And what we get from the Minister of Rural Affairs is, guess 

what -- rural municipalities can really pay for this; they can 

increase the mill rate by a 100 mills to help save their hospital, 

their nursing home.  Level 1 is no longer covered.  Level 2 is 

no longer covered.  Hospitals are going to close.  Nursing 

homes are going to close. 

 

And guess what -- you can pay more for taxes, more for 

prescription drugs, more if you've got a diabetic problem, with 

a brand-new NDP administration that is doing the very 

opposite to what they campaigned on.  And they're doing it, 

Mr. Chairman, because they promised tax cuts they knew they 

couldn't deliver.  Therefore they can't renege on that.  So they 

say, well I guess we'll have to stay with our PST (provincial 

sales tax) thing but we'll tax everything else, including the sick. 

 

And that's the legacy.  That's what we're faced with.  The NDP 

tax the sick.  And they're taxing rural communities.  They're 

taxing elderly.  They take away their senior citizens' heritage 

program.  They take away funding for level 2 and level 1 care.  

They close their hospitals.  And then they charge them more 

for utilities.  So what do you see?  You see their power rates go 

up.  You see the utility rates go up, their SGI rates.  The 

gasoline tax is increased.  And now you pay for prescription 

drugs. 

 

Madam Minister, if you were to put this in a brochure, you 

wouldn't have no more chance of getting elected than a 

snowball surviving in Hades.  And you know that.  And that's 

why people are upset.  And they're going to continue to be 

upset because you can say, well there was a deficit; we got to 

do this.  Well look it, you campaigned on the deficit.  But you 

said we'll put more money in and we'll make sure that we cut 

your costs so that the sick will be cared for and the elderly will 

be cared for.  That was absolute nonsense and absolute bunk. 

 

And we've got quote after quote after quote where you 

promised to make it better.  Well who are you making it better 

for?  The taxpayer's paying more.  Seniors are paying more.  

Rural communities are paying more.  Those that are sick are 

paying more.  Every family in Saskatchewan is paying more.  

And on top of that, you said well that's what we got elected on.  

You never got elected on that at all. 

 

So the Minister of Finance is finally reneging.  The Minister of 

Agriculture is changing his mind.  The farmers have had to sue.  

The Minister of Rural Affairs admits that RMs (rural 

municipality) will have to raise their taxes to 

defend rural health care.  Urban people won't be stuck with the 

same burden.  And your claim to fame is, this is the new-found 

NDP universal health care model. 

 

And you were against every one of these things when you were 

on this side of the House.  You were against tax increases.  You 

were against charging the sick.  You were against the 

prescription drug program when we charged 125.  Listen to the 

member from Saskatoon Broadway: the health situation in this 

province is out of control.  We have a drug plan where people 

are making decisions between groceries and prescription drugs, 

too little too late.  Your colleague said that, Madam Minister, 

when we charged $125 per family and you're up to $380 a 

family. 

 

And your member, and your colleague from Broadway, 

Saskatoon Broadway, is going to vote for this?  And she's 

tripled it?  She said people are choosing between groceries and 

prescription drugs at $125 a family and you've raised it to 380.  

A new NDP administration raised it to $380 a family, and 

seniors don't know what to do; people that are diabetic don't 

know what to do.  And you complained at 125 and now you 

have convinced your colleagues in their very partisan basis to 

vote for this? 

 

You see, Madam Minister, why you have got such a terrible, 

terrible taste in the public's mouth about your taxes and your 

increases in fees and your cut-backs?  Because you didn't tell 

them the truth -- you didn't tell them the truth.  They thought 

you'd do better, and you've done considerably worse. 

 

And you've taxed them, raised their utilities, increased their 

prescription drug fees, closing hospitals, not funding nursing 

homes, cutting off senior citizens' heritage funds, and now 

you're taxing those that have eye problems, and charging those 

that have back problems, charging those that need insulin -- 

and you're here in your Estimates saying well this is what we 

mean by the new wellness.  In the long haul it'll save us money. 

 

Well are they beginning to wonder?  And you say, well other 

provinces are doing it; we have no choice.  Well, Madam 

Minister, you've had lots of choices.  You have priorities.  And 

government is about making choices.  What we're just 

reminding people here today is that how do you justify, Madam 

Minister, a statement like this? 

 

This is in 1987: The health situation in this province is out of 

control.  We have a drug plan where people are making 

decisions between groceries and prescription drugs. 

 

Now how do you justify that -- by an NDP government 

member now -- when you raised it to $380?  How do you 

square that circle when you campaign and say that's way too 

much, they shouldn't charge you that, and then you come in and 

you charge them triple that? 

 

How do you justify that and why do you encourage the public 

to say, well this is a really fine idea, when every time when you 

were in opposition and there was even an increase -- and we 

increased the Health budget every single year -- and you said, 

not enough, not enough, helped them not enough, spend more, 

spend more, not enough, not enough, and then you come in and 

you do something like this? 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3233 

How do you square that, Madam Minister, when you can have 

an NDP in opposition say that 125 was so mean-spirited, 

people had to choose between groceries and prescription drugs, 

and now it's $380 per family and on top of that you've raised all 

the utilities and all the taxes and cut the seniors' heritage 

program, and charging for all of these other items?  How do 

you square that, Madam Minister, in terms of the public that 

thought that you were going to make it better? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, or 

should I say the minister of propaganda, has been spreading 

total misinformation here.  First of all, he has said that we have 

closed rural hospitals.  It is he that closed a rural hospital -- 

Bienfait.  He has said that we are going to increase municipal 

taxes by 100 mill.  In 1986 the average mill rate for union 

hospitals was 7.9; in 1992 it's 4.02.  So you see the 

misinformation and the mistruths that the member opposite is 

spreading.  And no one on this side of the House has said that 

the municipal hospital levy is going to be increased to 100 mill 

-- nobody.  The member opposite knows that that is not true 

and yet he has said that we said that.  And what he was telling 

this House was not true, Mr. Chair. 

 

And that sort of clouds every single comment he just made in 

the last five or ten minutes.  He said we closed hospitals; he 

closed Bienfait.  We're going to raise the rate to 100 mill; it's 

been dropped from 7.9 during his regime as premier to 4.02 

under this government. 

 

Now I want to speak to the fact that the member opposite who 

stands here and criticizes this government for trying to deal 

with the deficit -- for trying to deal with the huge deficit that 

the member opposite is personally responsible for creating, the 

$15 billion deficit that is drowning this province, that is almost 

making it impossible for the people of Saskatchewan to hang 

onto any future . . . Almost impossible because we're strapped 

with a debt of a government that was gallivanting all over the 

place, throwing money left, right, and centre, without any 

long-term plan in any area -- not to mention Health. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is by trying to get a handle on the 

deficit we are continuing to fight for our social programs.  Yes, 

it means short-term pain, but it's short-term pain for long-term 

gain.  And the fact of the matter is, is we are continuing to 

fight, as we said we would, to preserve and maintain social 

programs for future generations.  And the only way we're going 

to be able to do that is to deal with the mess that the member 

opposite has left us.  It's the only way we will save our social 

programs for the future. 

 

And the members opposite stand up in here and they say, well 

you shouldn't have made this cut or that cut.  And the fact of 

the matter is, is they had a whole slew of cuts prepared in their 

last budget, such as co-payments for chiros and co-payments 

for optos and a whole bunch of other things. 

 

And they were hiding it in their budget for after the election.  It 

was going to come on stream in January. 

 

And now they stand up here . . . And co-payments for 

physiotherapy, co-payments for chiros, for optos, 

 increases in the drug plan, de-insure List 3 Labs, drug plan 

deductible increase, seniors' ambulance cap increase, SAIL 

(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program changes 

-- that's what you were going to do after October election. 

 

And now you stand up and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Fearmongering, fearmongering. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's in writing; it's not fearmongering.  

And now you stand up and you say, oh you shouldn't have 

made these changes.  You shouldn't make these changes.  And 

the members opposite are saying we don't like these changes, 

and yet they had rafts of changes in their back pocket that they 

never told the public about and won't admit to now.  But we 

know that they were . . . they were there.  And that's the 

hypocrisy that comes from the members opposite. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is they devastated this province.  They 

spread mistruths throughout this province about the financial 

situation, about the annual financial situation and the long-term 

situation.  They devastated this province.  Now they can't even 

stand up and admit they made one, single mistake. 

 

And I think the people of the province want you to stand up 

and say I'm sorry.  I'm sorry you've ruined this province.  I'm 

sorry.  I'm sorry the present government is put in a position 

where it's almost impossible to get out of this debt and manage 

this province.  I'm sorry we did this to your children and your 

grandchildren in such an irresponsible and selfish fashion.  

Because that's what you did. 

 

You stand there spreading more mistruths and more 

propaganda.  You stand there making statements like, we have 

closed rural hospitals.  We are raising the rate by 100 mills, as I 

pointed out earlier.  And not once have we heard your Leader 

of the Opposition, the minister of propaganda, not once have 

we heard him stand up and say I'm sorry.  And you should urge 

him to do that, Mr. Member from Rosthern because it's time the 

both of you stood up and said you're sorry to the public for 

ruining this province. 

 

(1100) 

 

The fact of the matter is, is this government is continuing to do 

its best to fight, to preserve our programs.  You can't spend 

money you don't have.  You can't spend money you don't have.  

And it's absolutely crucial that what we do is get the financial 

situation under control, so we can clean up your mess and do 

what we can to preserve medicare and other social programs 

for future generations.  And that's what's happening in this 

province today. 

 

And let me tell you that the majority of the population agree 

with the need to get a handle on this deficit.  And they 

understand only too well.  They understand only too well the 

devastation that your carelessness and your policies and your 

self-serving administration created with respect to this 

province. 



3234 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Madam Minister, I asked you very 

specifically how you justify your current charge of $380 per 

family when I've just read you quotes where you and your NDP 

colleagues have said, and I quote:  We have a drug plan where 

people are making decisions between groceries and 

prescription drugs.  And that was after we brought in 125 

deductible. 

 

Now the facts are, you've taken it from 125 to $380 a family -- 

terrible increase.  At 125 you said people were making 

decisions and choosing between groceries and necessary 

prescription drugs.  And now you can turn around and charge 

them that. 

 

And on top of that, Madam Minister, the facts are, you've taken 

away the senior citizens' heritage program for a large number 

of seniors.  You've charged them a lot more for utilities -- their 

power rates, their telephone rates, their insurance rates.  You're 

charging them for various kinds of health care services. 

 

And now we find rural communities, Madam Minister, asking 

you for assurances that they won't have to raise their mill rates 

by 100 mills, so that in fact they don't have to have that kind of 

money necessary to maintain rural health care services, because 

what you'll have is non-universal health care.  And your 

minister says well if they want to do that, I guess that's their 

choice. 

 

And your Minister of Finance said well really it's the same 

debt; we just positioned it a little bit different.  And here we've 

got you doing exactly the opposite to what you campaigned on.  

And what's so ironic is that you promised tax cuts -- several 

hundred million in tax cuts -- and better service in health care, 

and better fees in prescription drugs.  And guess what you've 

done?  You've raised taxes and you've raised fees when you 

said you wouldn't. 

 

And that's why you get upset, and why members opposite find 

it difficult to support you; and why they're so anxious to get out 

of the Legislative Assembly.  Because when we're in here, we 

remind people of what you campaigned on. 

 

So here you are.  You're in a situation where we're looking at 

and you're looking at the closure or change and closure of 66 

rural hospitals.  And you've admitted that.  You don't fund level 

1 and 2 nursing homes.  You've admitted that.  And you've 

broken all of these promises and certainly you've been very, 

very difficult for people who have eye problems and back 

problems. 

 

And on top of that, we've got people like the member from 

Churchill Downs that says, and I quote -- this is 1991 in May: 

The NDP won't raise any personal taxes for four years.  

Imagine the campaign rhetoric.  Won't raise any taxes for four 

years. At 125 people have to choose between groceries and 

prescription drugs and we're going to make sure everybody's 

better looked after.  We're going to give the cost of production 

for farmers.  We're going to build a lot more health care 

facilities. 

 

And when you get into power, guess what?  Taxes went up in 

the first budget a lot.  Personal taxes, retail sales taxes and now 

universal health fees, costs, and services -- 300 

per cent increase.  And they say well what happened to the 

NDP promises.  And I'll tell you what the public are saying.  

They said whatever was necessary to get elected.  They said 

there was a deficit of $14.2 billion during the election, but that 

didn't matter, they were going to manage better without 

increasing fees and taxes and balance the budget.  And people 

said, well that's nice I hope you can, and guess what?  It's 

impossible. 

 

So you are taxing and cutting and slashing and wrecking 

universal health care across the province because people on 

low income, for Heaven's sakes, are paying 300 per cent more 

than they did under our administration.  And this is your new 

wellness plan. 

 

Well what I'm saying, Madam Minister, is how do you justify 

$380 per family on prescription drugs when you and your 

colleagues said, at $125 people on that income would have to 

choose between groceries and prescription drugs.  At $125 

deductible, and if that was the case, how in the world do they 

cope with it at 380.  Would you address that super-increase, 

that burden when you said and your colleagues said, it's 

impossible to live with 125.  How do you justify that to those 

people who you said you would defend and you increased the 

cost 300 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, we have a substantially 

expanded safety net over the one that was there by the former 

government.  For example, if a person needs special assistance 

under the old plan, they had a 25 per cent co-pay, a deductible 

of 125 would be removed and they had a 25 per cent co-pay.  

This government has been removing a deductible of 380, and 

they go down immediately to 10 per cent co-pay.  So special 

cases of individuals who need special assistance under this 

safety net is substantially expanded over the former 

government and in many cases some people are better off.  And 

that's why we urge people who need assistance to apply to the 

health care plan for some assistance. 

 

This government is maintaining the fundamental principles of 

health care.  And through re-organizing our health care system 

and re-integrating and integrating health care services, we will 

be able to improve on health care services in the province and 

maintain the present health care system, maintain medicare and 

the fundamentals of health care.  And that's what we are doing 

with our health care reform. 

 

Now the member opposite talked about de-insuring level 1 

services with nursing homes.  Once again he is spreading 

another mistruth.  Level 1 was not funded by his government.  

It was not de-insured by this government.  Level 2 has not been 

de-insured.  We have simply stated the intention to phase out 

level 2 over a period of time.  And we are in the process of 

setting up a home care safety net because level 2 people are 

individuals who don't need assistance and can be maintained in 

their home through home care. 

 

Level 3 and level 4, if people are level 3 and 4, they will be 

provided for.  But level 2 can be maintained in their home 

through home care assistance.  And we are building a home 

care safety net.  We are building that home care safety net.  

Level 1 was not funded by the former 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3235 

government either.  So level 1 was not de-insured by this 

government. 

 

Now with respect to home care, I think it's important for us to 

note that the government has had increased funding to attempt 

to deal with the future phase-out of level 2.  We have had 

increased funding for home care.  And the budget allows up to 

19.5 per cent for home-based services.  And we are out there 

developing the safety net so level 2 people who can be kept in 

their homes and do not need assistance in a special home, can 

live in their homes longer. 

 

Now I also think it's important to note that there has been 

increases in northern initiatives because there has been a huge 

inequity in health care services in northern Saskatchewan.  And 

although this government has no money, it has attempted to 

re-allocate some funding to the North.  There has been 

enhanced northern nursing, health educator, dental health, and 

mental health services. 

 

There's been increased specialist services available in northern 

Saskatchewan.  There's an integrated mobile health team to 

provide services within communities supported by northern 

Health and SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission), with follow-up services through Education and 

Social Services.  There's a new bursary program for northern 

residents who will return to work in health services in the 

North. 

 

This government has made a commitment to try and reduce 

inequities in northern Saskatchewan and has . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I know it's not enough money, but it has 

moved an increase in funding to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some of the other health initiatives that have occurred in this 

budget where there have been some increases -- And let's talk 

about that.  There's increases in '92-93 funding levels over the 

former government's funding levels in the mental health 

services branch. 

 

Now when I travelled the province as opposition Health critic, I 

repeatedly heard what a horrible situation mental health 

patients were in throughout this province trying to access 

services.  And while the members were cutting crisis lines in 

Yorkton and other places, mental health patients were going 

unattended to, in many cases.  Now that problem hasn't been 

eradicated, but we've recognized it by increases to the mental 

health services branch. 

 

And it needs a lot more.  I know it needs more, but this 

government is showing a priority.  It has moved some funds in 

that direction.  And some of the increases will include 

expanded services for respite and enhanced crisis services, 

services to rural communities, enhanced vocational 

employment opportunities for chronically mentally ill. 

 

In the northern health services branch there are enhanced 

psychological services and additional mental health 

counsellors.  There is a funding of over $1 million to support 

psychiatric research at the University of 

 Saskatchewan.  And we're looking at a new 24-bed forensic 

unit at Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford. 

 

And the point I wish to make here is that the government has 

said there are inequities in the North, there are inequities in 

mental health, and we have to start slowly moving towards 

trying to reduce those inequities.  And it isn't going to happen 

overnight.  It's going to be a long haul -- there's no question 

about it.  But this government is moving in that direction, and 

so we've shown our intent. 

 

Other initiatives that this government has undertaken in this 

Health budget are increased resources for the community 

therapy program.  We talk about the need for more 

community-based services in the province, and we are 

attempting to move to more community therapies, for example, 

and more community-based services. 

 

There has been increased funding for family planning, to 

address the high rate of teen-age pregnancy in Saskatchewan.  

Now there again this is an enormous problem in Saskatchewan, 

and it has long-term effects.  And if we can prevent unintended 

pregnancies, even if it doesn't reduce unintended pregnancies 

by huge amounts, but if we can prevent some of them through 

proper programming and planning, I believe that we will make 

a substantial impact on the lives of many people, of many 

young women and their children. 

 

And this government has recognized that that was lacking 

under your policy.  Family planning and the need to try and 

prevent unintended pregnancies was almost not discussed in 

here.  It was like there was something taboo about it.  But this 

government is moving in that area, and we're proud of that 

initiative.  And we hope in the years to come we will see 

benefits from that specific initiative. 

 

This government has also developed a provincial AIDS 

(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) strategy.  And this 

began with the symposium in June.  And there has been 

increased funding for this horribly tragic problem of AIDS that 

we're facing across this country. 

 

There have been family violence initiatives in mental health, 

SADAC, and community health, because family violence 

destroys women and children or other individuals who are 

subject to violence in a family situation.  Violence -- period -- 

is destructive.  And we want to move to a zero tolerance in 

society with respect to violence, because we believe that 

violence has an enormous impact on mental, physical, and 

spiritual well-being.  And so the Department of Health has had 

initiatives in the family violence area. 

 

(1115) 

 

And so what I wish to say, Mr. Chair, is that there is good news 

in the Health budget for many different areas.  And there has 

been a repriorization.  What we are attempting to do in the 

hospital sector, for example, is to move to more home-based 

services.  With level 2 we're trying to move to more 

home-based services.  Nobody's going to be put out of their 

home, contrary to what the members opposite say.  It'll be a 

phase-out over a period of time.  And we will provide 

substantial and adequate home care  



3236 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

in the home for those seniors who would otherwise be level 2, 

who might need some home-based assistance. 

 

The government sees that there are certain . . . And I want to 

say, give the members opposite credit, at the end of their 

10-year mandate the former member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the associate minister of Health, 

finally realized there was a need to improve home care.  And 

he stood in this House and he said that, that we must expand 

home care.  And I said, finally -- we've been talking about it for 

years here as opposition, the need to move to more home care 

services, an expanded role for home care and the need to 

de-institutionalize some of our hospital services and to deal 

with people in their homes as much as possible. 

 

The members opposite recognize that.  They spoke to it in this 

Assembly as though it was a new idea when it was really 12 

years old.  Took them 12 years to get to that point but they 

were finally moving in that direction. 

 

So this government has made a commitment to do what is right 

in the long term for the people of Saskatchewan, which is to 

improve our home-based services and de-institutionalize and 

develop our safety net, to reduce inequities in the North, to 

reduce inequities in mental health, to reduce inequities for 

women with respect to family violence and family planning 

initiatives, for example. 

 

And it isn't going to be easy to solve some of these problems 

that are out there, especially when you don't have any money.  

Because we're broke in this province and it's bankrupt.  And we 

don't have any money.  And the only way we can get at some 

of these inequities is by repriorizing funding.  And that is what 

this government is doing. 

 

And as long as we have a deficit of the nature that we do in this 

province, it will be impossible for us to deal with these 

problems effectively.  We have to get a handle and get a lid on 

that annual deficit so the interest from the $15 billion debt 

doesn't keep adding to the $15 billion.  And even though you 

may reduce expenditure -- and if you looked at the debt 

scenario -- even though we can reduce expenditure in programs 

and in government, we can still end up adding to the $15 

billion and it goes up and you've got to reduce more the next 

year because you're paying interest on the interest.  And that's 

what's happening out there. 

 

And until you get a lid on that debt and you keep it at a level 

that you can maintain every year and you don't add to the 

deficit, it'll be extremely difficult for this province under any 

government to improve social programs.  And the objective of 

this exercise is to put a lid on that deficit so for future 

generations when times are better, we can improve our 

education programs and our health programs and our programs 

for seniors.  That's the objective. 

 

Because let me tell you, if it continues the way it's continued 

over the last ten and a half years, it's going to be New York 

deciding whether we've got health care in this province.  It'll be 

New York deciding and not the people of Saskatchewan. 

But this government is going to save medicare for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we're going to save it by getting a handle on 

that deficit.  And when times are better, we can improve on the 

programs that are there. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

to admit that the last 15 minutes were a total and utter waste of 

taxpayers' money in this Assembly as we witness a pathetic 

attempt to deflect the issues that we're facing today, a pathetic 

attempt, Madam Minister. 

 

As you take on again your role as the government 

blame-thrower and have a heated blast coming at us as you 

patronizingly try to exonerate the ultimate betrayal perpetrated 

on the people of this province by you, your Finance minister, 

and the Premier of this province, the epitome of hypocrisy 

drips from your lips.  And you speak and try to deflect this 

entire fact that you are just unwilling and perhaps incapable, 

Madam Minister, of accepting the responsibility of forming the 

government of this province. 

 

Madam Minister, you were elected by the people.  You were 

elected by the people to govern and to live up to the promises 

that got you elected.  And you have the audacity to get up in 

this room and start talking about New York bankers.  You 

know and your government under the former premier of Allan 

Blakeney know full well all about the bankers of New York as 

you trod into New York to borrow billions of dollars for what 

purpose?  For what purpose, Madam Minister?  To buy dry 

holes in the ground, to buy potash mines that didn't create one 

job, that had no spin-off effects but rather put a millstone of 

taxation on future generations on our children's back.  That, 

Madam Minister, is exactly where the deficit got its original 

problems from. 

 

And now you're sitting here saying that we must repriorize, 

Madam Minister.  What gall, what unmitigated gall for you to 

get up and say that we are repriorizing.  All right, Madam 

Minister, who are victims of this repriorization?  That's what 

we've been talking about this morning for two hours. 

 

We've been talking about the diabetics.  And you're saying 

diabetics, you're going to pay.  That's what you've been saying.  

That's your repriorization.  You say we can't fund all of these 

people any more.  We can't do that.  So you pick on diabetics. 

 

You take and pick on those people who need chiropractic care 

because for some reason you cannot understand that that is a 

low cost effective form of treatment that should fit into your 

wellness plan. 

 

But you say no, we're going to take it out of the wellness plan.  

It's not part and parcel of my priority.  Optometrics -- no way, 

you say.  That doesn't fit my wellness plan. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, if these three that I have just recited 

right now don't fit your wellness plan in terms of preventative 

measures at low cost, then I don't know what would. 

 

But that's where your priorities are; your priorities now lie 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3237 

with the Minister of Finance and your Premier who have 

dictated to you, you've got to cut X amount of dollars off the 

budget this year.  And in the same breath you're saying, folks 

this ain't nothing yet; wait till next year. 

 

And the member says hear, hear.  Exactly.  Your own 

colleagues are well aware of what your long-term plans are, 

and that is to cut more -- to cut, cut, hack and slash your way 

through. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you came up with a plan that was 

going to save the health care system money . . . and I'm one of 

the first ones to admit that if you're going to have a substantial 

impact on the deficit, it must be done on the large and the big 

ticket items. 

 

We're talking about the Department of Health.  It's a third of 

your budget -- $1,600 for every man, woman, and child.  At 

least it used to be under ours; now it's of course less because 

you've decided to cut Health.  But if you came up with a 

rational proposal that indeed had the support of the people of 

Saskatchewan and was not counter-productive, then I would 

say, Madam Minister, that you would have our support. 

 

But how would you expect me, as a critic of Health now -- 

could you visualize yourself standing where I'm standing . . . or 

you were over there in those days saying, yes right on, cut the 

diabetics because we have a deficit; yes right on, cut 

chiropractors, optometric, triple the deductible on drug costs -- 

that we're going to be going along with that? 

 

Oh we'll get into the wellness plan, the way that's developing.  

And yet on one hand you talk about the consultative process.  

You do that.  You say, we consult; we will consult.  Then in the 

next breath you say, whoops, enough consultation, it's time to 

get into action.  You'd say that too.  And you have said that.  

You're saying two things at the same time.  Which is it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite had a commission 

that travelled this province and cost the taxpayers $1.8 million 

and I think it took two years to report.  And I followed it 

around at my own expense, at my own expense, and listened to 

what people were saying. 

 

It cost them $1.8 million, and what did they do with the results 

of that commission report?  They shelved it.  They didn't have 

the courage, they didn't have the courage to even act on what 

was recommended in that report, even though it was 

recommended by their own commission. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that there have been many 

studies taken place throughout this province, and this 

government is consultative and continues to consult.  But at 

some time people want their government to get on with it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you talk about the plan that 

we spent money on, the Murray Commission.  You were part 

and parcel of that, as I suggested to you while you were 

talking.  And yet you roundly criticized everything about the 

Murray Commission as it was going around and the results of 

the Murray Commission report.  Do you want me to start 

quoting the things that you said? 

I've got them here. 

 

Now you find yourself as the minister, and you've done another 

about face on many of the issues.  How do you account for 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have not done an about face on the 

issue because the facts of the matter are, is Murray's regions 

included 40,000 to 80,000 people.  We are looking at districts 

of approximately 12,000.  It could be less, could be a little bit 

more.  Huge difference in the minds of the public. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is we've set up a committee to look at 

the taxation issue.  Murray said that there should be a 5 per 

cent levy, and we are seeking consultation on the whole issue.  

And we have SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) will be represented and SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) represented on that 

committee, which is much different than the Murray 

Commission report.  There were a whole level of tiers in the 

Murray Commission report that won't exist in the new 

co-ordinated and integrated system that we want to talk to the 

people about over the next few months. 

 

There are huge differences between the Murray Commission 

recommendation and what we have proposed.  And the 

member opposite knows that.  The member opposite is aware 

of that. 

 

Now the fact of the matter . . . the fact is, is that the members 

opposite did nothing -- ten and a half years, no long-term 

strategic plan, nothing in health.  Instead they just let it drift.  

They showed no leadership, no creativity, no innovation, 

nothing. 

 

And what this government wants to do is to improve the quality 

of health care for Saskatchewan people, to preserve the 

principles of health care, the fundamental principles of health 

care.  In order to do that, we must co-ordinate and integrate our 

health care system in the province.  We must bring it together 

and reduce duplication and to co-ordinate services.  And by 

co-ordinating services, we also provide a better quality of 

services.  Because by co-ordinating services, we are hoping to 

reduce the number of people that would fall between the gaps, 

for example. 

 

So in order to improve the quality of the health care system, it's 

important to co-ordinate and integrate it.  We also believe as a 

government that in order to improve the quality of the health 

care system, we must seek community involvement and input. 

 

(1130) 

 

We've been doing that over the last nine months.  We will 

continue to do it over the months to come.  I am personally 

meeting with the health care boards and home care boards 

throughout this province and talking to them about it and 

getting input from them, telling them the way we see it 

developing. 

 

And I think this is a very unique experience to government, a 

government that is out there talking to 



3238 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

people at the grass roots, getting their input on how we can 

develop the best quality health care program, how we can 

co-ordinate and integrate our services, setting out a general 

framework, working out the details with the people.  I think 

that's quite exceptional.  And that's what we're doing.  We're 

working out the details with the people as we go through our 

health reform, and getting their input and their consultation as 

we go through this reform. 

 

And it's something the members opposite didn't do.  They took 

no stand.  They took no stand -- no stand on the Murray 

Commission report.  None at all.  They buried their heads in 

the sand and they did nothing, in spite of the fact they paid a 

fortune for it.  I would have thought they would at least have 

had the courage to back up the person who did that report, but 

they didn't. 

 

Now there were problems with it, with their report.  And we 

pointed those out at the time and we have corrected them in our 

approach.  We've corrected them in our approach.  And this 

government understands the need for consultation and this 

government is involved in consultation throughout the province 

with stakeholders and other health care groups.  This 

government is consulting in a way the former government 

never did consult with stakeholders, and we're seeking the 

involvement of individuals in a manner the former government 

never did. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  And I'm 

sure that the people who are listening and watching are 

appreciative of the opportunity to listen to what the Minister of 

Health is saying and engaging . . . or comparing her actions to 

her words. 

 

And, Madam Minister, you say you want to continue.  And 

that's what I found most disturbing about your little political 

speech that you just finished -- most disturbing that you want to 

continue on in what you are doing.  And I'm sure the people 

who are listening are shaking as well, as you say that you are . . 

. And you are promising.  You just promised right now that you 

are going to continue, in your words, to improve the health care 

situation in the province. 

 

Well that's a damning indictment of your intentions, Madam 

Minister.  I think the people have had quite enough of your 

improvements.  You talk to chiropractors and optometrists.  

You talk to the level 2 folks and find out if they are so 

enthralled about your improving that you're talking about and 

doing.  You talk to the diabetics.  You talk about all of those 

who have to participate in the increased prescription drug 

plans, whether they are in tune with your improvements. 

 

Madam Minister, as I said yesterday in question period, if you 

would do nothing in Health, that would be a tremendous 

improvement.  That's the bottom line.  That's the bottom line, 

Madam Minister. 

 

And you wanted to talk about consultation.  All right, let's talk 

about consultation.  I have a good example, Madam Minister, 

of how you consult, how you hold hearings with the real people 

out there.  Madam Minister, as you consult about your wellness 

plan, I can recall the report I got on 

your meeting in North Battleford.  Do you recall that meeting 

in North Battleford, Madam Minister?  You didn't even inform 

the chairman of the local hospital board that you were coming 

into town, Madam Minister.  Imagine that.  The Minister of 

Health did not inform the local chairman of the hospital board 

that she was coming.  Why?  Because you thought it was more 

important for you to get a good spot on the local news, the 

local evening news.  And I say this because the only people 

you talked to in North Battleford in your consultative mode 

was the media.  You didn't talk to the local people.  You talked 

to the media. 

 

The leaders, Madam Minister, the leaders of the local hospital 

didn't get a copy of your white paper until the following day.  

And you were there in your consultative mode.  Is this your 

idea of a consultative government, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- All boards were mailed a copy the day it 

was announced.  And we will be meeting with North Battleford 

when the meeting is set up.  The purpose of the meeting in 

North Battleford was not to meet with all the health care 

stakeholders.  There were some individuals that were met with.  

And the media was also met with.  There will be meetings in 

North Battleford.  We will be talking to health care 

stakeholders in North Battleford.  That will come.  We will be 

meeting with as many people as we can throughout the 

province.  And we've done a substantial amount of that in the 

last three weeks.  So we will continue to do more of those 

meetings with health care stakeholders through the province.  

And I will be going to North Battleford again, and we will be 

in touch with administrators when that date is set. 

 

Now the member opposite says that we shouldn't do anything 

in health care.  And I'm not surprised he would say that because 

that's what they did for 10 years -- nothing in health care.  They 

did nothing to improve the health care system.  They poured a 

lot of money into capital construction but nothing to improve 

the health status in the province and the health care system. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're right, Madam Minister.  We put a lot 

of money in construction.  Remember the last six years of your 

government?  You put a moratorium on nursing homes; folks 

had no place to go.  You built Liquor Board stores; you were 

great at that.  I've got some in my constituency to prove that.  

And yet you left the seniors out, out in the cold literally -- total 

moratorium.  What would you expect us to do for the first parts 

of our term?  All we had to do was try to play catch-up for the 

lack of building that you did, Madam Minister. 

 

I found out a good idea and a good example of your 

consultative mode which you conveniently got off of when I 

started talking about the North Battleford fiasco that you 

created.  And I also was in Eastend, Madam Minister, to see 

how your consultative mode . . . when you send your 

bureaucrats, when you send your officials to meet all day with 

a board, to indoctrinate them, to literally threaten them so that 

the end result is going to be to your liking. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, with consultation like that -- and we'll 

be talking more about that later on -- why don't you 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3239 

just simply send an edict out saying that this is the way it's 

going to be?  Because essentially that's what the people in 

Eastend and surrounding area -- from Kincaid and all the other 

surrounding towns . . . were basically brought to their attention 

with an ultimatum that said, this is the way it's going be, or 

sorry, folks, there's $140,000 taken out of your funding. 

 

That's the master hand that you're holding.  That's your ultimate 

trump card that you're holding in this whole wellness plan.  

And we're going to be pursuing that further yet. 

 

But at this time I just ask you: is that your idea of consultation, 

as it was in Eastend where your member there from Shaunavon 

was kept busy all night trying to extricate himself from the 

mess that you had put him in by the way that you were 

handling it?  And he made a firm commitment on your behalf 

to the people of Eastend that you, Madam Minister, would be 

there three weeks later.  And that's two weeks ago, those three 

weeks later.  Can you tell me now that you have been there and 

that you have listened to them personally, without sending 

bureaucrats? 

 

Because, Madam Minister, ultimately that's what you're going 

to have to do.  You're going to have to sit down with the people 

locally.  Don't just go to the Rosetowns and the Meadow Lakes 

and the Shaunavons to get a good ear.  Go to the smaller 

communities.  Will you commit to go to Kyle, to Beechy, to 

Dinsmore, to Eastend, to Kincaid and tell them how well this 

wellness model is going to treat them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We were at Dinsmore.  And with respect 

to the . . . And we spoke to people from the communities of 

Kyle and Beechy and Outlook.  We spoke to individuals, and I 

heard what they had to say.  And the meeting took place in 

Dinsmore.  The meeting took place in Dinsmore. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is with respect to Eastend, there 

have been extensive consultations with the individuals involved 

in Eastend.  And it's my understanding that the Department of 

Health and the officials in Eastend are working together very 

well, and that they are coming up with a solution to their 

problem.  And they will continue to have that good working 

relationship with the officials from Eastend. 

 

Now I want to talk in terms of consultations.  When we were 

looking at health care reform, in reviewing proposals that have 

been made in the past and new proposals, we met with, for 

example, in Regina: the Aboriginal Women's Council of 

Saskatchewan, the Chiropractic Association of Saskatchewan, 

the city of Regina health department, the Saskatchewan 

Alcohol & Drug Abuse Commission, the Saskatchewan 

Association of CNAs (Canadian Nursing Assistants), the 

Saskatchewan Association of Special Care Homes, community 

services, health care association, home care, medical 

association, mental health, pharmaceutical, psychiatric nurses, 

registered nurses, urban municipalities association, Service 

Employees International Union. 

In Saskatoon, we met with the Association of Non-Status 

Indians, College of Nursing, College of Medicine, College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, Community Health Co-operative 

Federation, Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

medical services branch, Health and Welfare Canada, Metis 

Society, the ambulance association, the association of 

optometrists, the association of rural municipalities, cancer, 

public health, union of nurses, community health unit, Senior's 

Secretariat. 

 

We've met with other organizations and individuals.  Archibald 

from the Sherbrooke Community Centre, Armstrong from 

Wynyard Community Clinic, Gloria Barnett.  And I've got a 

list of names here that goes on for a page and a half of other 

individuals and organizations.  We've received written briefs 

from Allergy Asthma Information Association, Breastfeeding 

Matters Group; Canadian Cancer Society; Canadian Diabetes 

Association; Canadian Institute of Public Health Inspectors, 

Saskatchewan branch; Canadian National Institute for the 

Blind; Canadian Organic Producers Marketing Co-op Ltd.; 

Canadian Physiotherapy Section; Canadian Red Cross Society; 

Catholic health association; chiropractors association; city of 

Regina Health department; College of Dental Surgeons; and it 

goes on.   There are one, two and a half pages of written briefs 

that were presented as a result of a request for briefs.  And 

some of this was followed up in individual think-tank 

environments. 

 

There has been a lot of consultation throughout this province.  

At some point in time, I say to the hon. member, at some point 

in time you have to get the job done. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, my colleague had used the 

term yesterday in this House to describe what you just did, but 

I'm informed that's an unparliamentary term so I won't describe 

your litany in those terms. 

 

A fairly simply question to you then, Madam Minister.  With 

all this consultation why is there so much apprehension, fear, 

and misunderstanding and ambiguity out there?  Explain that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members obviously haven't been 

reading the newspaper.  There has been support shown for our 

plan by a whole range of people, by SUN (Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses); by the SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care 

Association); by SASCH (Saskatchewan Association of 

Special Care Homes); by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons.  There has been an overwhelming support for the 

new direction. 

 

Yes I know the members opposite are trying very hard to raise 

as many concerns as they possibly can amongst people because 

their objective is to obstruct the reform.  They sat on their 

hands for 10 years; they didn't want to do anything and they 

don't want this government to do anything.  Because their 

philosophy is it's better not to do anything at all.  In fact I 

remember George McLeod's memo to the Department of 

Health telling them in effect, don't mess up.  Now the word 

wasn't mess; it was something else.  But I won't use it because 

that's probably unparliamentary. 



3240 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

That was his instructions.  That was his instructions to his 

people.  He was afraid to do anything.  So I can understand, I 

can understand why you do not want to see this government do 

anything, because you didn't have the courage to do anything -- 

not one little ounce of courage.  No courage at all.  Just 

maintain the status quo. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that there has been virtually 

overwhelming support for the wellness initiatives.  

Overwhelming support.  And there are some concerns which 

we will work through with communities.  We will work 

through these concerns.  And that's why we're going through a 

consultation process -- to determine what the concerns are.  

And we will deal with them. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You talk about 

headlines.  You talk about overwhelming support, Madam 

Minister.  I'll give you an example of the overwhelming 

support. 

 

First of all you say, Madam Minister, that the whole reason 

we're gutting the health care system is because of a deficit.  

You're responding to a deficit.  You're trying to cut money; 

you're trying to save money.  That's your overriding principle 

in your own words.  And therefore we're willing to gut the 

health care system as we know. 

 

Then you pick up a letter from the . . . into the Star-Phoenix.  It 

says:  Wellness model likely won't reduce cost of medicare.  

That's your overwhelming support, Madam Minister. 

 

Another one says: "Gov't will call shots for boards . . ." No 

local control.  Headlines saying, government will still call the 

shots.  The article goes on and says your government's health 

district board ". . . has more to do with politics than with health 

care . . ."  That's not me saying it.  It's a health economist 

saying it. 

 

Further it says: 

 

 In spite of the emphasis the government is putting on local 

control . . . the boards "will be the servants of the Department 

of Health . . ." 

 

And you say everybody's in favour, Madam Minister. 

 

It goes on: 

 

 The government's argument about local control rings hollow . 

. . 

 

 The government's move is simply "political flim-flam" in 

order to find a palatable way to close hospital beds . . . 

 

Madam Minister, and you've got overwhelming support? 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 . . . the truth of the matter is we're moving further away from 

local input by doing that. 
 

You say you have overwhelming support.  Madam 

Minister, I will grant you one thing.  When the initial response 

and the initial white paper got out, there was on the surface of 

it a lot of support.  But in the mean time almost every one of 

those organizations had said whoops, hold on now; we didn't 

understand the implications.  We didn't understand the impact 

that this potentially could have.  And we find more and more of 

that type of support waning as people begin to realize the 

impact that it will have on their community. 

 

I saw that.  I saw that at work where after a board's report to the 

constituents or to the members in that particular locality, the 

board members were giving solid support to your plan.  The 

doctor was giving solid support to your plan. 

 

And it seemed to me, and I was there to listen as part of my 

responsibilities and duties as a critic in Health, I said to the 

colleague that had gone with me there, after the first hour of the 

meeting, well I guess there's no reason for us to stay because it 

appeared as if there was solid support.  And if the community 

supports it, I as a Health critic support it because I have no 

right to resist something that doesn't have the concern of the 

people behind it. 

 

So I was prepared to leave until that proverbial little old lady in 

the crowd got up and asked, do we know what we're doing?  

What are we doing to ourselves?  What are we doing to our 

community?  Legitimate questions.  And from that point on, 

the board was under fire.  The doctor was under fire.  And 

certainly your MLA from that area was under fire and called to 

task a number of times because the well gates opened up, and 

the concern that was inside these people came forth. 

 

It welled up and spilled over to immediately following that 

where your own board members and your own doctor began to 

question your officials and said, yes what about this?  What 

about that?  What about the fact that if we lose our acute care 

beds, the building is not built the way it was anticipated, that 

had been approved.  If this turns out now that this is a bad 

move on your part, Madam Minister, and government, will you 

commit that we will still get those facilities that we lost in the 

interim? 

 

So, Madam Minister, when you say you have overwhelming 

support, I say at best, as one article that I have here says, 

cautious support, SARM, SUMA.  I can read that, and I will 

later on -- cautious support.  The implications are beginning to 

sink in, Madam Minister; that's all I'm saying.  Implications of 

many areas are beginning to sink in.  And these people want to 

know the true impact of your wellness plan.  They don't know 

that yet, and they are questioning, they are wondering, and 

they're worrying.  And they're telling me, where's the Minister 

of Health? 

 

That, Madam Minister, is why I want you to commit to true 

public consultation.  What you've been talking about so far is a 

farce.  You send officials there, and they meet.  You go to 

North Battleford, and you stand in front of the camera and you 

call that consultation.  That's not consultation, Madam 

Minister. 

 

We can get off this topic by you just simply getting up and 

saying yes.  This is my question: will you commit to full 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3241 

public hearings?  You've got standing committees in the 

government left and right.  Even this morning and yesterday, 

another standing committee established.  I don't know how 

many that is.  Maybe you can answer.  Is it 12, 15 standing 

committees?  How much is that . . . all those committees 

costing the taxpayer of this province?  How much money is 

being invested in it? 

 

So if you're in that mode already, why would you not do what 

is right -- set up a standing committee of this legislature where 

all three parties can be involved so that there is no hint of 

politicization of the process as it is under your dominating 

influence right now.  Why not do it that way?  Remove it out of 

the realm of politics, Madam Minister. 

 

I think you would admit then too that that's what would be 

happening.  It would be removed out of the realm of politics, 

because that's where it's in right now.  I recognize what I'm 

saying.  A lot of this is politically motivated, just as your -- I'll 

call them speeches -- just as your comments were and have 

been for the last hour.  And it becomes a political football.  I 

recognize that.  I hope you recognize that. 

 

So I'm quite prepared with one or two of my colleagues to sit 

on a committee like that with you and whoever you choose 

with the Leader of the Liberal Party and we'll do it right.  

Because, Madam Minister, this is a major, major change in 

direction of health care in Saskatchewan and we want the 

people to be part of it. 

 

We don't want a predetermined document with predetermined 

boundaries and so on set up for the people.  We want them to 

have that input.  And they're not getting it the way it's going 

right now, I assure you, Madam.  They are not getting it.  And 

I'm not the one that's saying it; they're telling me that. 

 

Would you consider that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all the paper has only been 

out for a couple weeks, as the member opposite is aware.  The 

Minister of Health can't be everywhere at once.  But I will be 

going throughout Saskatchewan over the next two months and 

meeting with as many communities as I possibly can, as is 

physically possible.  It's impossible to be everywhere at once.  

And so we beg people's indulgence and we'll get out to see 

them as quickly as we can. 

 

We will also ask other individuals such as officials in the 

Department of Health and other people involved in the system 

to get out and talk about this.  This is what this is all about.  

Yes, you're right.  Some people raise concerns, and that's what 

this model is all about, is people getting together in groups and 

talking about what is happening and asking questions.  That's 

what we're doing here.  We're trying to generate discussion on 

the health care reform. 

 

That's what it means, a local model.  People in Eastend getting 

together and talking about it and raising concerns.  That's what 

it's all about.  And this is the sort of discussion that we 

welcome in the months to come.  And we will be attempting to 

get to as many communities as we can as 

quickly as we can to provide them with as much information as 

we can and to hear what their concerns are and how we can 

work through these concerns and develop solutions. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is there has been an enormous 

amount of support and recognition for the need for health care 

reform and the need for organization on a district basis.  And 

that became clear when the paper was made public. 

 

We have headlines here that talks about health reform gaining 

support.  This one: rural health boards to manage services.  

Health groups were universal in their praise for the document, 

calling it a valuable and long overdue first step. 

 

He says they don't understand.  He says that the SHA -- the 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association -- the Saskatchewan 

Association of Special Care Homes, the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons, they don't understand.  They don't understand.  

He's saying all these people who work in the health care sector 

day in and day out and have worked there for years don't 

understand. 

 

Of course they understand.  And the fact . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't put words in my mouth. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No, well that's what you just said.  They 

don't understand. 

 

Here's another: health care leaders embrace; giving control to 

communities described as long overdue.  It's high time local 

communities had control over and ownership in the health 

system.  We have heard talk of change for many, many years 

but we've never seen anybody at the governmental level finally 

make that commitment to change, by a major leader in the 

health care area. 

 

Health care leaders embrace planned reforms.  We believe that 

when the communities take over responsibility for care, our 

members should be able to continue providing care.   Dennis 

Kendall, registrar for the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 

called the paper a positive plan that might help to attract 

doctors to rural communities.  That's what the registrar of the 

council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons said.  And it 

goes on and on. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is there's a recognition that we need 

change.  There's a recognition that we should co-ordinate and 

then organize on a district basis.  And we have put that 

framework forward for the people.  Now we are going out and 

asking them to tell us what our concerns are and to talk about 

possibilities of organizing in districts and what it may mean to 

them. 

 

And there'll be a lot of consultation to come.  And this is the 

process we are engaged in and I believe that this is a very 

effective process.  And wherever I go, people are welcoming.  

They are welcoming this input.  They are welcoming the 

opportunity to be able to talk about what it means to them and 

how it would evolve in their . . . with respect to their hospital or 

special care home, for 



3242 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

example.  And I think it's important that this consultation takes 

place over the next few months.  And we've been doing it.  And 

we will go to as many places as we possibly can, as I indicated 

earlier. 

 

It is clear, it is absolutely clear that the public recognizes the 

need for health care reform.  It is also clear that we need to 

co-ordinate and integrate on a district basis but not districts that 

are too large; districts that are at a size that we can deliver the 

kind of programming that we would like to deliver to our 

communities and still have local input and control. 

 

So we will be talking to people about what kind of input and 

control they would want on a board, for example.  Do they 

want an elected board?  Maybe we should have elected boards.  

And we'll be asking communities as we go through the 

province -- do you want the permanent boards to be elected?  

Or do you want them . . . one community already told me, no, 

they want a combination of appointed, elected. 

 

So these sort of things we have to think through in the weeks 

and months to come through the consultative process.  That's 

why this health care reform is a framework for change.  It's a 

framework.  Here is the general direction.  Now let's talk about 

how we make it work to our advantage in our communities.  

And if there are concerns, let's deal with them to the 

satisfaction of everybody involved. 

 

That's the way Saskatchewan people work.  They work 

together, co-operatively, with a goal in mind.  They organize 

and integrate, and they work together with that goal in mind in 

a co-operative fashion to improve services for their families 

and for future generations.  And that's what we're asking people 

to do with this health care reform. 

 

I know the members opposite say we're trying to get everybody 

fighting.  We're not.  We're trying to get them together to 

consult and talk about what this means.  It's not us who are 

pitting communities.  It's the member from Rosthern who's 

trying to pit communities against each other. 

 

We are trying to bring people together to look at the goal and 

what is for the benefit of their communities.  We've had an 

enormous amount of input in the last 12 years from 

communities and stakeholders.  Everybody knows what the 

general direction should be.  But not everything has been 

worked out.  And that's why this is a developmental model; 

that's why I talk about community development.  We want the 

people involved in the health care sector, the stakeholders, the 

boards involved, municipalities involved, coming together and 

talking about how we can make this framework work for the 

benefit of their children and their grandchildren.  And that's the 

process that's going to be taking place over the next six months 

to a year. 

 

(1200) 

 

And so I invite the members opposite when we have a meeting 

in an area, to come if they want.  And I hope that we have a 

co-operative approach to this.  We're not trying 

to force health reform on people.  We chose a community 

development approach to take a few months to talk about it and 

see how it works. 

 

In New Brunswick they came in with a blueprint that defined 

every boundary in the province, and they imprinted it on the 

province and they wiped out every board in the province and 

replaced it with a few boards.  That's what they did in New 

Brunswick. 

 

This government, in a co-operative spirit, chose to put forward 

a framework and to go out and talk to the people, and that's 

what we're doing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, Madam Minister, no.  Unfortunately that's 

not what we are doing.  You talk a good line, and I would 

appreciate it if you wouldn't put words in my mouth as to who 

understands and who does not understand.  That's not what I 

said, and you fully well know that. 

 

My concern, Madam Minister, is that people as they are 

gradually becoming more and more aware of the implications 

of your plan, are beginning to realize that they will not have 

local control.  The boards that are going to be appointed by you 

are not going to have the final say.  It is going to be the 

almighty dollar, the almighty purse-string that you are 

controlling that will dictate what these communities can and 

cannot do, because they will be limited by your funding. 

 

And, Madam Minister, the Finance minister has dictated to you 

to save money.  This is a mechanism and a means whereby you 

can accomplish that off-loading to municipalities.  That's the 

concern that SUMA has; that's the concern that SARM has.  

And those are your intentions, precisely. 

 

And as far as co-operation, Madam Minister, we would like to 

co-operate.  And the idea that communities should co-operate 

is something that's long overdue in Saskatchewan.  And 

although we're making a lot of progress -- I come from rural 

Saskatchewan, we have all our towns -- the competitive spirit is 

there and it's always been in sports and athletics and so on.  

But, Madam Minister, what you are doing is pitting one 

community against another.  You are asking in a co-operative 

spirit for a community to give up its schools, its hospitals, its 

elevators.  That's what you're asking these communities to do. 

 

Now I know what's going to happen.  Financing is the bottom 

line in all of this and these boards are going to be limited as to 

what they can do.  Municipalities will be limited as to what 

they can do.  And the only way that they can have that 

enhanced health care that the government will not be funding, 

is to pass it on to the local tax base. 

 

Madam Minister, if you can assure me that the local tax base 

will never, ever be used to supplement your down-loading, then 

I would say 95 per cent of this program of your wellness 

program has been taken care of.  I know you're going to get up 

and say health boards will not be given the right.  That's not 

what we're talking about; we're talking down to the local tax 

base.  If you can get up and say municipalities will not be 

allowed to tax 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3243 

for enhanced health services, if you commit that, that funding 

will come from the provincial coffers, we'll be a far . . . big step 

forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


