




















































Hansard: May 05, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 187 

 May 5, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think in light of Mr. Speaker's 

introduction, I can only assure the students from Robert Usher 

that I do attend here on a more or less regular basis.  I say to the 

students, the Speaker and I are at least on good terms. 

 

I want to introduce the students to you, Mr. Speaker -- on a 

more serious state -- I want to introduce these students to you 

and through you to the Assembly.  There are 19 students from 

Robert Usher Collegiate on the northern boundary of my 

constituency, some of whom will live in Regina Albert North.  

They're accompanied by their teacher, Fred Steininger. 

 

I look forward to meeting these students after the Assembly and 

to discussing with them what they see here today.  I'd ask all of 

you to join me and welcome these students here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 

colleague, the member for Regina Churchill Downs, in 

welcoming the students from Robert Usher once again.  Prior to 

the last election I had the honour of always being the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) to welcome Robert 

Usher.  Pleased to see teacher Fred Steininger here with the 

students again this year.  And again I ask all members to 

welcome the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and through you a group of 23 students from Walker 

School, grade 7 and 8 students from the constituency.  They're 

accompanied here by Mr. Barlow and Ms. Avram-McLean.  

These students come to observe question period and I want to 

say welcome to them.  I'm sure they'll find it enjoyable and 

interesting, and I'm sure all members would want to join with 

me in welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

introduce a group of students from Melville to you, and through 

you to the Assembly, from St. Henry School.  There's 30 grade 

8 students accompanied with their teacher, Garth Gleisinger, 

and bus driver, Al Schatz.  I will be meeting with them after 

question period.  They're here to observe question period. And I 

would like all members to welcome them to the Assembly this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Review of Milgaard Case 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, over the 

past two or three months an overwhelming number of experts, 

lawyers, and the public have been calling on the Saskatchewan 

government to commission an inquiry into the handling of the 

David Milgaard case. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that many troubling 

questions continue to be raised by Mr. Milgaard's lawyers and 

by the Supreme Court in the course of its review which called 

for a new trial. 

 

My question to the Minister of Justice: will the Minister of 

Justice today not agree that his government reacted too quickly 

to the Supreme Court ruling and did not, as Mr. Milgaard's 

lawyers have said, adequately review the ruling before denying 

a new trial, before denying an inquiry, and before denying 

compensation to Mr. Milgaard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

member for the question.  It's a serious question and a very 

troublesome issue because, as the member has observed, a 

number of people have expressed their views on it.  It's one that 

has concerned me personally since a very early stage since 

assuming this office, and I've taken every aspect, every step in 

the proceeding very, very seriously and have kept myself as 

well-informed on it as I possibly could. 

 

I want to say that no one denied David Milgaard another trial.  

That was not at all what I tried to do when I stayed proceedings.  

We stayed proceedings simply because the evidence in the case 

is as old as it is, that witnesses have grown old, retired from the 

police force.  I think one of them has died.  Memories have 

faded, and that was obvious before the Supreme Court of 

Canada, where one of the important witnesses had no 

recollection of the event at all.  On balance -- and we had 

considered this question over a long period of time -- we 

concluded that we did not have enough credible evidence to 

place before the court to justify proceeding.  And on that basis 

we stayed the proceeding. 

 

Following that, Mr. Milgaard was released by the federal 

authorities from the Stony Mountain Penitentiary.  So we did 

not construe that at all as denying him a new trial.  Rather, we 

made what we consider to be the responsible decision, as a 

Department of Justice, as an Attorney General, on the basis of 

the evidence that we had, and decided to enter a stay. 

 

Now as to the rest of your question, with respect to an inquiry, I 

don't know what further inquiry there could be.  The Supreme 

Court of Canada was presented with a huge amount of 

evidence.  Heard evidence orally over 14 days, heard at least a 

full day of argument from all counsel, and everybody there had 

the opportunity to call whatever evidence they wanted to call, 

and did call a lot of evidence.  And I simply don't know what's 

left to inquire into. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to the 

minister.  Mr. Minister, it would appear to me that the Supreme 

Court indeed, yes, looked at a lot of information and was able to 

derive from that information that maybe something was 

necessary, and maybe Mr. Milgaard may not have received a 

fair trial in the onset of the original proceedings, Mr. Minister. 

 

But what we have before us now, Mr. Minister, is the fact that 

there is a growing cloud of mystery surrounding why your 

government is so steadfastly opposed to ensuring that all 

outstanding questions are answered.  Minister, the Supreme 

Court have satisfied and has seen . . . we would like to see that 

justice is indeed done, and that the judicial system is upheld as 

we see it in our province. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you continue to refuse to abide by the Supreme 

Court recommendation by initiating a new trial, will you at least 

do the very least that would satisfy public suspicion about the 

process that was followed, by initiating a public inquiry to 

totally clear the names of all those involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say with respect 

to the hon. member that the Supreme Court of Canada found, 

specifically found, that the trial had been fair; that there was no 

miscarriage of justice in the way that the trial was conducted.  

They specifically found that the jury, properly instructed as they 

were, were entitled to find David Milgaard guilty of the crime. 

 

The Supreme Court of Canada did say that a new trial should be 

held.  But in the following paragraph, as you will have noticed, 

specifically said, reminded the Attorney General -- me -- that I 

had the power to enter a stay.  And then went on to say that if I 

didn't order a stay but went ahead and had a new trial, then they 

recommended that the federal Minister of Justice give a pardon, 

give a pardon to David Milgaard if he was convicted. 

 

Now in entering a stay, I think that I was complying with the 

wishes of the Supreme Court as indicated in those last three 

paragraphs of the Supreme Court's judgement. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the minister has sufficiently 

answered.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, new question.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that your government's treatment of the judicial system 

may be indeed shameful.  You apparently show no respect for 

recommendations made by the Supreme Court in the Milgaard 

case and it appears you don't have enough evidence.  And how 

the case was handled by the players involved to conduct an 

inquiry, and in other matters like the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program, have no qualms about breaking 

contracts and retroactively sanctioning your actions. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you please prove to the people of this 

province that they can have total faith in their justice 

system by allowing a full and open inquiry into the Justice 

department's handling of the Milgaard case so that indeed 

competence can again be placed in those who administered the 

law at the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of 

Canada has conducted the most extensive public inquiry that 

you could possibly imagine in this case.  Mr. Speaker, is the 

House aware that we provided, we ourself provided, 25 

volumes of evidence -- 25 volumes of evidence.  That the terms 

of reference of the federal Minister of Justice were wide enough 

to allow all of the parties to that inquiry to call whatever 

witnesses they want to, and they did.  There is simply nothing 

left to inquire into.  All of those questions were inquired into by 

the Supreme Court of Canada, or else the parties themselves 

deliberately decided not to call the evidence that might have 

been called. 

 

We for our part called all of the evidence that we . . . was 

relevant to this case in order that the Supreme Court could do 

exactly what the federal Minister of Justice asked it to do: to 

determine whether or not there had been any miscarriage of 

justice in this case. 

 

Now I simply at the end of the day don't know what is left to 

inquire into.  Certainly there's no percentage having an inquiry 

to cover exactly the same issues as were covered in the 

Supreme Court of Canada, and I think that's what we would be 

doing if we ordered an inquiry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can appreciate the problems 

that you may be facing and the government may be facing, but 

certainly I believe there are still many people around the 

province and throughout Canada who are questioning and 

wondering about our judicial system, of whether it is really fair; 

whether indeed Mr. Milgaard has been treated fairly, whether 

other individuals will be treated fairly; whether Mr. Milgaard 

has received due compensation for his time that he has spent 

behind bars; and certainly the Supreme Court has given you that 

option of either the new trial or a public inquiry or due 

compensation. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, certainly the question has also been raised 

about the fact that is this government really open and honest or 

accountable.  Are you refusing to open up your files on the case 

because maybe you believe that by doing so something or 

somebody might be brought out of the closet?  If the 

government has nothing to hide, Mr. Minister, and if you're not 

without fault, why will you not allow a process of an inquiry to 

prove no innocence?  Will you open up the case to a public 

inquiry, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect, I don't know 

how many times I have to say it.  All of the material that we 

had, all of it, was turned over to the Supreme Court of Canada.  

They had 25 volumes of material related to the Milgaard case.  

There was nothing withheld.  It's all 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

open.  It's all honest.  It's all above-board. 

 

Milgaard's lawyer has been through every scrap of it over and 

over again.  Any evidence that could have been called by 

anybody could have been called before the Supreme Court and 

was.  And the Supreme Court held that the actions of the police 

had been fair, had been proper, that the actions of the 

prosecutors had been proper, that the trial had been fair, that the 

jury verdict was a proper verdict considering the evidence that 

was before it.  And what's left?  What's left to inquire into? 

 

And as to your question of compensation, I know of no basis on 

which the government of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan are obliged to pay 

compensation to a person under these circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister.  

Mr. Minister, I believe you agree and I believe we all believe in 

the principle of innocence until proven guilty.  And if given that 

the Supreme Court has called for a new trial, but you refused so 

that innocence or guilt cannot be proven without doubt, then 

will you, Mr. Minister, do you assume that Mr. Milgaard is 

innocent or guilty and therefore will you compensate him for 23 

years spent in jail to possibly an error in the judicial system?  

Will the minister not admit that this reasoning demands that Mr. 

Milgaard be compensated or will you indeed, as I mentioned 

before, call for an inquiry to prove that justice was indeed 

carried out properly, thus proving that compensation is not 

warranted?  Mr. Minister, you tell us you have the information 

there; well then, allow a public inquiry to show that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As to the question of innocence, Mr. 

Speaker, let me say the following.  First of all, at the original 

trial a jury of ordinary Saskatoon people found Mr. Milgaard 

guilty.  The matter was taken to the Court of Appeal on appeal; 

the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.  In other words, they 

were prepared to let the guilty verdict stand. 

 

The matter was then taken to the Supreme Court by way of an 

application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, who 

reviewed the transcripts and denied Mr. Milgaard an appeal to 

the Supreme Court. 

 

Then the matter was reviewed by the federal Minister of Justice, 

by the former Justice Mr. McIntyre, and their first decision was 

not to have an inquiry.  And then on the second application, the 

Milgaard family were successful in getting an inquiry, and it 

came before the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court 

specifically said that it could not find Mr. Milgaard innocent 

either on proof beyond a reasonable doubt, on that standard, 

which is the criminal law standard, or on the basis of a balance 

of probabilities, which is the civil law standard. 

 

Now all those people, all those people, refused to find him 

innocent and yet you're asking me today to stand in my place 

and declare him innocent.  And I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I am not 

able to do that nor is it my function to do that. 

Now as to the rest of your question, I think I've answered those 

earlier.  There is nothing to inquire into so it would be 

irresponsible of me to order an inquiry.  And I see no basis on 

which the taxpayers of this province should be asked to pay 

compensation to Mr. Milgaard in these circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Union-only Contracting Policy 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would like to direct my question to the 

Minister of Labour.  Wealth creation is the only way out of the 

economic problems of this province.  So far, Mr. Speaker, the 

only time wealth creation is mentioned by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government opposite is when they crush 

economic development and job creation like AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) or perhaps when they read in the papers 

about how well the former administration did. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is no question that a solid business 

environment is needed to ensure that job creation and wealth 

creation take place in our province.  Mr. Minister, I am 

wondering how union-only contracting for government 

contracts fits into your extensive wealth-creation strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- On the general question of job creation, 

Mr. Speaker, the budget will be addressing some of these 

questions, and in days following the budget appropriate 

announcements will be made concerning the question of job 

security. 

 

On the question of a union contracting policy, the government 

has no such policy at the present time.  I have assured the 

industry and everyone involved that before any such policy 

would be considered by the government, extensive 

consultations would have to take place.  So in answer to your 

question, there is no such policy of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, in view of the answer, which 

somewhat evasive because what it says is that we don't have the 

policy present time, but of course he alludes to the budget 

wherein there will of course be a decision made along those 

lines, and so I think I'll continue with my line of questioning. 

 

In a study recently submitted to you, the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association showed very clearly that the 

union-only policy imposes unfair, unnecessary, and 

exclusionary employment policies on industry employees and 

employers, disrupts industry competition, has negative fiscal 

consequences for government and taxpayers, and has collateral 

harmful economic and social effects on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the same minister is: given 

these facts, can you tell us how this fits into fiscal restraint and 

your promise for open tendering? 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can't think of what I can add to my 

previous answer, Mr. Speaker.  The government has not 

adopted any such policy, and that's about all I can say.  I'd like 

to help the hon. member further with an elaboration of that, but 

the simple answer is no, there is no such policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will pose a new 

question for the same minister.  Mr. Minister, many labourers 

and most contractors have expressed grave concern over this 

policy.  And I remind you, Mr. Minister, that over 90 per cent 

of the independent business communities in Saskatchewan is 

non-union. 

 

And I remind you also, Mr. Speaker, that all through the past 

six months and even during the election campaign it was made 

quite clear to the people of Saskatchewan that the union people 

were going to be getting some kind of compensation or perks 

from this administration.  And we say to you that this is where 

the direction is coming to. 

 

Can you tell us who you have consulted with in determining 

these policies, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I understand the member's problem, Mr. 

Speaker; he has to fight his way through that list of questions, 

and he's going to ask them no matter what the answer is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- All I can say is that there is no such 

policy. 

 

As to the perks of the trade unions, I think the most important 

perk is that there is a government in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as is the case with responsible governments 

everywhere, who are prepared to meet with all groups in society 

including the working people of this province and their 

representatives, and we're doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, Mr. 

Speaker, I have a new question.  In the comments by the 

minister, he has said that there is no policy.  And I wonder if he 

would be prepared to issue in this Assembly and outside the 

Assembly in writing his absolute assurance that there won't be 

any such policy.  Because we have every reason, Mr. Speaker, 

to believe that we are being led down the garden path on this 

one. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister.  The Saskatchewan Construction 

Association has advised you on many occasions that the 

advisory committee you hand-picked does not represent the 

construction industry in Saskatchewan.  In fact the committee 

that you hand-picked, Mr. Minister, is comprised exclusively of 

individuals from unionized firms and AFL-CIO (American 

Federation of Labour and Congress of Industrial Organizations) 

affiliated buildings trades unions.  In fact in a letter sent to you 

on April 29 -- of which I have a copy here in my hot little hand 

-- from the Saskatchewan Construction Association, which you 

know is the only industry-wide organization in the province . . . 

was given no formal input into these discussions. 

 

Can the minister explain to this Assembly how this 

representation represents the industry when you leave out this 

very important segment of people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the mandate of the 

committee was the appropriate legislation which they, as the 

organized sector of the construction industry, may want to see 

introduced by this government.  What kind of bargaining 

structures, if any, do they want?  Do they want something like 

the law was back in the '70s?  Do they want something based on 

any of the other provinces in this country which have such 

legislation setting up structures in the construction industry?  

And that's the basic mandate of the committee. 

 

I asked the committee if they were prepared to give me any 

advice on the question of union contracting, and they said no.  

They said they didn't want to do that.  So their mandate has 

been limited to advice and recommendations respecting 

appropriate bargaining structures, and I expect to receive their 

report in that connection just any day now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Business Interest in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade.  

Mr. Minister, in your government's Speech from the Throne you 

spoke of 700 companies that are considering locating in this 

province and bringing with them a significant number of jobs.  

After six months in power, can you please tell this Assembly 

with how many of these firms your government is negotiating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that we have in fact met with hundreds of business 

people from Saskatchewan and from across the country, as well 

as other parts of the world.  And the numbers mentioned in the 

throne speech clearly indicate that there is I think a great 

interest in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you travel to Toronto, to Ottawa, and talk to business people, 

the fact that Crown Life is moving here, the discussion about 

Piper Aircraft, there is actually some enthusiasm about 

Saskatchewan for the first time in 10 years.  And I say that in 

part because there's been a change in government, the removal 

of the extended PST (provincial sales tax).  And I want to say to 

you clearly that there's a great deal of excitement.  And I think 

over the next few months you'll be seeing announcements that 

will show that job creation in fact is one of the highest priorities 

of this government. 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the minister: 

given that these companies are looking for every competitive 

advantage in today's market-place, what consideration have you 

given to the effect that tax increases to the business community 

and proposed increases to the minimum wage will have on the 

willingness of these companies to come to Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that her question is an important one because 

balance in the economy is very, very important.  In the studies 

that were done by Crown Life, when they made the decision to 

move to Regina, they came to the conclusion that the city of 

Regina and the city of Saskatoon were two of lowest cost cities 

in the country to do business, taking in provincial tax, city tax, 

cost of housing, cost of power, cost of utilities. 

 

So I want to indicate to you clearly that in setting direction for 

the government, the Minister of Finance along with the 

government is planning a strategy that will, over time, balance 

the books of this province, because of the huge deficit that we 

have, because that will indicate a confidence to the business 

people. 

 

On the other hand, obviously we want to give the kind 

invitation and incentives for business that will make this an 

attractive place to be, and I think we're accomplishing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, as you're well aware, in the 

last six months utility rates have gone up, other taxes have been 

placed on people, there has been an enormous amount of 

off-loading to the municipalities, which of course does not 

make our communities such a great place to come to at this 

particular juncture.  And I am wondering if you could please 

respond more specifically as to what implications you think that 

increasing the minimum wage will have on businesses wanting 

to locate here, and more specifically, what tax increases to 

businesses are going to do to having people potentially come to 

our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I simply don't buy the 

argument that having people working at a poverty level is the 

best incentive to create employment.  I just don't buy that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to indicate to the member that 

during the 1970s when we had, maybe not the highest minimum 

wage, but a relatively high minimum wage, it didn't hurt the 

economy of Saskatchewan.  In fact, those were the best years in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Having said that, I want to indicate 

that I would be interested in knowing that if you aren't going to 

solve the debt problem, if you're not going 

to deal with it, what kind of ideas you would have.  And in 

saying that Saskatchewan isn't a good place to do business or a 

good place to live, I think you really are doing a disfavour to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Because the analyses that have 

been done by many business groups across Canada indicate 

clearly that Saskatchewan in fact is one of the best places in the 

country to come and do business, and that's why many 

companies are now looking at coming here from both eastern 

Canada and from Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Lieutenant Governor's Audience with the Queen 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

by leave of the House I'd like to make a brief statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Tomorrow in London, England, this 

province's outstanding Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable 

Sylvia Fedoruk, will attend the state opening of the British 

Parliament, and she'll then have the privilege of a private 

audience with Her Majesty the Queen. 

 

I asked Her Honour to convey personally to Her Majesty the 

following message which I now read to the House: 

 

In this 40th anniversary of Your Majesty's accession to the 

Throne, it is my privilege and honour to convey to Your 

Majesty the respectful and loyal greetings of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

During these four decades of dedicated service to the 

people of Canada and the Commonwealth, Your Majesty 

has personified all that is good in our system of 

parliamentary democracy.  You have helped us understand 

that the enduring values of family and community are at 

the heart of our civilization. 

 

You have personally shown to the citizens of our 

multicultural province, and especially our aboriginal 

people, that the Canadian Crown is a vital symbol of 

non-partisan unity, of freedom, and of the rule of law. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan has been privileged to 

receive Your Majesty four times during your reign.  May I 

express the hope that Your Majesty will favour us with 

more visits in the years ahead. 

 

My colleagues in the Government of Saskatchewan and I 

wish Your Majesty many more years of health and 

happiness in your reign as Queen of Canada. 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to read the message.  The Lieutenant 

Governor is there and I'm sure that all members will concur 

with the sentiments expressed in the message, at least I hope 

they do, and join me in extending best wishes to the Lieutenant 

Governor during her visit to the United Kingdom. 

 

I might also say that, if my information is correct, that on this 

day, May 5, it is also the birthday of Her Honour, the Hon. 

Sylvia Fedoruk, Saskatchewan's Lieutenant Governor, so I think 

we should all wish her a very, very happy birthday.  Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

official opposition, I would like to add our words to that of the 

Premier in expressing our gratitude to Her Majesty on the 40 

years that she has been the sovereign of people of 

Saskatchewan and indeed all of Canada. 

 

It's something I think a great many people in our province feel 

very strongly about.  I know many people in my own 

background, even to this day, would think that we would be 

somewhat remiss, Mr. Speaker, if we did not take the 

opportunity as a legislature in recognizing these very important 

milestones in the monarchy. 

 

Our government during the 1980s I think took a number of 

steps to recognize the importance of the Queen's representative 

in our province.  And certainly some of the traditions which the 

Hon. Sylvia Fedoruk brings to this legislature are ones that we 

can be very proud of and I would, on behalf of the official 

opposition, like to echo the Premier's words of greeting and 

happy birthday to Her Honour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope it's appropriate now to 

ask for leave to introduce some guests who have arrived to visit 

with us today. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- In the east gallery are 57 grade 5 and 6 

students from Greystone Heights School in my constituency in 

Saskatoon.  And it's a school of which we're very, very proud in 

our city.  It's the only school on the east side of Saskatoon that 

hosts five class-rooms for gifted children as well as has an 

integrated program in their regular program for special needs 

children. 
 

We're very, very pleased to have you here today.  And I would 

like everyone to join with me in wishing them well and a good 

day in Regina at our legislature, and welcoming Mrs. Dyck, 

Miss Voitka, Mrs. Hnatyshyn, Mrs. Touet, Mrs. Durden, Mrs. 

Herbert, Mrs. Postnikof, Mrs. Schafer who are accompanying 

them today. 
 

Please join with me in welcoming them and I'll be visiting with 

them at 3 o'clock this afternoon. 

 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Britton. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

conclude my remarks on the address in the reply to the throne 

speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And last night in the initial part of my remarks I had spent 

considerable time talking about the need for change and the 

need for change as perceived by the people of Saskatchewan.  

That change that the people of Saskatchewan perceived, they 

acted upon by electing a new government to the province of 

Saskatchewan and a new government is now presenting . . . this 

week we will be voting on a throne speech which outlines the 

change that people in Saskatchewan have been asking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that time that I spoke yesterday, I outlined that I 

had always adopted a belief that politics can serve a very lofty 

purpose.  And I had indicated that I had the belief that 

government was a way for people to work together -- to work 

together to do the things that we valued as being desirable. 

 

And I mentioned that I believe that good government and good 

politicians work as a team on behalf of constituents to provide 

for education and health, transportation, and care for those that 

have been marginalized by events or circumstances in our 

society.  It is up to us, as elected officials, to construct and to 

preside over the administration of the means by which we can 

accomplish these desirable things. 

 

I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that my belief had been somewhat 

shaken in the last few years when I saw the political scene in 

the West dominated by people like Mulroney, Reagan, Bush, 

and Thatcher, whose conservative philosophy differs somewhat 

from the philosophy I'd been talking of earlier. 

 

They talk about values which, on the surface at least, have some 

appeal to everybody -- values like individual responsibility and 

individual ownership, individual initiative -- but when released 

without balance, with values of co-operation and community 

and compassion, these values end up actually hurting the public. 

 

What happened was that these governments embarked on a 

process of deregulation, of privatization and free trade which 

ended up using government and taxpayers' money for individual 

benefit.  And so what we saw in the last few years was an 

emphasis where government money was used for private profit 

rather than for just the common good. 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

Then I spent considerable time, Mr. Speaker, giving several 

examples of how this had happened and particularly how this 

had happened in the government previous, the Conservative 

government previous -- the wasteful spending that they had 

gone through as was outlined in the most recent auditor's report 

which is in addition to the wasteful spending that has been 

documented in the past over the last five years. 

 

And I wanted to then talk briefly about a second way that this 

use of public money for private profit rather than the common 

good hurts our country and our province. 

 

But before I get into that part, I want to indicate and come back 

to the contrast that is written into this throne speech with 

respect to government spending and to the accountability 

section of government spending, because right in our throne 

speech on page 2 we have a section dealing with open and 

honest and accountable government, to which my leader and 

our cabinet and this government is committed to. 

 

And in here we indicate -- black on white, Mr. Speaker -- that 

we will make changes to The Provincial Auditor Act to ensure 

the early release of the Provincial Auditor's annual report and to 

improve the Provincial Auditor's access to the books of all 

Crown agencies -- something very important and very 

fundamental, Mr. Speaker, to the working of a democracy.  And 

that is so that the public should have full access to information, 

and to have it done in a timely basis unlike what the previous 

government in the last, particularly in its last term of office, was 

practising. 

 

We are also making amendments to The Financial 

Administration Act to assure early release of Public Accounts.  

And there will also be a move to ask the members of the 

Assembly to adopt a code of ethical conduct which would 

reaffirm a high standard of behaviour to which all public office 

holders should aspire, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to be able to 

support those particular initiatives behind the leadership of our 

Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn briefly to 

that second topic.  I talked about wasteful government spending 

in the past.  I now want to talk about something else that they 

did a lot of, and that is the abdication, what I would call the 

abdication, to corporate dominance, and that is a hallmark of 

the Conservative government in the western world, in Great 

Britain, in America, in Canada.  And it's a result of that that is 

causing us to become less and less, to have less and less control 

over our lives through our governments and individually.  And 

instead we see our livelihood and we see more and more 

decision making being made outside of our province and 

outside of our country. 

 

In order to give an example by what I mean by that, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm going to refer to a controversy that is existing right 

now in my home town and in northern Saskatchewan with 

respect to the distribution of milk where we have the Dairy 

Producers Co-op, who has been delivering milk there for ever 

since I know of, being 

challenged by a multinational, Beatrice milk.  And I'm going to 

use that as an example, Mr. Speaker, to show you how it is that 

slowly we tend to lose power over our ability to regulate our 

own affairs. 

 

(1445) 

 

It is this trend, Mr. Speaker, which has caused increasing 

disparity across . . . not only in Canada, in Saskatchewan, but 

world wide.  Mr. Speaker, some recent statistics have just come 

out nationally and internationally, and they've shown that since 

1960, the time from 1960 to 1992, contrary to what we might 

have been trying to do, the poorer nations in the world are still 

getting poorer, and the rich nations are still getting richer, and 

the disparity between them is not increasing.  And the reason 

that phenomena exists is because corporate powers are 

exceeding the powers of governments or powers of people to be 

able to control their lives.  And we have as a result a shrinking 

middle income group. 

 

Now let me give you the more specific example with respect to 

the bid by Beatrice to infringe on the Dairy Producers 

Co-operative right to distribute milk exclusively in the Prince 

Albert area.  Mr. Speaker, there is a system put into place in 

Saskatchewan where milk distribution is controlled by a milk 

control board.  The Dairy Producers Co-op, under licence 

granted by the Milk Control Board, have had exclusive 

monopoly to serve the market in the Prince Albert area.  They 

have developed that market and they've served the market well.  

There have been no complaints.  I didn't get anybody ever 

phoning me complaining about the quality of milk produced by 

the Dairy Producers, the freshness of the milk, and whether it 

was available or not available. 

 

Through this distribution system, this supply management 

system, Mr. Speaker, we were able to have a plant in Prince 

Albert which employed approximately 40 people.  There are 

also distribution plants in the North Battleford district, Yorkton, 

Weyburn, Swift Current, and Melfort districts which are 

affected.  They also have a licence under this board.  There are, 

oh, 20, perhaps more, big dairy farmers and numerous smaller 

suppliers who supply milk to this dairy.  There are at least one 

and a half or two or three mechanics which would make their 

livelihood directly from keeping the trucks in repair.  I would 

estimate there would be at least one gasoline employee less, 

perhaps more, if there was a loss of these jobs.  But I'm giving 

you this background, Mr. Speaker, just to give you the impact 

of what this means to our particular town. 

 

Now the market there was developed by the Dairy Producers 

and it has been served.  And it's interesting that now once the 

market has been developed we have an internationally owned 

company . . . I believe it is now owned by Merrill Lynch.  It 

used to be owned by Peter Pocklington and it used to be called 

Palm Dairies at one time. 

 

What they have done is they've now made application and want 

to access the P.A. (Prince Albert) market.  And the arguments 

that they use go something like this: well you should give 

people the choice -- the typical argument used by any business 

who wants to enter a field. 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

And on the surface it seems to have some appeal because it is 

only natural for any consumer to say, well sure, I'm not afraid 

of choices.  I wouldn't mind choice A or choice B. 

 

But what happens in this case, Mr. Speaker, as in many cases 

with international corporations, is that while they are prepared 

to come in and on the guise of giving us a choice, what they are 

really after is access to a developed market.  And I ask them, 

what do they give us in return?  Will they give us a directorate 

on their board?  Will they put a branch office into 

Saskatchewan?  Will they give us any control over their 

distribution system?  By us, I mean the people in Saskatchewan 

now who produce milk.  Will they give the farmers any 

guarantee that they're going to have . . . they're going to take 

their products exclusively?  I rather doubt it.  I rather doubt it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What's going to happen instead, if they are given access, is that 

first of all in order to establish themselves they will undercut 

and they will offer incentives to merchants.  They have already 

done so.  They will offer incentives, financial incentives, for 

merchants to carry their milk. 

 

Those financial incentives will exist just long enough for them 

to get their foot in the door.  Long enough until they see the 

force that Dairy Producers Co-op, which is now in Prince 

Albert, established until it is forced to move and consolidate 

and go to Saskatoon.  Long enough only until we lose those 40 

jobs in Prince Albert.  Long enough only until the farmers of 

Prince Albert and north will find it too costly to be able to 

compete with farmers that are closer to the source or to the 

producing factories in Saskatoon.  In other words, long enough 

only to put a change into the life-style of perhaps a hundred 

families in our area. 

 

This is a very insidious but continuing plan which has a 

detrimental effect and has had a continuous detrimental effect 

on the population of Saskatchewan, and will continue to have a 

detrimental effect on the population of Saskatchewan unless we 

do something about it, Mr. Speaker.  Unless we say enough is 

enough. 

 

It's this way, this type of luring that has led us to lose control 

over supply and management systems in other areas, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is this type of propaganda and moves that has 

caused us to lose windows on the world of the oil industry and 

the potash industry. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know that now with trade agreements and 

attempts to have freer flow of trading, that we can't just sit back 

and ignore world trends.  We have to yield.  We have to 

consider new ways. 
 

But I think what we need, Mr. Speaker, instead of giving in 

totally into the corporate agenda, and thus by doing so we give 

up control over our own lives and we allow somebody else to 

dictate our life-style, that we need to develop new ways -- new 

ways of keeping control in this new world of ours.  We have to 

be creative, and we have to depend . . . but we have to depend 

on our value system and not go along in total with the corporate 

value system.  Because to do otherwise would be to turn 

Saskatchewan into a large part of that whole scene where the 

big dogs eat the small dogs in the market-place, and where we'd 

become more and more like the U.S. (United States) -- 

the U.S. which has perhaps in some cases the best, but in many 

cases the worst as well. 

 

It will lead to a situation where fewer and fewer people are in 

that middle income group.  And we've witnessed what happens, 

Mr. Speaker, we've witnessed just in the last . . . this last week 

what happens in a society where people feel like they are more 

and more powerless. 

 

What a tragedy, Mr. Speaker, to have seen the devastation in 

Los Angeles.  What a shock, Mr. Speaker, to have seen the 

spill-over into our own city in Canada, Toronto, last night.  

What a shock.  Those things, Mr. Speaker, have racial 

overtones, but the real problem there was a disparity suffered by 

the people in the lower income levels, unable to access middle 

income, and feeling frustrated. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that part of the solution to eliminate 

disparity is to eliminate the neo-conservative thinking of 

Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, Mulroney, and the 

government before us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to briefly 

outline some of the initiatives which I am very proud of that my 

government is taking.  And I want to do this very briefly.  I 

want to in the field of education say that I'm pleased that our 

government, led by the Premier and the Minister of Education, 

has taken some action with respect to some of the difficulties 

that we're facing in education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only recently in The Globe and Mail, April 30, 

the Economic Council of Canada made a recommendation in 

their report, and they released this report just early last week.  

What they did in this report is they studied the education system 

in Canada and they predicted that if present trends continue, 

Canadian schools will send another 1 million young people who 

are functionally illiterate into the work-force during the 1990s.  

That was a quotation directly from The Globe and Mail. 

 

And they also say that the vocational programs are being held in 

low esteem, especially in the business world.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, education is always in a transition and for us the 

quality of education is always under evaluation.  I guess that's 

because we all feel that education is very important.  It affects 

everyone.  It affects every student, parent, taxpayer.  It affects 

government. 

 

The study identified several problems which I won't detail into 

the record, Mr. Speaker -- but it's in The Globe and Mail -- but 

they parallel some of the issues that have been recognized by 

my government.  But in addition to the things that have been 

talked about in here, our government has also recognized the 

problem of rural school population which has to be dealt with. 

 

I was very pleased to hear the minister release the 

Scharfe/Langlois report.  It is generating some very vigorous 

debate, some good debate.  The minister has distanced the 

government from the drawing of the map for possible new 

boundaries suggested by the 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

Scharfe/Langlois report.  We're not going to be imposing any 

kind of new boundaries, but we are suggesting, Mr. Speaker, 

that there are things that we do want discussion on and we're 

looking forward to discussion about the public school system. 

 

I'm pleased that the minister will be forming a Saskatchewan 

educational council to advise her on matters.  I am very pleased 

that she has announced that there will an inquiry into university 

education in Saskatchewan.  It's very reassuring to know that 

the review of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology is now ongoing.  They will be meeting with the 

public in the near future.  There are . . . been many concerns 

over the way SIAST has been managed, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been mentioned to me.  And I encourage all of those who have 

had at their disposal to go and speak to this review committee.  

And I am very pleased that there are moves being made by my 

government to provide equity and access for aboriginal 

students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to what's being done in education, I also want to 

commend the Minister of Health for the health initiatives that 

are being taken by this government.  This government is taking 

an approach which stresses wellness and the need to improve 

our collective well-being by enhancing our social and physical 

environment -- words taken right from the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker.  There will be an increased emphasis on 

community-based programs and services, and we're going to try 

to increase integration and co-operation between facilities.  And 

we've already had the health boards in Saskatoon combined and 

in Regina combined under new, integrated city health boards. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, my own home town, 

the Holy Family Hospital, the Victoria Union Hospital boards, 

the boards of directors of Mount St. Joseph and the Herb 

Bassett Home and Pineland Home Care, all combined and 

agreed, signed a letter of agreement, whereby a health authority 

would be . . . the ministry would be asked to put up a health 

authority in the city of Prince Albert to integrate all of the three 

services. 

 

This will lead us into a third phase of health care, Mr. Speaker, 

which I think will be very, very important to the people of 

Prince Albert and area and will likely serve as a good model for 

other areas of the province, because here we have an integrated 

service where the delivery system for acute care and for 

long-term care and for home care will be handled under one 

authority.  And that authority will have all operating authority 

over all the areas. 

 

(1500) 

 

It was a co-operative agreement, something that people in our 

city are very, very proud of.  The fact that it was generated from 

within the community with the support of our ministry and our 

department is significant.  I look forward to working with that 

committee and I look forward to bringing the minister to Prince 

Albert to make an announcement regarding the naming of the 

new health board. 

 

Last, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay a compliment to the 

Minister of Social Services who has recently also announced 

several initiatives.  And I want to make particular mention of 

one which is just announced on April 23, and this is a work 

training program for people who are now on social service and 

in need of work.  And it's also of special interest to community 

projects and to non-governmental organizations who maybe 

have projects but don't have anybody to work on them.  This is 

a voluntary program.  We're expecting it to create jobs for about 

a thousand people. 

 

There are really three criteria, Mr. Speaker.  That is: there has to 

be some type of training opportunity on the job; it has to be a 

benefit to the community and provision to the community . . . or 

to the provision of services to groups within the community; 

and we have to have assurance that this work is not going to be 

taking other work away from local contractors or existing 

employees. 

 

Anybody who may want to inquire about this, Mr. Speaker, 

should feel free to contact any of their MLAs' offices -- the 

opposition offices as well as the government members' offices 

or the department.  And I would encourage especially NGOs 

(non-governmental organizations) to give this their 

consideration.  I know that a lot of us have been asked about is 

there any possibility of us employing somebody to do a specific 

thing -- asked this by NGOs.  The opportunity is now here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close now by referring to some remarks 

made by the member from Thunder Creek last week. 

 

As a parliamentarian who treasures this House and its 

traditions, I must say that I was appalled, somewhat 

embarrassed, by the actions on Friday of the member from 

Thunder Creek.  And that's because his behaviour rebounds on 

all of us  

_- those on this side of the House and those on that side of the 

House.  It demeans a profession of politicians in the eyes of the 

public.  And I need not remind us that our public image is 

already somewhat fragile. 

 

Simply put, it was a cheap political grandstanding to cover what 

was a rather weak and indefensible argument.  There were 

preachers who used to be instructed on sermon delivery.  If you 

have a weak point, then yell like heck.  Well that seems to have 

been his strategy. 

 

I'd like to make two quick points, Mr. Speaker.  First I want to 

compliment you on the firmness and fairness with which you 

handled the situation.  No one could accuse you of doing 

anything but following the rules and procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

In this House events occasionally approach a lip of chaos and 

you keep things from getting unbalanced.  But more 

importantly and more disturbingly, the member from Thunder 

Creek acted in a way that simply confirms what we have known 

for a very long time, and that is that the Tory Party has little 

sense of history, no allegiance to tradition, and no concept of 

decorum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member from Meadow Lake said in his 

address moving the throne speech, we not only represent the 

moment, we represent the British 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

parliamentary tradition.  We serve the people through the Queen 

and the stability that the monarchy represents.  We uphold rules 

and we uphold the procedures handed down to us through the 

generations, and in doing so we serve democracy. 

 

It's that simple, Mr. Speaker, and it's that profound.  If you 

break a rule in the House, you apologize to the House, and then 

you go on.  But not in this case, not in this case.  The Tories on 

the other hand flaunt tradition.  They despise the past.  They 

turn their noses up on democracy.  This was a move that was 

deliberately set up, and the House Leader as well did nothing to 

encourage an apology. 

 

There are other examples, Mr. Speaker, when they have 

flaunted these traditions, our parliamentary traditions.  The 

rules of the House say that Public Accounts should be submitted 

for public scrutiny within a reasonable time.  Forget it, said the 

previous government. 

 

Tradition and common decency say that by-elections should be 

called in due course so all people will be represented.  Forget it, 

nonsense, said the ex-premier.  Long-standing electoral 

traditions says that a general election will be called at least 

every four years.  Well they didn't pay too much attention to 

that. 

 

Parliamentary tradition says that we must pass a budget.  Not as 

long as we can get another few billion from special warrants, 

said the former Finance minister. 

 

The rules of this House say that we must abide by the ruling of 

the Speaker.  What a laugh, what a laugh, says the member 

from Thunder Creek.  Why should I when I can get myself on 

television?  So he mocks our parliament, and he mocks all of us 

with his calculated ignoring of the Speaker's ruling.  I say 

calculated because all he cared about was taking advantage of 

the moment.  And as I mentioned before, the House Leader 

made no move to stop it -- deliberately planned.  Mr. Speaker, 

the Tory Party has been kicking its ball out of the sand trap for 

years, and finally its been caught. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I take this time during this debate not just to 

comment on a single incident in a life of this legislature, but to 

point out to you and to members opposite that civilized 

behaviour is back in fashion, and the rule of law has returned to 

this province with your able assistance. 

 

By the way, what was it that the member from Thunder Creek 

was trying to say?  Something about that they knew we knew 

that they knew that they were fudging the figures or that we 

didn't know that they knew or . . . I'm not too sure, Mr. Speaker.  

They'll just have to let some future code-breaker figure out what 

he was trying to say. 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you thought for a 

moment we were in a time warp last Friday.  In naming the 

member from Thunder Creek, did you feel for a moment that 

this member was merging with the previous member from 

Thunder Creek, a member who had also perfected being 

banished from the legislature?  Mr. Speaker, there are some 

traditions that need not be followed. 

 

But let's deal with the substance of the issue, Mr. Speaker, 

with which the member from Thunder Creek was dealing.  And 

I have before me here a letter dated September 22, 1991.  It was 

signed by the Premier, the now Premier, and it's addressed to 

the previous premier, and it says this: 

 

I write concerning an issue of major importance to the people 

of Saskatchewan, that being the current state of the provincial 

government's finances. 

 

And later on he says: 

 

There are a number of reasons for my request . . . 

 

First, (dealing with) special warrants.  The public has no 

way of knowing whether these expenditures were 

according to the original budget Estimates or not . . . 

 

That was a quotation from the letter of the now Premier of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Second, (regarding) the flurry of pre-election announcements.  

In the final days before the calling of this election, your 

government committed Saskatchewan taxpayers to hundreds 

of millions of dollars in new expenditures, loan guarantees, 

and other financial arrangements. 

 

We're referring there, Mr. Speaker, to things like the AECL 

announcement and Fair Share Saskatchewan, I believe. 

 

Third, your government's . . . record on deficit forecasts.  

Voters recall that prior to the 1986 provincial election, your 

government presented a budget which forecast a budget 

deficit for that year of $389 million.  Within weeks of the 

election, you revealed the actual deficit was $1.2 billion. 

 

So he asks that . . . in this letter for a response to these 

situations.  The response, Mr. Speaker, which I have also before 

me, which has been tabled in this House, to the now Premier of 

Saskatchewan from Lorne Hepworth who was the minister of 

Finance at the time.  I want to quote a couple of things from it.  

One quotation on page 2 says: 

 

As you can see, we have kept an extremely tight reign on 

1991-92 provincial expenditures. 

 

Boy, that's got to be the joke of the day.  He also goes on to say 

in another part: 

 

With the exception of the three items noted above, 

announcements made in recent weeks will not add to the 

1991-92 provincial deficit. 

 

Another quotation.  And then, last of all, Mr. Hepworth says: 

 

. . . there are numerous factors at play that must be taken into 

consideration.  On balance, however, I see no reason to alter 

our target of a $265 million deficit. 

 

Now, now I ask the members opposite: have you asked yourself 

if you knew and if Hepworth knew when he wrote this letter?  

Did you know when Hepworth wrote 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

this letter that it was over 265?  Did you know?  And if you 

knew, then it was your job to tell him not to put this down, not 

to come around nowadays and ask somebody else if they knew 

-- when you've supported them in the first place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we'll put that to rest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan decided 

not to follow the path that was led by the previous government.  

They, on October 1991, decisively elected a new government 

because they wanted change.  And, Mr. Speaker, the change 

that we're effecting in this government is one to put people first, 

is one to tackle poverty, is one to tackle education, tackle 

health.  And in order to do that we first of all have to tackle the 

deficit. 

 

There have been numerous examples, Mr. Speaker, that our 

government . . . and numerous examples of initiatives taken by 

our government. And I want to mention just today's initiative, 

put it into the record, because it was today or last night that the 

Associate Minister of Finance made an announcement publicly 

as to the direction we're taking with respect to cutting back on 

what we regard was wasteful and excessive spending. 

 

In this particular case, Mr. Speaker, there was a . . . this is a 

follow-up to a situation where George Hill, the president of 

SaskPower, was paid $450,000 a year plus perks.  He was 

replaced by a chief executive officer who's getting $150,000.  

I'm proud to say that that's quite a saving.  I'm proud of that.  

I'm proud of that.  The members opposite don't want to hear 

about it, but it's true.  That's what's happening.  As a matter of 

fact, all of our chief executive officers are being limited to 

$150,000. 

 

(1515) 

 

The executive salaries and benefits which were in place under 

the former government, which they never said a thing about 

until it was brought to their attention . . . Now they squeak and 

holler a bit somewhat hypocritically.  It's going to save 

Government of Saskatchewan $1.5 million a year to change the 

benefits to executive salaries and other benefits.  The new 

administration has reduced salaries for senior executives by 20 

per cent.  Car allowances which range from $650 to $800 a 

month will be reduced by 50 per cent.  And no longer will golf 

club memberships and other club memberships be paid for by 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's our feeling that if you're going to serve the 

government, you should be prepared to do so without dipping 

into the public trough in the manner that was accorded by the 

previous government. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, with one more remark, and that is 

an example that I think of often now when I'm wondering how 

to meet the people of Saskatchewan or how a politician should 

conduct himself with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When I was a teenager living in North Battleford, I remember 

going to a rally where Tommy Douglas was the 

speaker.  And we were supposed to have dinner with Tommy 

that evening.  I was about 14 years old.  And I remember going 

there with some excitement and sitting and waiting around this 

table. And we were waiting and waiting and waiting, and 

Tommy didn't show up.  And we were saying, we wonder 

what's happened? 

 

And then we got a message that Tommy had been there all 

along in the room next door, and he was having a very 

important meeting.  When the door opened, to my amazement, 

Mr. Speaker, out came Tommy and out came a woman who was 

widowed and was farming in an area north of North Battleford 

-- very ordinary person.  And she had some concerns regarding 

an issue pertaining to pasturing that were very important to her. 

 

And Tommy Douglas took time from his dinner to go and speak 

to that lady and to listen to her story.  And he pointed out to me, 

although I didn't quite realize it at the time, Mr. Speaker, how 

important it is that a politician sit and listen and be willing to 

listen to a person who's got something important to tell you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's in that tradition that I support this throne 

speech, and I support my leader, because this throne speech 

represents something that represents a listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I intend with my vote to continue to work 

to change the way the Government of Saskatchewan was 

working -- to change the balance so that we're not working 

strictly towards individual greed but we have a balance, the 

individual rights with the balance of the community. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to address the 

throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It indeed is nice to 

be able to rise today to discuss the amendments to the throne 

speech.  This throne speech we felt was so devoid of anything 

useful or constructive for a future in this province that we 

thought that it was absolutely incumbent upon us, Mr. Speaker, 

to put in an amendment so that it would at least have enough 

substance to bother wasting our time voting on it. 

 

So in addressing this amendment and my support for the 

amendment, I want to take a little different direction than I did 

when I spoke earlier to the throne speech itself. Although I had 

given some thought to taking it apart clause by clause and 

working through it and pointing out to the people of 

Saskatchewan exactly what is lacking in the Speech from the 

Throne, and what will be lacking in our budget and where we're 

going to be going.  But the reality is that that would probably 

not serve as much purpose as to maybe make a few comments 

directly on some of the speeches that we heard. 

 

I can only say, Mr. Speaker, in all sincerity, that a few weeks 

back we thought there wasn't going to be any hockey games in 

this part of the season to be watching on television. And I 

thought at first, well that's good; we've probably seen enough 

hockey on television this winter anyway.  But then last night as 

I realized that the speeches being delivered here were the 

entertainment for the 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

evening in alternative to the hockey game, I was pretty happy 

for the folks out in the country that they had something 

worthwhile to listen to because it certainly wouldn't have paid 

to bother listening to some of the speeches we heard here. 

 

And I just want to refer to some of the things that were brought 

up, Mr. Speaker, in those speeches, and give you a little bit of 

direction as to the reality of where some of these things should 

be going to, because there's always two sides to every story.  

And of course the dust storm that we had last week was 

foremost in a lot of folks' minds.  And it certainly had people 

thinking about what would happen out in the country over the 

next year. 

 

And obviously, as the dust blew out in the country . . . and I 

want to tell you that I was in Maple Creek on Saturday, and I 

discussed with the agrologist out there the wind storm that had 

occurred.  He told me that he'd been out to the Fox Valley area 

and had actually witnessed some of the fields after the big blow 

and that they had been blown down to the hard pan. 

 

That of course, for those folks that may not know what I'm 

referring to, means that all of the soil that was tilled last year 

blew away from the top right down to the depth of the final 

working.  So every bit of ground that had been loosened up by 

an implement over the past year had blown away.  And that was 

a very serious situation. 

 

But out in the country we have a unique kind of people -- 

people that can sometimes laugh at themselves.  And one of the 

farmers pointed out to me that he'd looked out the window 

during the wind storm and he said it was so windy.  And I said, 

how windy was it?  And he said, it was so windy that there was 

a gopher out there 15 feet in the air and he was still digging. 

 

Well only farmers can show that kind of spirit and make jokes 

about the disaster that they're living through.  And it's that kind 

of spirit that keeps them going through all of these difficult 

times.  Because when you consider all of those kind of 

problems and the things that are happening with the GRIP 

program . . . And I note with my tongue in my cheek that last 

year that GRIP was referred to as the reason to gripe, and this 

year the GRIP is not the reason to gripe; it's the reason to grope, 

because all the farmers are groping around to figure out what 

they griped about last year and what to do next to try and save 

themselves this year. 

 

The NDP have said to us all through last summer and all 

through the fall and through the campaign and all winter that 

they could do better and they would do better.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, they took a trip down to Ottawa.  They spent, I think 

somebody says, $400,000 and they were going to do better.  

They were going to get more. 

 

And I want to tell you and tell the rest of the folks that I'm a 

farmer -- farmer first still, and a politician second.  And my 

hand is out.  I am waiting for this money that the Minister of 

Agriculture promised that he was going to get us.  I'm standing 

here waiting. 

 

I'm waiting for him to explain to me also why he continues to 

say that the federal government is the only 

one that has any responsibility.  Certainly the federal 

government does have responsibility -- there is no question 

about that  

_- but at the same time I will point out to this Assembly and to 

the rest of the folks that last week I received, as a farmer, a 

cheque in the mail.  And when I opened it up, I found that I had 

received money from the federal government.  That money was 

itemized as being an acreage payment from the federal 

government. 

 

Now the people in the government tell us that the federal 

government owes us a third line of defence.  Well I say to you, 

what is a third line of defence?  Is that not money from the 

federal government?  Now maybe it wasn't enough, and I guess 

in farming the point can be made that no matter how much you 

get it's never enough.  Money's like that for everybody in 

society. 

 

Now we have to be a little bit thankful for what we get because 

if we step on the very toes of the people that are helping us, 

how long are they going to continue to help us?  Why don't we 

say thank you, go with our hat in hand to Ottawa and say, we 

appreciate the help that you've been giving us, we do need some 

more, but we appreciate what you're doing, instead of stabbing 

them in the back and trying to make them look bad every time 

we turn around? 

 

Now we understand that the Minister of Agriculture is trying to 

push everybody to go into a market-price crop insurance.  Why 

is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have to remind the member 

that he has already spoken in this debate and he must speak 

strictly to the amendment.  And reading the amendment, there is 

absolutely no reference whatsoever to the changes to the GRIP 

program in the amendment.  So I will ask the member to keep 

his remarks to the amendment that has been made. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will no longer 

refer to the GRIP program because after all we have sort of 

bludgeoned it to death.  And I will continue on to the other parts 

of the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- One of the other members, Mr. Speaker . . . 

and I'm sure that you won't mind if I refer to the speeches that 

were made to the amendment by the other members if I don't 

point out directly which ones spoke on them but just generalize.  

And what I will generalize on is that, first of all, I made some 

little notes as you will see here as each one of the speakers was 

up.  And that of course should point out that I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to again remind the member that 

it's your duty, not mine, to make sure that your remarks are in 

keeping with the amendment.  And if you're referring to 

speeches that other members have made and does not pertain to 

the amendment, I'm going to rule you out of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He said it was on the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: -- He did not.  He said general terms.  He would 

speak in general terms and if it did not refer 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

specifically to the amendment he would hope that the Speaker 

would take that into consideration. His remarks must pertain to 

the amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I most certainly will 

concentrate my discussion on the exact amendment and the 

words of the amendment.  And I also will specifically talk about 

those things that those members have talked about in their 

speeches to this Assembly on that specific issue. 

 

Now one of the members brought up the fact that they were 

going to bring in the old dental program and we wondered why, 

as we were writing up our amendment, why that wasn't in the 

throne speech.  That promise was thrown out many times 

through the election, and we thought that if a government is 

going to put together a throne speech with their first intention of 

approaching a new budget, that they would in fact start to 

deliver on some of their promises.  And the fact is that they are 

not mentioning this particular project. 

 

They talk about closing our schools.  And we just heard the past 

speaker talk in fact about the fact that he supports a lot of the 

Scharfe/Langlois report being restudied, and just after a time 

when we saw 600 people assembling in the school over in Swift 

Current and very upset with the prospect that the government 

would bring in this particular document and use any of its 

recommendations. 

 

The Minister of Education has sent letters to us indicating that 

that report would not be used.  And now we hear the member 

opposite saying in fact that they are going to.  What a 

contradiction.  And it makes me very, very upset to hear that 

there might be a contradiction of that kind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also heard people alluding to things like the 

Rafferty-Alameda dam in just the second-last address.  And 

they alluded to some of the figures.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that it's only fair and proper that we make sure that the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan know exactly what those 

figures were and what was happening.  The member across the 

way alluded to the fact that the Rafferty-Alameda dam had been 

started at $42 million and had ended up at $50 million.  Well 

the figures that that member used were accurate but they were 

not portrayed in a proper explanation of how the process really 

worked.  The $42 million that the member alluded to was the 

cost only of the face of the dam -- the dirt that you put between 

the two hills.  And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that it takes a 

lot more to build a dam than just putting dirt between two hills. 

 

In fact, the reality is that the project was supposed to cost $120 

million to begin with.  That was the starting figure, not $42 

million, because there's a lot of things that have to be done.  

Then the American government kicked in 40-some million 

dollars American which comes to about $50 million Canadian, 

and the reality of life is that the Americans would not be 

kicking in more money than the entire project would have cost.  

So that refutes the argument that $42 million was the projected 

original cost, because they simply were not going to pay for 

more than the cost of the whole project. 

The reality is that there was a cost overrun and that cost overrun 

went from 120 to $150 million, and there's a logical explanation 

for that that the people of this province will remember if they 

just think back to the days of the construction and all of the 

problems that resulted while that construction was on.  And 

those problems, of course, resulted from litigations that forced 

the government of the day to go into the building of extra 

facilities for wildlife and those kinds of things.  So if you have 

to go out and build some extra things as a result of litigation, 

you can't really call them cost overruns; you can only call them 

legitimate costs of the project forced by the public. 

 

So then one of the other members gets up and alludes to the fact 

that it is terrible and almost sinful in this province that 

somebody was building a golf course beside it.  Well I always 

thought that when you build a dam to save water, the recreation 

project . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I must remind the member that 

he has spoken in this debate and he must limit himself to the 

amendment that has been made.  And he is not doing that.  I 

would ask him to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I am raising this point of order 

because the amendment that he is speaking to very precisely 

points out that what we want to talk about on this amendment is 

that  ". . . and further regrets . . .", Mr. Speaker, if I may just 

quote the amendment itself as we have proposed it, ". . . and 

further regrets that the government has failed to provide any 

economic leadership or positive solutions . . ." 

 

Now the economic leadership that we're talking in part and 

parcel, beyond the economics as diversification and so on, is the 

agricultural aspect which we feel is very important.  Now the 

economic or positive solutions is GRIP, we would contend, as 

being one of those positive solutions that we are looking for this 

government to institute.  And that's why it's in this amendment 

as we're proposing and that's why our members, who feel very 

strongly about it, are bringing this up, Mr. Speaker.  I draw that 

to your attention. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the words of the member are well taken 

if they are then applied to the amendment.  But I fail to 

understand how criticism of the overrun of the dam that was 

built by the previous government and the criticism of a golf 

course that is being built there has anything to do with 

providing leadership, positive economic leadership, of the 

present government. 

 

If the member can relate that to the amendment that is made, I 

will let him continue.  But so far he has not related it at all as to 

how that relates to lack of positive leadership by this 

government.  If he can do that he can continue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The fact of the 

matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it shows a lack of economic 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

leadership when members of the government themselves 

condemn projects that the previous administration were 

working on.  It's a lack of economic leadership when you plant 

in the minds of people a fever of doom and gloom about all of 

the good things that we have.  When you start putting people 

down who in fact do golf, that is a lack of economic leadership 

because you're saying to people that they shouldn't have 

recreation in their lives in our province.  And that cannot 

possibly be.  You have to have a sense of well-being, a sense of 

wanting to live, and a sense to want to have a reason to get up 

in the morning.  And you can't just do that if you're always 

surrounded with doom and gloom. 

 

And that was the point I was trying to make, Mr. Speaker -- that 

we have to have positive solutions to the problems we have, 

positive solutions of economic leadership. 

 

Now in the area of economic leadership, we could ask where in 

the budget have we failed to talk about things like our parks.  

And we wanted to talk a minute about recreation and I'd like to 

mention the Cypress Hills Provincial Park. It's in my 

constituency.  And economic leadership would have been, Mr. 

Speaker, if they would have put into this throne speech some 

direction that the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources 

would in fact do something to make our parks more attractive to 

the tourists of the country and perhaps from across the United 

States. 

 

Last year we were disappointed to find out that a lot of folks 

weren't coming to Saskatchewan for their holidays.  And if we 

don't show some initiative, some kind of future planning to get 

the tourists to come back to our parks, to get people, even in 

Saskatchewan, to start taking some time out to go and use our 

facilities, then those facilities are going to end up having to be 

closed, and we're not going to have them any more. 

 

I've had people, for example, say that the very simplest thing 

like planting some extra trout in the lake there would be 

economic leadership because it would bring in more tourists if 

the people could actually catch a fish once in a while.  If there's 

only enough there to feed the birds that live on fish and the old 

fellas that are retired that go out there to spend a few hours and 

take their grandsons, never get a bite, they're going to go.  I 

mean they're not going to come here.  They'll leave.  They'll go 

somewhere else.  So we've got to have that kind of economic 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, that provides for some recreational 

facilities to be expanded, and putting one at the Rafferty dam 

would be an excellent idea. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The sound of one hand clapping. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I guess I shouldn't stop to listen to the 

commentaries.  But one thing I have to note, Mr. Speaker, is 

that whenever I get up to talk, at least I get some hecklers, and 

it makes me feel that at least I'm doing some good because 

somebody's paying attention.  And I did notice that some people 

spoke without even so much as a comment from the gallery.  So 

it makes my day actually, and I enjoy it. 

We had, Mr. Speaker, wondered why in this speech, as I wind 

up my remarks about the amendment, why in this Speech from 

the Throne there wasn't more emphasis put on the plebiscites 

that were held, and showing the people which direction the 

future is going to take us in that area of a positive solution to 

the problems that people feel we have in our political system.  

And that problem, Mr. Speaker, is that people feel that 

politicians aren't listening, and many of the other members have 

alluded to that.  And the reality is that they think we don't come 

back to them. 

 

Well in our plebiscites -- we had three plebiscites, you all 

remember them -- we feel that these things should have been in 

this document.  That there should have been positive direction 

outlined of where we're going on those three important issues.  

And I'm not going to go through them, each individual one, 

because all of you know what they were about. 

 

But the government has been ducking those plebiscites and the 

concept of it.  And I want very much to remind the government 

that if we're going to have a positive solution to the problems of 

this province, we've got to look at what the people want and 

have indicated in the plebiscites where they voted so very 

dynamically in numbers in one direction or the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite will consider 

that economic leadership is important in a throne speech, and 

it's important in a budget, and it's important that we have 

sustenance and substance into this throne speech.  And I would 

encourage the members opposite to forget their partisanship and 

to forget about the role they have to play of naturally opposing 

everything that we say, because we're not really saying that a lot 

of the things they're doing is so terrible.  We're saying, we just 

have to do a little more.  And we would ask them to join us and 

support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 

join in this debate on the Speech from the Throne.  As I 

indicated last time I had the opportunity to speak, it's a real 

honour for me to represent the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld in 

this legislature. 

 

And I'd like to join with some others in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, in complimenting the member from Meadow Lake on 

his speech in support and moving the Speech from the Throne 

and also the member from Regina Wascana Plains.  Both of 

those individuals did a very commendable job and I was proud 

to be associated with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I'm also proud to associate myself with this government 

and with this Speech from the Throne.  It is a very positive new 

direction for our province, Mr. Speaker, and I've had the 

opportunity since the speech was read by Her Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor . . . and the speech has certainly received a 

very positive and favourable reaction from people in my 

constituency who have been waiting for a new direction from 

the Government of Saskatchewan for a long time. 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- And I want to touch on some of the positive 

aspects contained in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, 

although not all of them, because other members have most 

ably addressed some of the other aspects in the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

But one aspect of it that has not been addressed is what Her 

Honour said concerning The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act and the fact that amendments will be introduced to that Act 

to better protect people in the work place and to address the 

recommendations of the Occupational Health and Safety 

Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one, to state the obvious, should die on the job.  

But from 1986 to 1990, Saskatchewan averaged 29 fatalities in 

the work place and also 16 occupational farm fatalities.  In 

1991, I'm sorry to say, as the minister announced in the 

legislature last week, 40 individuals died in the work place.  

And accidents should be prevented in the work place, Mr. 

Speaker, but in 1990, 13,715 workers were injured on the job. 

 

We have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that these numbers sound 

somewhat sterile, but they represent people, people with 

families and the same aspirations for a productive and healthy 

life-style that all people have.  They are spouses, parents, sons 

and daughters, co-workers, sisters and brothers and friends.  

And I'm sure we've all had the experience, Mr. Speaker, of 

seeing someone we know either killed on the job or injured on 

the job. 

 

These numbers not only represent a staggering human cost but 

also, Mr. Speaker, they represent a great loss in economic 

terms.  We suffer from income loss, productivity loss, loss of 

experienced workers, social service costs, health care costs, 

workers' compensation costs.  And all of these costs are 

unacceptable in our province. 

 

Unfortunately in the 1980s we saw from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the previous government, not only a lack of 

commitment to enforcement of occupational health and safety 

standards but also, very sadly, an insensitive and unresponsive 

workers' compensation system.  And in light of that, Mr. 

Speaker, I was very happy to see what Her Honour said 

concerning this issue in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

And I'm particularly pleased that the extremely difficult 

financial situation that the government finds itself in will not 

prevent the government from improving occupational health 

and safety laws and regulations.  Because it is one thing to have 

occupational safety laws and regulations, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

another thing to be committed to enforcing them.  And I believe 

that enforcement of them is indeed the key to improving our 

province's safety record.  And I hope that none of us, whether 

governments, unions, or workers, are content as long as there is 

a single, preventable work-place accident occurring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Cline: -- So I thought that that was a very positive 

initiative in the Speech from the Throne.  Another positive 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, was what Her Honour said about this 

government moving forward in the area of prevention and 

wellness in health care, including life-style education, 

assistance towards independent living by the elderly, emphasis 

on community-based programs and services, home care, and 

hospital integration and co-operation. 

 

I was particularly pleased as well that the government intends to 

consult with consumers, health-care providers, and community 

leaders through the creation of a provincial health council to 

address some of these issues.  This to my mind, Mr. Speaker -- 

and many, many people in my community have reacted 

positively to it -- is a very visionary approach. 

 

Much has been said of late, Mr. Speaker, by some of the 

members opposite about health care and what this government 

may or may not do with respect to health care, and in particular 

medicare.  And I pause to reflect upon the history of medicare 

in our province and our country since this is the 30th 

anniversary of medicare in Saskatchewan, which of course was 

the precursor to a national medicare plan. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, involved a great deal of courage, 

determination, and vision on the part of the then government of 

the day, the government of T.C. Douglas and later, Woodrow 

Lloyd. 

 

History tells us some very interesting things about the role of 

the party with which I am associated in the health care field and 

also the role played by the other parties represented in this 

legislature.  The government of T.C. Douglas of course first 

brought in hospitalization, a first in Canada and North America, 

on January 1, 1947, which later led to national hospitalization. 

 

(1545) 

 

I was interested to hear from the member for Arm River 

yesterday that it was in fact John Diefenbaker who pioneered 

medicare in our country.  I thought I might point out to the 

member from Arm River that actually, if we want to go back in 

history, it was the Liberal Party at its national convention in 

1919 which first proposed a national, comprehensive health 

insurance system. 

 

The problem was, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Moose Jaw 

says, this was all talk and empty promises.  The Conservatives 

took no action, the Liberals took no action, and in fact 

eventually when the CCF/NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation/New Democratic Party) started to bring in medicare, 

it was a long and bitter fight, opposed at every step of the way 

by the Liberals and their political cousins, the Conservatives. 

 

But despite their lack of enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker, on December 

16, 1959, then Premier Douglas announced to the legislature his 

government's intention to enact medicare, which was a first in 

Canada and in North America -- very impressive, Mr. Speaker, 

from a small province with limited resources.  Of course on 

July 1, 1962, medicare was enacted into law. 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Today, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the Liberals and Conservatives, 

one would think that they were enthusiastic supporters of the 

plan at that time.  But the facts show they were not. 

 

In the 1960 provincial election campaign, the Liberal and 

Conservative parties campaigned in opposition to medicare and 

attempted to unseat Mr. Douglas and his party with respect to 

that plan.  They were aided and assisted by the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, which at that time spent tens of 

thousands of dollars in an effort to defeat the CCF. 

 

The government did not waiver from its objective and the 

government was re-elected in 1960.  As I said, the law came 

into place July 1, 1962 when The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Act became law. 

 

But this too came only after a fight between the time of the 

1960 election and 1962.  Firstly, the Liberal Party did 

everything it could to obstruct and prevent the passage of the 

legislation in this Chamber.  The College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, once the legislation was passed, demanded its repeal.  

The various right-wing thinkers in our province formed the 

Keep Our Doctors committees, which launched a vicious, 

fearmongering smear campaign against medicare.  The Liberals 

resorted to all sorts of tactics and theatrics, including an attempt 

by the then opposition leader to kick the door to this Chamber 

down. 

 

Municipal councils passed resolutions against medicare.  

Hospital boards denied medical privileges to physicians 

sympathetic to medicare.  The College of Physicians and 

Surgeons denied licences to physicians from elsewhere.  Rallies 

were held on the legislative grounds against medicare.  And of 

course the doctors went on strike July 1, 1962 to back their 

demands that medicare be withdrawn. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, the representatives of the 

Conservative and Liberal parties were together as one on this 

particular issue.  But the then premier, Mr. Speaker, Woodrow 

Lloyd, and his government did not back down.  With 

considerable courage and the conviction that all Saskatchewan 

people should enjoy equal access to medical care, the party I'm 

associated with enshrined medicare into the social fabric of this 

province and this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- So that is the history of the issue, Mr. Speaker, 

and those are the facts.  And my point is this:  I and the 

members of this government do not need to be lectured to or 

taught any lessons by the members of the Liberal and 

Conservative parties about medicare.  The record speaks for 

itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have the opposition complaining about 

the province's financial situation.  And I must confess that this 

has struck me as passing strange, Mr. Speaker, because taking 

over the Government of Saskatchewan from the previous 

administration is a little bit like coming back into your house 

after a group of drunken yahoos have been having a wild party 

over a 

long weekend. 

 

In short, the finances of the province are in a bit of a mess to 

say the least and I would predict, Mr. Speaker, that it will be a 

very, very long time indeed before the people of this province 

entrust the members opposite with the financial purse strings of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Whatever the members opposite may say in this 

regard, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan know that no 

Saskatchewan family could have run a household like the 

member from Estevan ran this province.  The revelation 

recently, Mr. Speaker, that some $15,000 worth of liquor was 

delivered from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board warehouse to 

the legislative office of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

minister responsible for the Liquor Board was very 

disconcerting, Mr. Speaker, especially when one considers that 

they got the booze but we got the hangover. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Then we have 168 passes worth almost $10,000, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Big Valley Jamboree, purchased by the 

Liquor Board for distribution by the minister to his friends and 

colleagues. 

 

Then we have 23 employees seconded to Executive Council 

from departments for political work, total wages paid by the 

affected departments being almost $1 million.  Then we have 

42.5 million estimate for the province's share of the 

Rafferty-Alameda dam, but the figure of 155 million was spent 

up until the time of the 1991 election. 

 

Not to mention, Mr. Speaker, fiascos like GigaText, Supercart, 

Joytec, High R Door, Austrak Machinery Corporation, Pro-Star 

Mills, Nardei Fabricators Ltd., and Canapharm Inc., all of 

which were projects of very little thought -- other than the 

immediate political agenda of the day -- were put into and all of 

which cost us millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And recently the Provincial Auditor has reported in his special 

report to the Public Accounts Committee that some 130 

employees, Mr. Speaker, were paid over $5 million by 

government organizations which did not have them doing 

anything.  And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that is 

extremely disappointing and disconcerting to me, and it's 

extremely distressing to the people I represent. 

 

Also we have the auditor reporting that nine organizations of 

the government made payments for advertising totalling 

$439,000 over a two-year period, but the advertising was never 

received. 

 

We also have five government organizations reporting goods 

and services of a value of $42,000 provided to cabinet ministers 

and other officials of the previous government without charge.  

We also have goods and services totalling $1.7 million given by 

eight government organizations to other government 

organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think the question that many people are asking is, 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

what sort of accountability you can have in government if this 

kind of misspending and misappropriation can occur without 

these members being taken to task.  And I realize that the 

members opposite were taken to task, or their parties at least, in 

the last provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it seems to me that a lot more needs to be done in terms of 

asking the question as to how this could have occurred and what 

role present and past members of the Conservative caucus may 

have played in these developments. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with statements made 

by Mr. Eisler in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of May 2, 1992 

where Mr. Eisler says, and I'm quoting: 

 

It is deeply offensive to hear the Opposition Tories attempt 

to deflect attention from the scandalous way they treated 

the public purse during almost a decade in power. 

 

They seem not the slightest bit contrite over the fiscal 

mess the province now finds itself in.  It's as if they have 

nothing to be ashamed about or repentant for. 

 

The facts are that while the Devine Tories were in power, 

people in government engaged in practices with public 

funds that at times were despicable, in some cases perhaps 

criminal. 

 

What more do the Tories need to be shown before they 

will atone for their behavior or at least admit they have 

much to answer for? 

 

And I think that's a very good question, Mr. Speaker.  There are 

a lot of unanswered questions concerning the role of 

Conservative politicians both elected and unelected, and 

Conservative government officials concerning the public, the 

finances of our province, Mr. Speaker.  And I hope the 

Conservatives will, as Mr. Eisler says, eventually come clean 

and assist the government in explaining to the people of 

Saskatchewan exactly where all of this money has gone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- I'm very pleased, Mr. Speaker, in view of what 

I've said about the lack of accountability in the previous 

administration, with the actions today taken by this government 

including the appointment of the Gass Commission, which has 

recommended ways in which we will ensure that what 

happened under the previous administration never happens 

again. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have every confidence in 

our Premier and the members of our cabinet and the members 

of . . . my colleagues in the New Democratic caucus.  I 

sincerely believe that we now have a government which 

consists of honest and competent people. 

 

I believe in the future of our province.  I want to end on a 

positive note, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that the province of 

Saskatchewan, with its resources and most importantly 

with its people and with its history of being able to solve 

problems together, has a great future.  And I believe that the 

1990s can be Saskatchewan's decade.  With good management 

and community co-operation and even moderate improvements 

in the price of some of our goods sold on the world market, we 

will pay the bills that have been run up, and we will provide 

new opportunities.  We have every reason, Mr. Speaker, for 

hope and optimism, and we will indeed make the 1990s our 

decade. 

 

So I'm very pleased and proud, Mr. Speaker, to support the 

Speech from the Throne, and I will be voting accordingly upon 

the division.  Thank you very much. 

 

(1600) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank you 

also, Mr. Speaker, for your leadership in the first sitting of the 

twenty-second legislature for the province of Saskatchewan.  

And my constituents, Mr. Speaker, from Kelsey-Tisdale, 

convey their support to you, through me, in this second sitting. 

 

I'd like to thank my colleagues, the hon. member from Meadow 

Lake and the hon. member from Regina Wascana Plains, for 

moving and seconding the throne speech. 

 

I rise in support of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker.  But before I 

get into that, I want to make one comment.  The hon. member 

from Maple Creek mentioned tourism in his response to the 

amendment, and encouraged us to look at economic 

development and tourism.  And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are interested in economic development and tourism.  

And the reason, Mr. Speaker, that tourism dropped last year was 

not because of that; it was because the government of the day 

had a 7 per cent PST tax.  That's the reason tourism fell. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, abolished that tax on October 

21, and I'm proud of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- On October 21, Mr. Speaker, the province of 

Saskatchewan gave the new government a mandate, a mandate 

to change.  They elected a new government in 55 seats -- 55 

constituencies across this province.  Rural areas, cities, farmers, 

labourers, professionals, business men -- they voted for change, 

Mr. Speaker.  And they would have elected 66 members, all 66 

seats, if the campaign had lasted another few weeks. 

 

You ask yourself why.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the reason is the 

members across, whose management ability was quite simply 

not satisfactory to the people of this province.  In fact, to use a 

favourite word of some of the members next, their 

manageability was a liability. 

 

The people in Kelsey-Tisdale and across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, stated by their vote that we cannot have a debt of this 

magnitude in the province of Saskatchewan -- a debt that will 

destroy our ability to govern, that will destroy our ability to 

control our own destiny. 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

The former premier said deficits are only deferred taxes.  And 

then they left us with a debt, Mr. Speaker, a debt on a per capita 

basis that is the second largest among all the provinces in 

Canada -- nearly $14 billion.  A debt of nearly $14,000 for 

every man, woman, and child in the province of Saskatchewan.  

A debt, Mr. Speaker, that if it is not turned around in a very 

short time will gobble up government services like health care, 

education, agricultural policies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to speak on the Crown corporations for a 

moment, a government that drained the retained earnings from 

those Crown corporations, put them into general revenue to 

hide the deficit, weakening not only the government's operating 

side but also the Crown corporations which are so important, a 

vital aspect to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

The people on October 21, Mr. Speaker, elected a party that 

they trusted, a party who when in office before showed surplus 

after surplus.  In 1982 the Consolidated Fund was some $139 

million to the good, in the black.  And the debts in the Crown 

corporations was merely $3.3 billion, and it was a 

self-liquidating debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On April 27, Mr. Speaker, of this year, our government stated 

emphatically that in the throne speech we will begin to face the 

challenge of putting our financial house in order.  This was the 

first of our election promises, Mr. Speaker, and it was one of 

the reasons for our resounding victory. 

 

Saskatchewan people realize, Mr. Speaker, that it is not an easy 

challenge, but they know that together we can meet the 

challenge.  People in every sector will join with us to begin our 

mandate for change.  They know that this debt was not created 

by them or their children, and their children must not be left 

with that great burden. 

 

Interest on our debt, Mr. Speaker, is money that could be spent 

to help create employment, health care, education -- over $700 

million this year alone.  This of course cannot continue.  If it 

was allowed to continue, Mr. Speaker, that interest bill could 

reach $1.5 billion in the next few years.  That's the old show 

and the old title, Gone with the Wind. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in the past few weeks there has been 

talk of health care premiums.  In a 1971 throne speech, the New 

Democratic government of the day eliminated the deterrent fees 

put in by the Liberal government and the medical fees to the 

elderly. 

 

And you yourself, Mr. Speaker, why are we talking about them 

now?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I look at the members across and I 

look at how they managed this province.  And I say to them, 

why?  There are thousands of reasons why, and they all say 

Tory mismanagement. 

 

I look at the special auditor's report, Mr. Speaker, and I note 

$16,000 for cabinet ministers to attend the Big Valley 

Jamboree, for food, administration, trailer rentals, alcohol.  Yes, 

indeed.  They've got the alcohol, and as a member just said 

moments ago, the people of Saskatchewan got the hangover. 

And I note over $5 million in payments to some 130 employees, 

for extended periods did not work for the organizations that 

were paying their salary.  And I see $439,000 paid to nine 

advertising agencies for advertising or communications, for 

goods and services that were never received by the government.  

And I look at $705,816 spent by the Crown Management Board 

to pay a company for general advice on privatization.  And I 

look at $5 million for GigaText.  And I look at $1.1 million 

spent by SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) to prepare 

for privatization.  And the list goes on. 

 

If there are premiums, Mr. Speaker, and if taxes are raised, the 

people of Saskatchewan know why.  They know who's 

responsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a change in the wind.  I look at the Gass 

Commission report -- another election promise kept by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, a promise to open the books.  And 

what do you see, Mr. Speaker?  We see recommendations 

because of Tory mismanagement.  They say there is a need for 

greater public accountability.  The government must have a 

solid plan for deficit reduction and recognized accounting 

practices must be implemented.  Why?  I know why. 

 

Since taking office, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of my 

Premier and his cabinet.  We have taken a leadership role in 

cutting excesses.  SaskPower-SaskEnergy bills in one envelope 

-- savings, $750,000; the repeal of the high severance deals like 

George Hill, $1.34 million; total, $12 million savings; closing 

of the trade offices in Hong Kong, Zrich, and Minneapolis -- 

welcome home, Mr. Taylor and Mr. Andrew -- saving us $2 

million; spending cuts in government advertising and travel, 

another $28 million.  So if there's a will, there's a way. 

 

Smallest cabinet but most efficient cabinet in 20 years -- and the 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker, that took a 5 per cent cut in salaries.  And 

again the list goes on.  Responsible government has finally 

arrived in this province. 

 

The mismanagement and the waste demonstrated by the past 

Tory government, Mr. Speaker, has led to the perception that 

politicians are not to be trusted.  This feeling, Mr. Speaker, in a 

province that traditionally regards its politics in the very highest 

of regards, is not right. 

 

I will take this opportunity to read from an editorial from the 

Leader-Post dated May 2, from the pen of the same writer that 

the hon. member from Wilkie quoted yesterday, to emphasize 

the mismanagement and waste of the previous administration.  

And I will read from this article: 

 

One small example of the mess is the nine government 

departments or agencies that paid $439,000 to advertising 

agencies for services they never received. 

 

As well, 130 government employees did not work for the 

department, agency or Crown corporation that paid their 

salaries. 

 

It goes on to say: 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

The biggest abuse of this was in the premier's realm of 

Executive Council.  Of the 130 (employees), 49 were actually 

working directly for Devine, thereby appearing to reduce his 

budget by $1.8 million. 

 

All of this adds up to an abuse of the public trust that comes 

with being in government.  There can be no defending it, 

which perhaps explains why the Tories really don't even 

bother trying. 

 

Another election promise, Mr. Speaker, by this new government 

has been addressed in this throne speech -- to correct that 

feeling about the political people that govern our province; 

amendments to The Provincial Auditor Act and to The 

Financial Administration Act, a code of ethical conduct for 

elected officials, Conflict of Interests Act, and amendments to 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  This will demonstrate, 

Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan that our 

government is very serious about changing this attitude by 

action. 

 

Certainly our financial situation is so very serious, Mr. Speaker, 

and still the throne speech delivers a positive plan for 

Saskatchewan people.  The plan is simple.  It's straightforward, 

Mr. Speaker -- a plan unlike anything this Assembly has seen in 

the past 10 years.  It is not a plan of ad hoc this here and 

megaproject there.  And to illustrate that, I just want to talk a 

minute about the previous administration in this ad hoc type of 

policy or plan that they had.  The previous administration, Mr. 

Speaker, would have had us put up what may have been another 

of their white elephants -- a CANDU 3 reactor -- with no idea 

of need or benefit, without any actual cost/benefit analysis. 

 

I am proud, Mr. Speaker, that our government's right direction 

in the appointment, Mr. Speaker, of the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Institute, recently appointed by 

our Premier.  It will look at all forms of energy with the good of 

Saskatchewan people at the forefront -- nuclear energy, wind 

energy, co-generation -- because this is economically the best 

way to address our future energy needs.  And it's likely the 

reason the members across are not in favour, because anything 

to do with economics may not be that high on their priority list, 

Mr. Speaker.  It is no wonder the member across cannot 

understand our plan. 

 

Firstly, of course, we must get our financial house in order.  It is 

a plan that speaks of jobs and economic development.  Mr. 

Speaker, it talks of the Premier's Economic Action Committee 

representing all players: business, labour, agriculture, local 

governments. 

 

(1615) 

 

I suppose that sounds a little strange to the members across.  

They may not be able to understand that people working 

together is the only way to address the concerns of the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It speaks of agricultural industry in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and recognizes agriculture as our number one industry.  Our 

government has recognized that over the 

many years we have governed this fine province that we are 

totally committed to agriculture.  On April 27, we addressed the 

agricultural sector of our province -- more improvements to the 

income stabilization plan for 1993, an action on severe debt 

problems faced by our farm community today.  The lack of 

persuading or the lack of desire to persuade their federal 

counterparts, Mr. Speaker, is why the agriculture in this country 

. . . or why that agriculture in this country is an equal 

responsibility of every Canadian, has had a very detrimental 

effect on agricultural programs across this country and 

especially in our province. 

 

I am very proud, Mr. Speaker, that I am part of a government 

that will continue to attempt to convince the federal government 

of their responsibilities to this very important industry -- 

agriculture. 

 

It speaks of protecting our environment with some clear cut 

direction -- the environment charter of rights and 

responsibilities Act, an Environmental Assessment 

Commission, amendments to The Parks Act, The Critical 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.  And, Mr. Speaker, we also 

speak of health care. 

 

Speaking of health care, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that it 

was a priority of this government since the very beginning.  I 

want to read from the 1944 throne speech, Tuesday, February 8: 

 

Legislation will be submitted to you authorizing my 

Government to enter into such an agreement to provide 

Health Insurance for all people in Saskatchewan. 

 

You will be asked to consider a measure respecting a 

National Physical Fitness Programme which is being 

undertaken by the Province in co-operation with the 

Government of Canada. 

 

From the 1944 throne speech, Mr. Speaker, that's our 

commitment to health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Another article in the provincial election of 

1960, the Saskatchewan CCF promised to introduce a 

province-wide medical insurance plan, construing the election 

victory as a mandate to implement this scheme.  Douglas 

summoned a special session of the legislature in October 1961.  

Mr. Speaker, this is our commitment to health care. 

 

Thirty years ago Tommy Douglas took a new direction in health 

care after defeating one administration that had no desire to 

change.  Today our Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, again after 

an administration that had no desire to see change -- too busy 

cooking the books or whatever . . . Tommy Douglas, if here 

today, would be as proud as I am of the direction that we are 

taking in health care, the wellness, preventative care, new 

structures, better service, less waste.  I would like to commend 

our Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Mr. Renaud: -- The throne speech speaks of child hunger, Mr. 

Speaker, something that should not exist in the western world.  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, the mismanagement of this province's 

financial affairs by the members across contributed to this very, 

very serious situation. 

 

It speaks about the plight of our Indian and Metis brothers and 

sisters and the need to promote the right of self-determination 

and self-reliance.  It speaks about workers, Mr. Speaker, about 

their health, about their safety.  It speaks about the importance 

of a strong Canada in this its 125th birthday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the story is straightforward and I am excited as my 

colleagues about this new session, about attacking our deficit 

and its interest costs, about democratic reform, about jobs, 

about employment, about agricultural direction, about social 

justice, and the environment, about a sharing, a coming 

together, a new will, a new understanding of all our peoples -- 

urban, rural, rich and poor, young, old, black or white -- toward 

our future and the future of the next generation. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members across for their 

co-operation -- I notice the member from Thunder Creek 

recently stated that people want the partisan stuff to be put aside 

-- and I ask them to join with us in supporting the throne 

speech.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the short time left 

available to me, I'm pleased to have this opportunity to make a 

few comments, particularly to the amendment that was put 

forward by the members of the opposition on this throne 

speech. 

 

A lot of people in Saskatchewan, I think, Mr. Speaker, were 

expecting the new government of the day, a government elected 

with a very large majority, to come into this legislature -- after 

great delay because they said they needed the time to put their 

house in order -- and lay down a statement that people in this 

province would finally have some sound leadership; if one 

believed the statements of the member from Riversdale when he 

was in opposition and after he became Premier, that this sound 

leadership would lead Saskatchewan in a new direction. 

 

Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as I've listened to members of 

the government talk about this particular throne speech, I 

thought they might come up with some reasons that obviously 

the members of the public missed.  Because I haven't noticed a 

lot of platitudes for this particular throne speech coming from 

the public at large. 

 

I haven't noticed in the newspapers, I haven't seen it on TV, I 

haven't seen any of the special interest groups in this province 

that traditionally are involved in the debate from the throne, 

make any remarks at all on this particular throne speech.  And I 

think it says something about what this legislature was 

presented with, Mr. Speaker -- this vast deafness that we see 

across the province of Saskatchewan. 

Because when one looks at this particular document, the only 

economic initiatives that I see are initiatives taken on by the 

former government.  I mean how ludicrous to stand in this 

legislature and claim that Harvest Meats and Spar industries are 

this new vision that this government is bringing to 

Saskatchewan.  How ludicrous. 

 

We have a lot of platitudes in this throne speech about how 

people in Saskatchewan are going to change their views of 

things, how the community is going to become more involved, 

how we're all going to sort of redirect our thinking.  That's fine 

and dandy, Mr. Speaker, but people need leadership in order to 

do that. 

 

As one of my colleagues said in speaking to this amendment the 

other day, there are politicians and then there are leaders.  There 

are politicians and then there are premiers.  Premiers are 

expected to provide leadership to give people the self-will 

because ultimately, Mr. Speaker, it still comes down to 

individuals in this province collectively or by themselves 

changing the direction in which we do things. 

 

And I saw nothing in this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, that 

would motivate individuals, either by themselves or 

collectively, to go out and know that their government is setting 

a new positive agenda for the province. 

 

And that is why the opposition found it reasonable to bring in 

an amendment to this throne speech, because the government 

basically is presenting nothing new other than rhetoric to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

They didn't talk about the campaign promises that were broken.  

They didn't tell us about reducing taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They didn't tell us that the medicare system 

wouldn't have user fees attached to it.  They didn't tell us how 

freedom of speech in this province is being taken away from 

people.  They didn't tell us about the patronage that they 

promised they wouldn't do, but appears to be rife in our 

province. 

 

I found it rather amazing, Mr. Speaker, that in a throne speech 

from a government, from a political party that said political 

patronage has to be something of the past in our province, 

would brag about appointing 500-and-some individuals to 

boards and commissions already over and above all of their 

political appointments which they don't tell us about and which 

members of the media have to ferret out. 

 

They didn't brag in that throne speech about making a past 

president of the NDP Party one of our newest provincial court 

judges, particularly given the comments of members opposite, 

particularly given the comments of members opposite on 

appointments made by the former government. 

 

And they talk in here about how they set this new direction of 

helping communities work together, and yet members in this 

legislature stand and condemn community bonds.  Because 

community bonds, Mr. Speaker, by opinion of everyone in this 

province -- by everyone in this province -- are a way that 

communities can work together. 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The member says, and I find this interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, the member says, what about Fair Share?  And I 

remember full well when members of the public, members of 

the government's own unions came to this legislature and said 

that they didn't agree with the program.  And yet the 

government of the day didn't threaten to fire those people 

because they expressed an opinion that was counter to the 

government's policy directives of the day. 

 

And yet we have a minister of the Crown stand in this 

legislature, stand in this legislature and say that it is quite right 

and proper for the government of the day to place a gag order 

on its own employees because they might -- they might explain 

the differences between '91 GRIP and '92 GRIP to one of their 

clients.  They might explain to an angry farmer who stands up 

at a meeting or walks into his agent's office as his fields are 

blowing away, they might explain the fundamental economic 

differences.  And the minister responsible says that he is going 

to sick the government's police on them because they might say 

something contrary to government policy. 

 

And after members of that party, the NDP Party, stood in this 

legislature and chastised the government of the day for even 

introducing a program that the employees didn't agree with, I 

find it absolutely reprehensible, Mr. Speaker, that these people 

can talk about building communities and getting people to work 

together in a throne speech, and then do diametrically opposite 

to what they talked about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day in this legislature I spoke at great 

length -- at great length -- on some economic issues that face 

the people of this province, and during that speech, Mr. 

Speaker, laid on the Table of this legislature the documents that 

I spoke from and quoted from, and outlined my arguments 

based on documents not developed by this opposition, not 

developed by anyone associated with this opposition, and at 

least presented the evidence to this legislature that that party 

and that government is simply trying to pull the wool over the 

taxpayers of this province, because they knew, they knew 

exactly where the finances of this province were. 

 

They went out and promised the moon.  They went out and got 

the taxpayers' votes in this province by total deception.  And 

now, Mr. Speaker, they're running and hiding behind the fact 

that the former government didn't do everything perfectly. 

 

(1630) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of 

the government, take a look at the Star-Phoenix today, take a 

look at most of the media around the province and know full 

well that the folks are beginning to catch up with you.  And 

after your budget on the 7th, I think every member in this 

legislature would stand and vote for the amendment as put 

forward by the member from Wilkie. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:32 p.m. until 4:44 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Shillington Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Goulet Cline 

Solomon McPherson 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Calvert  

-- 41 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me to again address this House on the throne speech.  I feel 

honoured by the people of my constituency who have supported 

me through the past 10 years.  Actually it's almost 10 years . . . 

it's a little past 10 years that they have supported the Tory 

government and me as a member of the legislature.  And I want 

to say that I appreciate their support. 

 

I want to also indicate some of the things that I think are of 

interest to the people of the Assembly.  I had a situation in my 

constituency that went back for some 30, 40 years where it was 

represented by Liberals and NDP MLAs, and some of them had 

significant influence in this province. And yet what we had in 

my constituency is an overriding principle that said that we 

don't want to build anything. 

 

And subsequent to that we have had some very significant 

building going on in my constituency.  I want to point out that 

we have had quite a number of schools built in our 

constituency.  We've had a hospital built.  We've had 

renovations to other hospitals. 

 

And I want to thank the people of Saskatchewan for providing 

that support to the constituency that I live in.  The school that 

my father went to was built in 1912.  A new school was built 

this year, and that's in the town of 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1992 

Herbert.  And they took the old bell tower and put it in front of 

the new school, and that was a significant day in the life of the 

people in the Herbert community.  And I think that they want to 

say to the people of Saskatchewan that they appreciate very 

much the willingness to participate in their tax dollars to 

provide that to the people of Herbert. 

 

Addressing the needs and the concerns of the province go far 

broader than just my constituency, although I think it's an 

example of the things that are around the province. 

 

I have economic development in my constituency; I have 

agriculture in my constituency; I have people who live in the 

rural and work in urban, and I have a lot of those people and 

they're very avid supporters of mine.  And I appreciate that a lot 

in relating the kinds of things that they're prepared to do, not 

only on my behalf in getting me elected, but also in providing 

an economic direction to the people of Saskatchewan and 

showing how they can work together to make that happen. 

 

The oil industry is a very intricate part of my constituency.  

Some of the very earliest discoveries of oil were discovered in 

my constituency.  They deal with the kinds of things that I 

believe that people of Saskatchewan are familiar with, being on 

the frontier, being on the cutting edge of development.  And I 

would say that as I go through my speech, I want to point out 

some of the things that I believe not only the government in the 

throne speech have done wrong, but I think that they provided a 

backdrop of things that really haven't been good for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have sat here diligently listening to members talk about 

the throne speech.  I've listened to that carefully.  And I've 

gathered some very important information and I've deducted a 

few things. 

 

One of the things that I've deducted is that there was nothing in 

the throne speech, so they had to go back to 1944 to dig up 

Tommy Douglas and talk about Tommy Douglas in relation to 

the things that he did.  And I'll point out to the members of this 

government that Tommy Douglas was important to the people 

of Saskatchewan, and I'll tell you why. 

 

It was because he was a builder.  He did believe in building.  

Why is Diefenbaker Lake the centre of attention for Gardiner 

dam and Tommy Douglas -- the three people who built in this 

province who are recognized as builders in this province have 

their names attached to that reservoir, that development there.  

And Tommy Douglas and John Diefenbaker and Jimmy 

Gardiner were people who were prepared to build. 

 

And I say to you that maybe you should go back and look at the 

dynamics of the Tommy Douglas days and what made him the 

initiator of those things to build, things to do, things to work 

with -- the things that you need to think about in terms of the 

kinds of things that you've spoken about, going back to those 

fundamental days when you think that your party began. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I've heard a lot about.  I think 

that these people have lost touch with knowing how 

to build.  They'll study it.  They'll study it again and they'll 

study it again and they'll study it again.  And when they get 

done studying it, they'll cut down more trees to study it again.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the way this government has operated 

through their history.  And I think that the kinds of things that 

we see in this throne speech deal with the kinds of things that I 

think are kind of mundane. 

 

But if you go back and look at what their speech brags about, 

you'll see Spar Group as one of the things that is mentioned 

there.  Now who brought Spar Group into the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Well I'll say to the people here, it was Spar 

Group themselves that brought Spar Group into the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And why?  I'll tell you why.  Because they wanted to get out of 

British Columbia.  Do you know why?  Because of labour laws.  

With an NDP government in British Columbia and the labour 

laws that they were confronted with, they decided that they 

were going to move to Saskatchewan.  That was one of the 

main reasons why they moved in the first place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I see in this discussion on the throne 

speech, I see that there's going to be a whole lot more that are 

going to be dealing with the same kinds of labour legislation 

that we anticipate coming before this Assembly that are going 

to just as much stifle them in Saskatchewan as it probably did in 

British Columbia. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is one of the reasons why they moved, and 

that, Mr. Speaker, I think is reason to believe that we've got a 

sense of lack of direction when all we can do is make a law that 

says that we've got to restrict, we've got to withdraw services 

and all of those kinds of things.  We have to look for 

opportunities; we have to look for economic development. 

 

I want to touch a little bit on another area of economic 

development that I think this government totally missed the 

mark, and that's the atomic energy opportunity that we had in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  I really fundamentally believe 

that every person who represents any seat in Saskatoon ought to 

be totally ashamed of what their position was. 

 

They did not look at economic development in dealing with 

this.  They did not look and research.  They did not look in any 

kind of scientific expansion in the university.  They never 

looked at that at all.  And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members from Saskatoon should hang their heads for not telling 

the cabinet that they needed that economic development to 

enhance the opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What was it going to do?  It was going to study the 

opportunities that nuclear medicine, nuclear physics, nuclear 

energy could provide in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

think, to the people of this Assembly, that that should be 

something that even now you should begin to consider because 

of the opportunities that are available. 

 

What would 70, 80, 160, 170 jobs do in Saskatoon, of high 

profile, scientific jobs and giving an opportunity for our young 

scientists coming out of the university right 



May 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

now?  It would give an excellent opportunity for those people to 

not only consider but also that they could become a part of this 

community.  And what have we got that we can export more of, 

is knowledge and information, and put that energy to use in 

driving the opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have produced some of the brightest people in 

Saskatchewan that are telling the world what to do.  And why 

can't they do it from Saskatchewan?  It's because of the kinds of 

attitudes that are demonstrated in the memorandum of 

understanding in the energy agreement that the people of this 

province turned down.  And I think that the people of Saskatoon 

should hang their heads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say on this subject, and 

therefore I would ask to adjourn debate today. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


