




















































Hansard: May 25, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 609 

 May 25, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to answer the question that was asked at 5 o'clock if I can 

remember the question as accurately as possible.  If not, I am 

sure that the member opposite will ask the question again or 

remind me of the things that I didn't say. 

 

As I recall, the question asked had something to do with what 

impact the 50 cents per acre would have on particularly the 

Kindersley area where a lot of the wells are fairly marginal.  

And we did some checking between 5 o'clock and now, that the 

average well in the Kindersley area is about 3.2 barrels a day.  

So we have some that are slightly less and some that are 

slightly more, but it's not great production. 

 

I'd like to report, Mr. Chairman, that in the Kindersley area 75 

per cent of the wells in that area are from Crown minerals.  The 

Crown owns the minerals.  So 25 per cent would be from 

freehold . . . where the freehold mineral rights are held by other 

than the Crown. 

 

And given the impact that this might have on one well on a 

40-acre field, as an example, the tax increase would be about 

$20 for that 40-acre field at 50 cents an acre.  And you work 

that out over the course of a month and it's $1.66 a month, and 

on a daily basis it's about 5 cents a day on a well.  And again I 

would like to say that with those kind of numbers I find it 

difficult to accept the fact that 5 cents a day is going to have a 

serious impact on the viability of a well in the Kindersley area. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that may be very true, Mr. Minister, if 

that were the only tax that these individuals were dealing with.  

However, as you know, there are a wide range of costs 

associated with oil production, one of which is the proposed 

change that you are talking about here tonight.  Six hundred 

and forty dollars to 960, Minister, is more than $80 a quarter 

section.  So you are talking about, for an individual producer, 

far more than just that $20 per well. 

 

Mr. Minister, what effect will this have on the area of hard rock 

minerals?  What will be the amount of land that will be turned 

back to the province?  Or what is anticipated, given the change, 

in particularly the area of individual prospectors, that sort of 

thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is that the tax only applies in the southern part of the 

province.  So it doesn't affect the northern half of the province 

because the northern half of the province, the minerals are all 

in the Crown.  So the freehold mineral rights are only in the 

southern half of the province.  So it wouldn't affect anybody in 

the northern half. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- In other words, Mr. Minister, this Bill is 

strictly limited to oil and gas properties?  There's nothing else 

that would be included in here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- No, it's not entirely limited to oil and gas 

properties -- also potash.  Potash companies own large tracks of 

land where the freehold mineral rights would apply to them.  

I'm not sure what other minerals it would apply to in the 

southern half of the province.  But I think basically it is oil and 

gas with a few other minerals involved. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, first 

of all it's been enlightening to hear you attempt to give 

straightforward answers without a lot of rhetoric about other 

things that don't concern your particular portfolio, and I 

appreciate that. 

 

I have to say though that I'm a little unhappy with your answer 

to the one question which was, whom did you consult with?  

And my question is: as your reply was that you hadn't 

consulted with anyone, why did you not consult with people 

from the petroleum industry?  They do have an organization, I 

understand.  And why were no studies done before you went 

into this process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I need to correct 

one of the things the member has suggested.  I did not say we 

did not consult with anyone.  I said we did not get numbers 

from the industry as to how many acres would be turned back.  

I think that was the previous question, if I remember correctly. 

 

We did consult with the industry.  We had meetings with IPAC 

(Independent Petroleum Association of Canada), with CPA 

(Canadian Petroleum Association), with the uranium miners, 

the potash miners. We had extensive consultations and early in 

April we invited all these groups into a meeting and we 

indicated to them the general direction that we were going.  

Now we did not indicate to them the numbers because that 

would be considered as a budget leak if we'd have given them 

the numbers.  But we did indicate to them the general direction 

we were going and the industry was aware of the fact that there 

was a possibility of taxes going up on their property, on their 

behalf. And we had extensive consultations. 

 

If I've had one meeting with the industry since November 1, 

I've probably met with them 100 times on different occasions 

and on different topics, so we've had extensive consultations.  

And they were aware of the fact that we were considering an 

increase in taxation because they were also aware of the fact 

the situation we face in the province. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm glad that I gave 

you the opportunity to clear that up because I'm sure a lot of 

people didn't pick that up earlier in your comments. 

 

And it's interesting then that you have stated that since 

November you have been in consultation with people from the 

industry.  In view of that, it has been expressed to me and I 

think probably to yourself that the industry has had a rather 

fearful winter wondering just exactly where 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

the province would be taking them. 

 

And while this particular tax is not the one that is so greatly 

prohibitive to the industry, along coupled with, in an 

accumulating effect with those others that are proposed, we 

have been led to believe that there may be some grounds for 

assuming that the industry has basically shut down its 

operations in the province. And to try to find a conclusion for 

those thoughts and to discover whether or not in fact this is 

reality, could you provide for us how many new wells have 

been drilled in the province of Saskatchewan since October 21, 

1991.  And could you also provide us with a background for a 

comparison of how many wells were drilled in each of the 

years for, say, the 20 years preceding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we were just trying to find 

the numbers here, but unfortunately we just can't put our hands 

on them right now.  If we can, before the evening is over we'll 

be happy to pass them on to you.  If not, we'll see that you get 

the numbers for the last . . . did you say 20 years?  We'd be 

happy to provide you with those numbers. 

 

In answer to your first part of the question, however, the 

activity in the oil patch in western Canada has not been great in 

the last year.  Not only in Saskatchewan has it been poor; it has 

also been poor in Alberta and also in British Columbia.  The 

reason for the activity being low is basically price.  Oil and gas 

companies are active in the drilling industry.  If the price is 

good, if there's a dollar to be made, they're active in the 

industry.  If there's no money to be made they slow down.  And 

that's just the way those companies operate.  And I'm sure 

you're familiar with that scenario very well. 

 

We've checked across the western part of the province and 

Alberta's drilling is proportionally down as ours is down.  And 

we're not pleased with that but there isn't anything we can do as 

far as the price is concerned.  We have not changed the royalty 

regime in any way at all.  So it's not the royalty regime that's 

turning them off.  I think it's basically the price. 

 

If we can find the numbers we'll pass them on to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We appreciate the 

fact that you will get those figures for us. 

 

Now you have made a point of saying two things that are of 

interest to me.  First of all, you said that the petroleum industry 

is in a slack period all over so, therefore, we are down 

proportionately with everyone else.  You have also stated that 

this particular tax is insignificant and shouldn't bother anybody. 

 

However, the scenario we get is that there is a fear of what is 

going to happen in Saskatchewan with taxation and with 

royalty changes that you're proposing, and that in fact that fear 

has now shut the industry down.  And with that, I ask you, sir, 

how many physical crews have been working in the province 

of Saskatchewan in January, February, March, and April of this 

year as compared to those working in Alberta? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Again I'd like to say I don't have 

those numbers with me here, but we can provide you with 

those numbers as well, so . . . I don't have those numbers. 

 

I'd like to just respond to the other point that you made is the 

concept of fear that the industry has of coming into 

Saskatchewan.  And I was hoping that we could keep this 

whole discussion on a factual level and not get into any of the 

politics here.  But I can't avoid mentioning this one item, that 

during the election campaign the only fear that was generated 

in the oil industry was generated by members of the opposition 

in saying that the NDP (New Democratic Party) were going to 

shut down the oil patch.  They ran huge ads in the papers, in 

the newspapers, trying to instil fear in the hearts of the oil 

companies. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite that there is no fear in 

the oil patch of this government.  In fact I think we have built 

up a very good relationship with the oil industry and the gas 

industry and the whole mining sector.  And we have their 

confidence.  They believe what we're telling them and they 

trust us, and I don't think that there's any fear being instilled in 

the hearts of the oil industry because we raised the tax on 

freehold mineral rights by 50 cents an acre. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, with all due respect, I have in 

my hand, with me tonight, the C.P.A. Review, May 1992.  And 

you don't have the figures so I'll just give them to you.  In 

Saskatchewan, in January, you had one geophysical crew 

working and in Alberta you had 36.  In February you had three 

in Saskatchewan; you had 30 in Alberta.  In March you had 

three in Saskatchewan; you have 26, in March, in Alberta.  And 

on it goes. 

 

Now my next question, sir.  Even though you say that we're 

doing so well and that there is no fear of this government by 

the petroleum industry, could you tell me how your new tax 

structure is affecting land sales in the province of 

Saskatchewan as compared to other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would say that this tax 

has not affected land sales in any way at all because we haven't 

had any land sales since this tax has been in effect.  So this 

particular tax hasn't affected land sales at all. 

 

If you're asking me, how did land sales at March go in 

comparison to other years, the land sales in March were down.  

But when I compare the land sales in March in Saskatchewan 

to those in Alberta, they were not down any more than they 

were in Alberta.  So this is not a phenomenon that is peculiar to 

Saskatchewan.  This is true in the entire industry all across 

western Canada.  And to lay the blame of low land sales or low 

activity on a tax -- a 50 cent tax on freehold holdings -- I think 

is ludicrous to say the least. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you might think it's 

ludicrous for us to ask these questions but you just finished 

saying that you had no land sales and turned right around and 

said you had one in March that didn't go so well.  So maybe 

you could think a little bit about what you're saying there 

before you jump all over us.  The fact of the matter is that land 

sales are disastrously down in 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

this province and the reason for that is because they are afraid 

to come into this province and spend any money for fear that 

you will tax them out of existence and cause them to go broke 

before they ever get a chance to start. 

 

My next question, sir, is what has this particular piece of 

legislation, this increase in taxation, done to the drilling activity 

in the province of Saskatchewan since December to March, as 

compared to, say, Alberta? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to correct the 

member in something that he's accused me of saying that I did 

not say.  I said we've had no land sales since this tax has been 

implemented.  And this tax was not implemented in March so I 

was perfectly consistent in what I said.  We had a land sale in 

March.  We haven't had any since this tax has been 

implemented.  So I think that's perfectly consistent. 

 

Just to put this in perspective, you're talking about poor land 

sales in Saskatchewan.  The Oilweek says the first-ever 

cancellation of Alberta land sales was announced by the 

province in the wake of discontinued dismal results.  So if you 

think that things are bad in Saskatchewan and if you think this 

tax is contributing to the dismal situation, look at the 

neighbouring province of Alberta.  They cancelled their land 

sales.  They didn't even have one.  So I don't think that you can 

put the blame on this land sale . . . pardon me, on this tax, for 

any loss of land sales. 

 

Again, I don't have the statistics for your other question.  If you 

wish, my department will be happy to supply those for you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Again with all the 

respect in the world, you may not have had a land sale since the 

tax went in but you, by your own words, said that you have 

negotiated with the petroleum industry since November and 

that you were bringing them fully up to date on what general 

principles you were going to evoke.  Our contention is that 

those general principles have scared the industry out and that, 

in fact, in March your land sales didn't go well as a result of 

what you were proposing to the industry. 

 

Now in the drilling activity area in Alberta you had 133 drilled 

in December and in Saskatchewan you had 10.  I can give you 

the rest of the figures in case you can't find the book. 

 

My next question, Mr. Minister: as every indication has shown 

that the general principles that you are about to undertake in are 

going to probably stall the oil industry, if not finish it 

altogether, would you reconsider some of these moves that are 

going to take place in the more important areas of royalty 

structures?  The second thing I want to ask you about is, more 

specifically, I have received a phone call from an individual 

that tells me that 56 gas wells have been capped in the Leader 

area this winter.  Could you confirm that that figure is correct 

or not?  And could you tell us why that happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll answer the last 

part of your question first.  Our statistics showed there were 44 

wells were capped in the Liebenthal area and there may have 

been a few others around.  And the reason for those wells being 

capped is they simply were uneconomic, they were not 

producing enough to make it viable for the company to operate 

at today's prices. 

 

I'd like to respond to your first statement just briefly here.  You 

keep talking about changes in royalty.  I want to emphasize 

again there have been no changes in royalties whatsoever.  So 

if the companies, if the industry is leaving Saskatchewan 

because of royalties, it's because of the royalties that your 

government put in place that they're leaving.  We haven't 

changed the royalties.  We haven't touched them. 

 

We have talked to the industry about royalty structures.  We 

have asked them for input and we will continue to ask them for 

input into the royalty structure, but we have not changed the 

royalty.  I think we have to be very clear on that.  We have not 

changed the royalty structure.  We have instituted a 50 cents an 

acre tax on freehold mineral rights. 

 

You say that our policies are probably going to stall or finish 

the industry.  That's absolute nonsense.  You know, and I 

know, that 50 cents an acre, 5 cents a day on a well, is not 

going to stall an industry.  That's not going to stall the industry.  

What is stalling the industry in this province and in western 

Canada is the price of the product.  It's got absolutely nothing 

to do with a 50 cents an acre. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just for your 

information that there is legitimate reason why the petroleum 

industry would be concerned about your proposed moves in the 

royalties area.  And that reason, just for your information, is the 

fact that in the past election the NDP candidate went around 

our constituency campaigning on the note that there would be 

changes to the royalty structure if an NDP government were 

elected. 

 

In fact, that became a bone of contention in the area so that in 

fact the petroleum industry demanded to know more about this.  

And there was a meeting held in Richmound, Saskatchewan 

where only people who were invited were allowed to come.  I 

wasn't one of those allowed to come because I wasn't invited, 

but apparently the NDP Energy critic at the time did attend that 

meeting and did go over several points of what was going to be 

changed in the royalty system and structures. 

 

And at that point, the petroleum industry contacted me and said 

that if anything like this happens, we're out of Saskatchewan 

totally and completely because the increases in the taxation all 

accumulated together will be such that we will no longer be 

able to make a profit in the industry and therefore we may as 

well not be here and may as well not continue drilling. 

 

So you do have an effect with 50 cents an acre or 5 cents a day 

if you add it on to all of the other bills that you put an industry 

through.  It's just like 1 cent more on tax for farmers for gas.  

You know, it may it not be a whole bunch but it does have an 

effect, sir. 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Now I would like to know, sir, in that light, what have the 

crude oil prices done in the past while?  You've alluded to the 

fact that this is a major problem for us and I would like to 

know exactly what those figures are.  Could you give us the 

prices that our particular kinds of crude oil in Saskatchewan 

would bring for a producer for the past few months, as 

compared to other years in the past 20 years as well, so that we 

can get a picture of just exactly where we're going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- In response to your question regarding 

the prices, the West Texas Intermediate prices since we've been 

in power have ranged anywhere from $19 to $20.50 U.S. 

(United States).  The heavy crude, however, has done much, 

much worse and it's been as low as $8 and 8.50 to $9 a barrel.  

The price of heavy crude right now is probably in the range of 

$12 a barrel, which is fairly low in comparison to the West 

Texas Intermediate. 

 

In response to your suggestion over there that the member that 

was running in Maple Creek for the New Democratic Party 

during the election indicated that there would be royalty 

changes, he may have said that.  I don't know whether he said 

that or not.  But the point I'd like to make is that I recall in 1982 

very clearly, some members opposite, and certainly members 

of that party, running all over Saskatchewan saying they would 

eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax in their first term of office.  

What they did in respect to the sales tax is increase it to 7 per 

cent. 

 

So what our member or our candidate said in Maple Creek, I 

can't tell you what he said and I'm not responsible for what he 

said.  I'm simply saying what we have done.  And we have not 

touched the royalty structure, but we will be consulting with 

the industry over the course of next year as to royalties and we 

want their input and we'll give our input as well. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's interesting that 

you come up with these figures on crude oil and at the same 

time have alluded to the fact that it is the low prices that have 

caused all of the misery in the oil patch. 

 

I want to take you back to the late 1960s at which time crude 

oil was at $2 a barrel.  A bushel of wheat was worth exactly the 

same amount of money.  Now a bushel of wheat is worth about 

$1.85 or something in that area depending whether it's durum 

or hard wheat at the elevator.  And oil you say is worth $12 a 

barrel.  So certainly agriculture is surviving at a much lower 

standard than the petroleum industry is. 

 

And so I say, and suggest to you, sir, that if the petroleum 

industry is in trouble, it is because of taxation in this province 

and not as a result so much of world prices.  Because certainly 

there are many farmers surviving on less money per bushel 

than they got for wheat 25 years ago, and yet the petroleum 

industry is getting more money per barrel and yet they don't 

have it to use in their operations.  So taxation must be the 

villain that is taking that money away. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose you can 

speculate on whatever you want to speculate on as what causes 

the problems in the oil industry or the farm 

industry.  And there are all kinds of things we could debate 

here all evening and all night if we wanted to, but the point that 

I want to make, and I'll make it again -- the royalties have not 

changed.  The taxation that we are putting on here at this time 

is approximately 5 cents a well per day, which is not an 

exorbitant amount.  So I think with that, Mr. Chairman, I'm 

going to leave the answer. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a couple 

of brief questions for the minister.  And I'm wondering, in a 

field like the oil patch surrounding Kindersley, the constituency 

I represent, whether you have any indication that you might be 

able to give us tonight, whether there'll be any negative impact 

with respect to jobs in the Kindersley area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would say that I don't 

anticipate any impact or reduction in jobs.  Now I'm not a 

fortune-teller, so I can't tell you that for sure, but I don't 

anticipate that there'll be reduction in jobs and I certainly hope 

that there won't be.  All I can do is sort of take you back to a 

few years ago, when in 1986 this tax on freehold mineral rights 

was 50 cents an acre.  The previous government raised it to a 

dollar an acre in 1987.  And that was a 100 per cent increase 

and there was no significant impact on the production of oil or 

the drilling effect or the employment effects . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Because there was very . . . significant impact, 

therefore a 50 per cent increase in the taxation, I don't think is 

going to have any significant impact on the drilling. 

 

I think we have to remember that this tax is on the owners of 

the freehold mineral rights.  And some of the owners are not 

capable of passing this on to the people that they lease it to.  It 

is not on the company that drills for the oil, necessarily, 

particularly if they have somebody else . . . It's on the owners 

of the freehold mineral rights. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the concern that there always is in a 

marginal field like the one around Kindersley is that any 

increase, any increase whatsoever, puts additional wells under 

serious question.  And I'm wondering, is there any indication of 

what kind of impact this measure will have with respect to the 

capping of wells? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, again in reference to the 

Kindersley field, and we seem to be talking at a particular field 

here, and I can understand why we are because it's a marginal 

field and there's more concern probably there with loss of jobs 

and wells closing down, I don't think that this tax is going to 

have any impact on closing down or shutting down any wells. 

 

I spent some time in Kindersley late March, early April, and I 

made it a point to visit some of these people who are operating 

the marginal wells.  I went out to the field with a fellow who 

does a lot of swabbing and I also visited the Westar field.  And 

I spent a considerable amount of time talking to these people, 

asking them about the viability of the field in Kindersley. And 

there's no question that whenever a tax is imposed on anybody, 

there are people who will come up and say that it's going to 

have a serious impact on the industry.  We all say that. 

 

If there's any fear being distributed or being produced in 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

the oil patch, it's by remarks that I hear from members opposite 

that are creating that kind of fear.  The industry hasn't given me 

that indication, and I have spent a lot of time talking to them.  

And I don't think that there are going to be any wells capped 

because of this particular tax on the freehold mineral rights. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that assurance. 

We sincerely hope that you're correct in that.  In a field like the 

one at Kindersley that is very marginal, I suspect that it will 

have some impact on it, and we will see some wells closed 

there as some of the oil people that I had the opportunity to 

speak with . . . And I suspect the same gentleman you're 

referring to that does swabbing is the same gentleman I'm 

thinking of when I allude to that. 

 

I believe you will see some shut-downs in capping of wells in 

the Kindersley field as a result of this measure.  And I just want 

to reinforce the point that any increase in a marginal field 

makes for a lot of wells in serious jeopardy. And I think you 

have to, when you're examining taxation measures, keep that in 

mind.  This one may not be the straw that breaks the camel's 

back in that area, but any additional tax certainly will. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like leave to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1930) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm delighted to introduce to 

the Assembly 23 scouts from the High Prairie Scout Group 

seated in the Speaker's gallery.  They are accompanied by 

Scouter Ed, Scouter Gord, Scouter Jack, Scouter Laurie and 

parent helper Bob.  I've had the opportunity to meet with these 

scouts before and I'm looking forward to spending some time 

with them this evening.  And I would like to ask everyone here 

to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also 

like to add my welcome to that of the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden to the scouts in the gallery here.  

Welcome to the legislature. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 9 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- In response to the question from the 

member opposite, I think we are now dealing in semantics.  He 

says, I believe and you believe.  Well I'm glad that we both 

believe.  You believe there's going to be losses in jobs.  I 

believe it's not going to.  We can argue that point for ever if we 

want to.  We're not going to get anywhere, because neither one 

of us has proof.  You 

haven't got proof that the wells are closing down and jobs are 

being lost.  I don't have any proof right now that jobs are being 

created.  So this business of you believe one thing and I believe 

another thing is really not getting us anywhere, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm sorry.  I 

would like to thank the officials for coming here first this 

afternoon and again this evening.  They provided me with 

valuable information.  And I hope that the information that the 

members opposite want can be supplied by the department.  

We'd be happy to do so. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I do want to thank 

the officials for their answers and we'll be looking forward to 

the material coming over as soon as possible.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  I'd like to introduce the 

officials who will help us tonight.  To my left is Susan Amrud, 

Crown solicitor with the legislative services department of 

Justice; to my right is Madeline Robertson; and behind me is 

Brent Prenevost. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, welcome to the minister and to her 

officials who . . . was a pleasure to work with over the past two 

or three years.  And I think I can indicate that due to their 

diligence we're not going to spend a lot of time on the Bills that 

are before us tonight. 

 

Number one, one question: this . . . I guess you could say, in 

retrospect, The Marriage Act is really an increase in fees.  It's 

not really increasing the fees, but certainly everyone is going to 

be required to purchase a marriage licence now, and I'm just 

wondering if the department has any knowledge of the 

anticipated revenue through this process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The estimated revenue is 26,000 a year.  I 

should point out, however, that I have been advised that the 

churches are very anxious to have this change made in as much 

as it reduces the necessity for them to comply with the Act in 

the technical manner that they've had to in the past.  So it 

makes it easier for churches.  Banns can still be published, but 

the legal requirement with respect to the Act doesn't exist any 

longer because a licence would be obtained.  So although it 

does increase revenues, it also makes it easier from the point of 

view of the churches. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I'm glad to hear that obviously there's been 

some consultation with a number of the groups and the church 

groups out there.  I wonder if it's possible for 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

the minister and her staff to indicate which groups they've 

contacted or consulted regarding the proposed changes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I understand that there has been a fair 

amount of consultation but primarily the consultation has 

centred on the churches who use them the most -- the Roman 

Catholic, the Mennonite, United, and Anglican churches. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Wills Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if Madam 

Minister would just explain what the purpose is behind the 

changes to The Wills Act. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There were amendments to The Intestate 

Succession Act in 1990 that increased the preferential share for 

surviving spouses under The Intestate Succession Act when 

there isn't a will.  Section 32 of The Wills Act refers to the 

preferential share and brings it in line with the increased 

amount that was changed in The Intestate Succession Act. 

 

This amendment is retroactive to 1990, but not so as to upset 

any estates that may have been distributed in the interim. 

 

But it's to bring The Wills Act in line with the amendments that 

were made to The Intestate Succession Act increasing the 

preferential share of a spouse from 40,000 to 100,000. 

 

Clause 1 agreed. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Jury Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, the 

minister shared with us the other day the reasons for the 

changes to the Act -- a couple of questions that were raised and 

just bring to her attention again this evening. 

 

First of all, I think that most people would probably recognize 

that registered or certified mail is something that you can 

certainly identify as something, as a form of being certain that 

a person has received that mail or received notice of an event 

or whatever.  And a question we had the other day was, by 

deleting this and just going regular mail, if it wouldn't create a 

few problems.  And I wonder if the minister would just fill the 

Assembly in regarding that concern. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Under the provision with respect to 

registered mail, what occurred is that a juror who did not attend 

and did not show up would have . . . The onus would be on that 

person to establish that they did not receive the notification.  

What this does is it says, it doesn't have to be sent by registered 

mail.  It would be sent by the ordinary course of mail, and the 

onus is no longer on the juror to establish that they did not 

receive.  If a juror was accused of not attending and having 

received, they would simply have to make a statement to the 

effect that they had not received the mail and they wouldn't 

have the onus to establish they didn't receive.  A statement 

would be adequate.  So although the service is done in a more 

ordinary, inconsequential fashion, what the juror . . . the onus, 

or the duty on the juror, is also reduced commensurate with 

that.  What would happen is, if the person failed to respond and 

a charge was laid, the person named in the summons would 

simply be legally required to offer an explanation that the 

summons and information was not received or was not received 

on time. 

 

In the past, there was a reverse onus, and they had to establish 

they didn't receive it.  If they gave an explanation that they had 

not received it, then the Crown would have an onus to establish 

they did.  And obviously they wouldn't be able to do that if it 

was sent through ordinary mail and the person simply didn't 

receive it and stood up and said, I didn't receive it or I didn't get 

it on time.  So practically speaking, there's a substantial 

reduction in the onus on the juror. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, just another question I would 

have is, what process would be followed through, then?  Say 

this mail was . . . and as part of the document which says, 

"deemed to have been received," if the prospective juror hasn't 

received or isn't aware of a call to juror duty, and what process 

is then followed up.  Because obviously that prospective juror 

is going to have to give that explanation.  There must be a 

format that is followed to inform the individual of jury duty. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The general process is as follows.  The 

sheriff would mail a jury summons and jury information return 

to each person on his jury list.  The jury information return asks 

the person to fill out certain questions respecting capacity and 

availability to serve, for example.  The person to whom it is 

mailed places the return in a self-addressed envelope supplied 

in the kit, addressed to the sheriff.  The sheriff reviews the 

returns to determine if a person is eligible to serve, or should be 

excused. 

 

Now -- and this is the part of the question that you were asking 

-- if the jury information return does not come back, the sheriff 

will attempt to contact the person named, to serve that person 

again or serve him personally.  If they don't get the return back 

from the person that it's sent to by ordinary mail, the sheriff 

will then try and contact that person. 

 

Now if that person, obviously, just simply gives an explanation 

that, I didn't receive it, the sheriff will try to serve personally if 

there's still time to have the person there, or may take some 

other action, but isn't going to pursue charges.  Now if that 

person is belligerent and 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

can't give an explanation, then there may be a charge that 

ensues. 

 

The person named in the summons is legally required then to 

offer an explanation, that the summons and information return 

was not received or received on time.  And the person will be 

found not guilty unless the Crown provides contrary evidence.  

So if the person simply gives an explanation at that point, if 

they've been charged, the Crown would then have an obligation 

to establish contrary evidence that contradicts what the person 

indicated. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, with the changes, wouldn't it be 

possible that it would become a little more complicated, or the 

process of selecting or informing jurors may become delayed?  

Because if I'm not mistaken, registered or certified mail, if it 

isn't picked up within a matter of . . . I'm not sure what the day 

period is . . . automatically goes back to the sender whereas 

regular mail could just sit in the post office for a determined 

period of time.  There must be some guidelines that would be 

followed up on, I would think. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am advised that . . . Well first of all, let 

me say that in a number of different legal situations today, they 

are moving to ordinary mail as opposed to certified mail.  This 

is happening in other cases as well.  I also want to say that the 

intent is for the whole process of jury selection to start sooner 

so that if there is any delay because of ordinary mail that it 

doesn't actually hold up the process. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Madam Minister, what process would then be 

followed?  Say a person's out of province for a while or out of 

the country.  And even in the winter-time, we know many 

people tend to be away for a month at a time, maybe two 

months at a time.  Is there a process or do we have a process in 

place that recognizes people who tend to be away so that you 

can follow up and speed up the process of selecting a jury? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well what would happen in a case like 

that is we would expect the sheriff to use his or her common 

sense.  And if the person isn't there, obviously they're going to 

be aware of the situation when they attempt to get in touch with 

that individual.  And I think in a situation where people are 

away for winter months, it'll just be the common sense of the 

sheriff that applies in a case like that.  And if the person's not 

available because they're away, they obviously haven't received 

the mail and therefore wouldn't be charged. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank the minister 

and her officials.  And we trust that as we move further through 

this legislative session we will have the same type of 

co-operation, and certainly the same quality of effort put into 

bringing forward straightforward Bills that we can work 

through as easily.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, I too would like to thank the 

opposition for their co-operation and the officials for the help 

they have given us.  And they actually have been on stand-by 

for some time so we really appreciate their help.  Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that 

the Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2000) 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Wills Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to promote regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair: -- Mr. Minister, will you please introduce your 

officials.  And I might say we're dealing on page 80. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay, the officials are the same as 

they were the other day; in fact they're seated in the same 

places.  Beside me is the acting president, Don 

McMillan.  Next to him is Barry Hilsen, the assistant 

vice-president of human resource services.  Norman 

Drummond is sitting immediately behind Mr. McMillan.  He's 

the corporate comptroller.  Immediately behind me is Rob 

Isbister, director of financial planning. 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I guess it's about 10 days since we started SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) but it was 

so long ago that I did have to go back through Hansard and see 

what questions you did answer and which ones you didn't 

answer.  And actually we did quite well, Mr. Minister.  We had 

some good answers, except I guess you and I kind of had a 

little . . . we didn't agree on the people that had been eliminated 

or lost their jobs or fired or whatever. 

 

We had a little disagreement there on what date you could give 

us.  And I'm going to be asking you that question tonight, for a 

firmer commitment when you can give me that answer that we 

discussed the other day on . . . And I realize it can't be 

tomorrow or the next day or a month from tomorrow, but I 

don't want it open for a couple of years like you . . . or for the 

end of the session. 

 

So I'm going to be asking you that later on, but I'm going to 

start with a series of other questions, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you could provide a list of all advertising done by the 

department since November 1, '91.  I'll see what you have and 

then I'll tell you the different ones that I want. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- While the officials are reviewing 

their notes to see if that's . . . how readily available that is, I'm 

going to ask one of the pages to take across to the member, a 

file.  It contains the responses to all of the undertakings which I 

gave you the other day. 

 

I just want to point out for all members present that this was a 

courtesy which we in opposition almost never got.  It was very, 

very common to have members opposite give us undertakings 

which were never fulfilled.  I remember writing letters to you 

people when you sat on the treasury benches.  Months later, the 

next year, we'd ask you for undertakings of a year ago.  You 

never completed them.  I just want it noted, Mr. Member, that 

we complete our undertakings within a week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, while they're looking up 

some of that information I'd just like to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll pass it on by page.  This, the 

officials believe, is all the advertising that was done.  They 

obviously haven't had time to check the records, but that is 

their belief that that is what has been done since November. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, these are just 

figures here.  I'd like to ask if it includes the following, because 

I wouldn't know what it all includes.  Because I want to make 

sure that this is included. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

Now what I am saying, Mr. Minister, is does it include the 

production and distribution of the direct mail, pamphlets, 

news-letters, print ads, broadcast ads, speaking tours, public 

displays and exhibitions?  I'm giving you a lot at once here but 

I want to know.  We'll go back and go over it one at a time.  

Promotional items such as pens and key chains, media 

relations, and all other communication vehicles, all these things 

-- are they included in this advertising? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer is they are not because 

we haven't spent any money on those things.  The advertising 

which you got is virtually all tender calls and routine 

departmental advertising.  Things you mention there have not 

been done by the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You're saying that there's been no 

news-letters, no print ads, none of this has ever happened, just 

never happened since November.  Is that what you're saying, 

Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

All right, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we'll accept that, that 

there's been absolutely . . . all these things I've mentioned, that 

they haven't done.  And I thank you for the response here. 

 

But I want to respond.  It was nice of you to get up and make 

that few remarks that we're getting all this information to you 

so quickly; that we never had this happen under the other 

government. 

 

Well now giving me a remark like that doesn't just make me 

too happy.  Because I was minister of Crop Insurance for three 

and a half years, and if you could ever find, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can't get anybody to listen here.  We're either 

into Estimates or we're not.  Mr. Chairman, the members 

opposite asked tonight if we can hurry this along and get it 

done in a few hours.  If we're going to have all this heckling 

from the back rows and we're going to have all this 

yack-yacking, I can tell you, we'll be here a long time.  And I 

mean a long time.  And if you can find out, when I was 

minister, if I held any information back, well then go back in 

the books and show me.  You'll have to show me.  These are 

fine for you to make these accusations -- that you never got any 

information, ever, from the departments when you were in 

government.  Now that's a pretty broad accusation, to say I 

never got any information -- because you did get information.  

Because we'd still be here if you hadn't have.  You didn't quit 

until you got everything you wanted. 

 

(2015) 

 

Now let's just see how you're going to respond when we get 

finished asking questions.  Maybe like for after you making 

that remark tonight, maybe we'll hang on here for days and 

days of questions and see, Mr. Minister, if you can respond as 

quickly as you did here.  But I have to peruse through this 

information and I can't do it and keep asking you questions.  

We'll turn it over to some of my other colleagues after a while 

while I go through this. 

Because just handing me a package and saying, there's 

everything you asked for . . . I'll tell you whether it's everything 

I asked for when I see it.  And I take your word for it that you 

probably did. 

 

Can you, Mr. Minister, provide a list of all trips paid for by the 

department since November 1, 1991 whether in the province or 

outside the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Are you speaking of trips, ministerial 

trips, ministerial travel?  I just wasn't sure of the scope of the 

member's question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I will repeat it again.  Provide 

a list of all trips paid for by the department since November 1 

whether in the province or outside.  That would be the entire 

department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can undertake to provide that to 

you.  We don't have a list here in the Assembly.  And I so give 

the undertaking. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

It's going to be hard for all these . . .I want to include a bunch 

of questions so it's best if they got it out of Hansard.  Because 

if you can't provide it tonight, then you'll be able to get it out of 

Hansard in the morning because I'm going to add these 

particulars to that: the names of all persons on the trip, 

indicating which persons were paid for by the department and 

which were not; a breakdown of the costs of each trip by 

person including transportation, meals, accommodation, and 

any other cost; destination, dates, and purposes of each trip; the 

method of travel and the name of the travel supplier; name of 

hotel or other institution that provided accommodation; the 

results of each trip, including a copy of any tangible evidence 

showing a benefit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's the kind of questions that I 

want answered. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  We will undertake to provide 

that.  I will venture to say it's all going to fit on one side of an 

eight and a half by eleven too.  There's been very little travel. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, can 

you tell the committee -- and I'll be asking this as well vote by 

vote when we get to it -- whether or not the department has 

spent any money in the 1992-93 fiscal year that we're being 

asked to include in the '91-92 fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps the member can give us 

some explanation of how such a thing might occur. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll add this to it and it might 

help you.  And can you ensure the committee that all the 

monies being requested in the supplementary Estimates and the 

main Estimates that is attributed to the '91-92 fiscal was 

actually used before March 31, 1991.  And further, if you 

choose to make the expenditures prior to March 31, assure us 

that the product, services, or obligations were actually and 

really received, consumed, delivered or executed in the 

1991-92 fiscal year.  Don't 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

ask me.  You tell me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer to your questions is yes, 

of course you may . . . the member will understand, your 

veteran member will understand, that we would include the 

supplementary Estimates when we use the word Estimates in 

general terms.  But the answer is yes, as long as you include 

supplementary Estimates. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, will you be providing that in 

more detail to me or is that you final answer for the whole 

thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If all expenditures taken into the 

Estimates were for things actually used or received in 1991-2, 

my answer was yes, it was all used. There is no further detail to 

be provided, I don't think. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you said you don't think.  Now 

are you real sure?  You're not asking your officials.  Be real 

sure of that, because you know, you ended up like you did 10 

days ago. You would say that several times -- this didn't 

happen, and then you'd say afterwards, I'm not sure.  You said, 

I think.  So be sure how you think it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- When I think it, it's so.  I say to the 

minister, it is so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is the department 

making payments into RRSPs (registered retirement savings 

plan) on behalf of any individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, could you inform this 

Assembly if any of the ministerial staff or any department 

heads have credit cards. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes they do, as a matter of 

departmental policy, utilize credit cards and are issued credit 

cards in some cases. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you tell us who has credit cards and 

who hasn't?  I don't mean the individuals, but that's left pretty 

loose, how many.  I don't expect you to say the exact individual 

that has them, but what people in your . . . how many 

individuals in your personal staff and how many in the 

department.  I don't want you to give names. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there aren't any credit cards 

issued in the name of any individuals.  That practice was 

stopped.  The credit cards are now all in the name of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  They're 

basically just for fuel -- basically to purchase fuel. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, could you provide a list of all 

persons who have cellular phones for which the department is 

responsible, the supplier of the phone, whether the phone is 

rented, leased or owned. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We'll have to undertake to get back to 

you on that.  That's . . . we do not have that information with 

us, and there will be some field employees who will have them 

and be permitted to use them in connection with their work.  So 

we'll have to 

undertake to get that to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, while they're doing that . . . I 

think in this case with the cellular phones we need to know the 

purpose of why they have them and the person that has the 

phone.  I think in this instance we'd like to know of cellular 

phones, the individual that has them and the purpose why they 

have them.  And also a breakdown of the cost associated with 

the phones since November 1 of '91 -- a breakdown of the cost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can provide that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Could you, Mr. Minister, 

provide a list of all persons who have lap-top computers for 

which the department is responsible for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're going to have to undertake to 

provide you with that as well.  They're not a large number.  

There are a large number of desk-top computers, but not a large 

number of lap-top computers, but there are more than we 

would safely be able to give you orally.  So we'll have to 

undertake to give you that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, how long . . . the last few 

questions I've asked you, you said you could provide it, how 

long is it going to take to get this information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This information won't take long.  

We got back to you in a week last time, and I wouldn't imagine 

it would be a lot more than that.  This won't take long. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you also provide a list of the fax 

machines that the department have and are responsible for, the 

locations of the machines indicating whether the machines are 

situated such that they are for general use or for use of one 

individual.  In the offices, or whatever, are they for the use of 

an individual, or how many you have, or are they just for the 

whole department, or how many do you have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Once again, it's a very short list.  But 

to be on the safe side, we'll supply it to the member in writing. 

 

We are supplying the number of fax machines which are for 

departmental use . . . for the corporation's use.  This 

corporation supplies fax machines to all the government.  I 

assume that's not what you want within the scope of these 

Estimates.  What you want is the fax machines which are 

supplied for the use of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'll add some 

more questions to that question.  And you'll have to take it from 

Hansard too, because it would be pretty hard to remember that.  

I just want this added to it.  Seeing you're coming back with the 

answers, as I said before, best to get it from Hansard. 

 

If there is fax machines for one individual, we'd like the name 

and the title of that individual, not if they're for the department 

use and for a group of people.  But if they're just for one 

individual, whether each machine is rented, leased, or owned; 

the name of the vendor; the date the 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

machine was obtained; a breakdown of costs associated with 

the machine including long distance, service contracts, lease, 

rental, and purchase payments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are no fax machines assigned 

to any individual. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, what about televisions, VCRs 

(video cassette recorder), camcorders, and other audio-visual 

equipment including production equipment for which the 

department is responsible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again there are no televisions, 

camcorders, or VCRs assigned to any individual. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well on this one here, I didn't say 

individual; I'm talking about the department.  Is there any 

televisions for the department, VCRs, camcorders, and other 

audio-visual equipment for the . . . including the entire 

department, not individual.  Just that one question was, back 

there, talking individual, not this one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are a very few.  Again this is 

going to fit on a very small piece of paper but just to be certain 

we got it accurate, we'll supply in writing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Although there are 

other questions I have, I'll be waiting for information that you 

said you'd be able to supply. 

 

Would you be able to provide a list of all the contracts, verbal 

or written, which are not of an employment nature to which the 

department is a party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's impossible to supply a list of 

all verbal contracts.  That includes a great variety of different 

undertakings.  The answer is we're not able to do that.  There's 

no . . . I mean your question is incapable of being answered. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, we'll narrow it by . . . I said verbal 

or written.  That's what the question was -- verbal or written.  I 

didn't say it had to be just verbal -- verbal or written. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, but verbal contracts includes a 

wide variety of contracts of different degrees of formality.  

Unless you can narrow the scope, I don't think we can give you 

that answer. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, if this government is giving 

out so many verbal contracts that they can't even count them, I 

think we better stop here and get serious.  We better get real 

serious because I've heard more talk about verbal contracts and 

people with verbal . . . Even their salary ranges are verbal. 

 

Now you said that there's so many . . . If you've only got a . . . 

Why would you ever in the department any place have a verbal 

contract?  Why would there ever be a verbal contract?  I ask 

you verbal or written, and if you haven't got any verbal, then 

say you haven't got any and then answer me about the written 

ones.  But if you have verbal, I want to . . . Somebody has to 

know, somebody in the department.  You're not going to fool 

me that you don't know exactly how many verbal agreements 

there are.  If 

you've got 10 or 2,010, somebody has to be able to tell you 

exactly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- By the very nature of the term, verbal 

contract, it's very informal.  Every time somebody pulls up to a 

service station and asks for some gas, that's a verbal contract.  

You asked this evening for some different information -- a 

perfectly valid interpretation of the word, verbal contract, 

because each one of those is a verbal contract.  The term, 

verbal contract, is too vague and too indefinite for us to be able 

to respond to your question.  The member has to be able to 

focus his question a bit better because it's incapable of being 

answered as it is now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'll read what I have here in its entirety and 

maybe it'll help us.  I'll start over again, Mr. Minister, because 

maybe I wasn't fair to you by being so abrupt. 

 

Provide a list of all contracts, verbal or written, which are not 

of an employment nature, to which the department is party, if 

the contract is not bound by confidentiality provisions.  A true 

copy of the contract.  If the contract is covered by 

confidentiality provisions, provide details of those provisions 

and to the extent that the provisions allow, the names of the 

parties to the contract, the purpose of the contract, all costs 

associated with the contract.  Was the contract obtained by 

tender?  Was the need for the service or contract advertised?  

Now I . . . 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member opposite, this 

hasn't changed since October 21, 1991.  There are hundreds of 

thousands if not millions of contracts entered into by this 

government every year, most of them by this particular Crown 

Corporation.  Your question is going to . . . If we just gave you 

all the written contracts, your question would elicit tons and 

tons of paper.  It really would.  Every requisition . . . You 

would want a copy of virtually every piece of paper put out by 

the department.  Your question is far too vague and general.  If 

you can focus it so we know what information you really want, 

we'll provide it.  But your question is simply incapable of being 

answered. 

 

As for verbal contracts, I think I made that clear, it includes a 

wide variety of different commitments, most of them extremely 

informal and there is no list of them kept.  So I just don't think 

we can answer the member's question; you have to be more 

specific. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't think 

we're understanding each other, if a government has, you said 

millions of contracts, now that's a lot of contracts.  All right 

you're the ones that when you went out on the campaign trail 

said the books will always be open, the public will know 

everything, now maybe we'll have to get more . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . maybe we'll have to, but I don't think we 

should have to, I think you should be able to supply, I said 

verbal or written and the written contract should not be a big 

thing for you to supply.  You got a written contract, well just 

give me an idea so then maybe I'll know where I'm at.  Get 

your officials to tell you what's approximately the volume 

we're talking about in written contracts.  Are we talking 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

about hundreds or thousands or millions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Certainly the latter.  We're not going 

to need more officials.  If we're to answer the question, we're 

going to need a bigger room.  You can't get it all in here.  Every 

time we requisition something, and it's done every day, it's 

repeated many times a day by branches, by the head office, 

that's a contract.  Every time we have any dealings with 

anyone, that's a contract.  The question is simply incapable of 

being answered and if we were to go to the expense it would be 

incapable of being used by you.  It's an unmanageably large 

amount of information.  You'll have to be more specific. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

you and I both know that we aren't talking about requisitioning 

of pencils and pens and that sort of stuff.  I fully realize that 

you can put whatever kind of legal jargon you want on it.  I 

will give you a number, Mr. Minister, I think that will help 

your process.  How many contracts, either written or verbal, 

above $10,000 would you enter into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes that is a more manageable figure.  

That in fact, if my memory serves me correctly, is the cut-off 

for Public Accounts and this isn't included in Public Accounts 

but we think we can provide it with some exceptions which the 

member will understand.  The one that comes to mind is real 

estate leases.  We don't provide those and the member from 

Arm River and I had a discussion about that the other night.  

But except for real estate contracts and other contracts of a 

confidential nature, we can supply that.  We can supply that 

information as if SPMC were a line department. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, how many contracts would you 

have with the confidentiality provisions attached to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The only one we can think of is the 

real estate contracts.  There may be something . . . I just 

pointed out to the member that when we review these 

extensively, there may be something else come up.  We're not 

undertaking to break the law here, but at the moment the only 

one that comes to mind is real estate leases. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, does your department have any 

personal services contracts either written or verbal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I was distracted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Does your department have any personal 

services contracts which are written or verbal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are very few.  And I'll give the 

member this undertaking.  We will supply to you any personal 

services contracts which we would be required to supply under 

the freedom of information Act.  Perhaps that would serve as a 

fair guideline for what ought to be supplied.  We'll supply to 

you anything we're required to supply in the freedom of 

information Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that you would 

have some which you think are outside the freedom of 

information Act? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just do not know at this point in 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would hope, Mr. Minister, that we 

won't have to use the freedom of information Act to access that 

information. 

 

Mr. Minister, on your tendering policy, do you have any 

tenders occurring now or in the past which would be by 

invitation only? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, has your agency done any 

polling in the last seven months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, within your agency there was a 

program called "coaching for results" in the past.  Can you tell 

me if that program is still in existence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can't because none of the officials 

have ever heard of it.  The member probably knows something 

about the operation of this department that we don't, but none 

of the officials here ever heard of the program. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Minister, I had some of your 

duties mixed up.  That was to deal with another area that . . . 

Mr. Minister, there have been a number of firings associated 

with your agency in the last seven months.  Can you tell me 

who conducted those firings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The list of . . . I don't know if the 

member was here the other night when we were doing 

Estimates.  We referred to the list of February 5.  And if your 

member has that list or if you can get it from your colleague, 

the first four of that list were vice-presidents.  It was done by 

the acting president.  The balance were done by their 

immediate supervisors. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm aware of the list of 

individuals that you provided.  Were there any legal counsel 

involved along with the department officials in those firings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, there was a law firm.  To 

anticipate your next question, who were they?  Olive Waller 

Waller. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what type of fees were paid to 

that particular law firm for conducting the firings of the SPMC 

employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Very modest, but we don't have the 

figure here.  We would have to undertake to provide the 

member with the fees. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I understand two of the 

individuals that were fired were later rehired, that your legal 

people had messed up in some way, that you had to rehire 

them.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  To the best of the 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

knowledge of the officials -- and the member from Thunder 

Creek will realize I came to these responsibilities on March 23 

-- but to the best of the memory of the officials, there were no 

rehirings. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, my information is that two 

individuals, one by the last name of Coppin and one by the last 

name of Brown, were fired and later rehired.  Is that true, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We were dealing with the list of 

February 5.  We now understand the member is dealing with 

the lay-offs which occurred as a result of the budget.  These 

were not firings in the normal sense that one uses that term, 

dismissal for cause.  These were lay-offs.  That's not normally 

referred to as a firing.  At any rate, there were the two that you 

mentioned which were given lay-off notices and then their 

services were retained. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I suppose we all can put 

interpretations on, and I suppose these two individuals weren't 

involved in your ID of the department that I'm sure your party 

did when you did your firings previously. And I am glad to see 

that people did come to their senses over there and rehire good, 

working civil servants. 

 

Mr. Minister, given that these individuals were rehired, for 

whatever reason you wish to attach to it, can you absolutely 

confirm to this legislature that there weren't any mistakes made 

with any of the other individuals who were either fired or, as 

you say, laid off for various reasons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  The member will understand 

that, with respect to those which are in scope, there is the 

normal provisions under collective bargaining for bumping and 

so on.  But these were the only two who were eventually 

reinstated in their positions, I guess one would say. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Would you be able to 

give us an explanation of which parts of your capital program 

in Health, for example, which hospitals you're funding now, 

which ones you moved into the Department of Health, which 

ones are you still retaining, if any, through the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the member will be aware that 

as of . . . one of the recommendations of the Gass Commission 

was that that type if capital funding be moved to the 

departments.  And those third-party capital provisions are now 

all in the departments and there is none of them left in SPMC. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There's none of them in Health?  None of 

them in Education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The opposite's true.  There's none of 

them in SPMC.  They've now all been moved to the line 

departments. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, that's what I meant.  They're moved 

over.  Are there any other of the capital projects that are at all 

involved with Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, either in Justice or in Rural Development, or any 

of the other agencies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there are no other third party . . . 

no other capital projects of that third-party nature. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that I would assume then that the College 

of Agriculture was moved over for that same reason from note 

in the budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So we will have to take a look at each of those 

in its own capacity.  Did you have any write-offs of any of the 

volumes in Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

of any of the hospitals?  Any of the level 4 care facilities or any 

of the other schools?  Or anything like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Does the member want the detail of 

how this was handled?  As the member will know, the Gass 

Commission recommended this be done and we did it in total.  

I can give you the detail in writing if you want it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like the detail in writing of each of the 

capital projects that you moved over and the details of whether 

there was a Consolidated Fund write-off.  I can ask the 

departments when I get to them but from your side of it, when 

you transferred this to the department, whether you had a 

write-off or who had the write-off, and if there was one, who 

took it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We don't have that here, but we will 

undertake to provide it to the member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That will make for some very important 

discussions, Mr. Minister, and we would like to have that 

available to us when we go into each of the departments, so if 

we could have an undertaking for that to be done as quickly as 

we could, then we would be able to deal with each of the 

different departments in the framework that they are attached to 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can have that for you in a matter 

of a very few days.  I asked the officials if it were now 

compiled, I would have it faxed over to the building tonight but 

it's apparently not in that state but you will have it within a day 

or so, I'm told by the officials. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have any other buildings that you own 

that you have done that?  For example, you made the decision 

to do that with level 4 care facilities, health care, hospitals and 

schools, what about other facilities?  Liquor Board, do you own 

them or does the Liquor Board own them?  Have you got any 

other facilities that you own that are in that same position, that 

you still own and haven't written off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there were some loans for tenant 

improvements.  All of those were all written off, and that 

problem was finalized. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Tenant improvements, you said . . . 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

(inaudible interjection) . . . right that's what I said.  Tenant 

improvements, can you give me a list of all of those that you 

wrote off and the value of them in determining what the 

volume of that would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we'll give you that on the ticket. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you write them off in '92, '93 or '91-92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They were all done in the last fiscal 

year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I find that one interesting 

because there is another reason why you bloated your deficit in 

1991 and '92 and that'll be very interesting to find out how 

many dollars that really is.  So on these tenant improvements, 

how many tenant improvements, how many of them did you 

have to do in the province and how many did you write off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we just still do not have that level 

of detail.  We'll have to provide the member with the list. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On a normal basis on vehicles, do you have 

the same depreciation kind of focus that you take on a normal 

annual basis where you remove your vehicles and have that 

depreciation also accrue to that year or how do you deal with 

those functions on planes and cars and different kinds of 

vehicles like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm told it's depreciated over a 

five-year rate and that the system hasn't changed since the 

members opposite were on the treasury benches. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister be able to give us a 

volume on that on the loss carried forward or the volume of 

depreciation that is taken for all of those?  And then also can 

you add into that the depreciation, if there is any, on the 

buildings that you still own, and if that is accruing on an annual 

basis also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can give you the, certainly the 

global figure with respect to the vehicles.  I'm told the global 

figure with respect to buildings may not be immediately 

available.  It is under discussion with the auditors I gather -- the 

facts of which I don't thoroughly understand.  But the global 

position on that may await the completion of the discussion 

with the auditors. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The question then becomes, why is it different 

to do it with health care facilities on one hand, and the Walter 

Scott Building on the other hand, or the T.C. Douglas Building, 

in that same context?  Why is it necessary to have the 

capitalization go to the department when you don't do that with 

the Walter Scott Building, and the Department of Agriculture 

and Rural Development use that facility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the comments made in the Gass 

Commission were that these were . . . that there was no income 

out of which these loans could be repaid except the 

Consolidated Fund.  And therefore, they didn't truly represent a 

legitimate capital project, that this would 

not truly represent the financial picture of the province.  Thus, 

in keeping with the Gass Commission, these were transferred 

to the line departments to carry rather than have these third 

parties carry them. 

 

The clear effect, according to the Gass Commission, was to 

allow members opposite, when they were in government, to 

understate the province's debt by allowing a significant portion 

of the debt to be borne by third parties, supposedly outside the 

system. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, do you have any 

idea whether you supplied any of the money in the warrants 

that were given in April and in May, that they paid for anything 

prior to the for the '91-92 year?  And did any of that 

depreciation or any of that occur?  Because the member from 

Arm River asked you a question that was similar to that, but I 

would like to know that for sure. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer to your question is no.  

While we've been talking, the officials have also got together 

the amount of the global figure on depreciation which I will 

now send to the members opposite. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a few quick 

questions for the minister with respect to the building that used 

to house the Saskatchewan Pension Plan in Kindersley.  I'm 

wondering about the . . . What is the length of the term of the 

lease? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am told the term is five years. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- And, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us 

what the annual cost of that lease is. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The officials are struggling to find 

the answer, which should have been easier to find than it has 

been.  If the member has some other questions, we'll have it in 

a moment.  Perhaps the member might go on with other 

questions he might have. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'm wondering what the government's plans are 

for this building now that it's being . . . the lease is being 

terminated. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As yet undetermined.  That's the best 

answer I can give the member.  We have not yet made a final 

determination as to what will be done.  I'm not being coy.  

That's just the only answer we have.  We haven't yet finally 

determined that. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Do the plans then include transferring of other 

government departments there, or buying out the lease with the 

gentleman who owns the building, or will you be looking at a 

whole range of options, or what? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the only proper answer I guess 

is the latter one -- a whole range of options is the best answer I 

can give you. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- I appreciate your finding those answers for us.  I 

think it's important that we recognize that the Pension Plan was 

moved into the town of Kindersley approximately a year and a 

half ago, and I think it's important that we recognize that there 

is not only a cost to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan holders by 

having their 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

pension cut out, but there is also a cost to the people who own 

that building.  I think it's important that we know that cost. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry.  I didn't catch the member's 

question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- That was fine.  We were just wanting to be sure 

we had that figure as well as the complete terms of that 

agreement, to recognize the fact that there is a cost associated 

with closing the place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in the 

figures that you gave to the member from Arm River on the 

volume of space divided by the cost, does that include the 

vacant space too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to give me an estimate of 

the volume of vacant space that is there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps I can interrupt the member, 

I'm sorry, to go back and answer the question that had been 

asked by the member from Kindersley.  The figure is $5,112 

rent per month. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- We're talking about vacant space, okay.  And 

I'd like to know the percentage . . . or the volume of vacant 

space in relation to that number that you gave to the member 

from Arm River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The vacancy rate is 1.4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to go back for a little bit more detail on a question that my 

colleague was discussing with you earlier, and it has to do with 

the credit cards that are issued. 

 

In your statement you stated something to the effect that you no 

longer issue credit cards in individuals' names, and you seemed 

to imply that that allowed for some sort of indiscretions to 

occur.  And then you said that all credit cards are now issued in 

the name of the corporation.  And so I would like you to 

explain to me how that better serves the interests of honesty or 

accountability, and who in fact has authority within the 

corporation now -- or outside of it -- to use those credit cards 

and to sign for them.  And you might as well, at the same time, 

allude to the limits of the amounts of dollars that are allowed to 

be charged to these credit cards.  Is it $25 a month, or a year, or 

$5 million a year, or what kind of figures are we looking at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The difficulty with credit cards issued 

in the name of individuals, as I understand it, is the statements 

may come to the individuals and not to the department.  The 

credit cards are now all in the name of the department.  

Virtually the only credit cards that are issued in the name of the 

department are for fuel purchases.  I'm informed that the 

purchase allows up to $100 at any given time, after which they 

must phone in for permission to spend more than that at a given 

time. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Does that suggest, sir, that you could go 

to 10 service stations and charge up $99 at each one on one 

particular day, and not have to call in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think that's accurate.  I don't know 

how you burn that much fuel in one day, but I suppose that's 

accurate.  That's why credit cards are not used extensively 

except for the purchase of fuel.  As I said at the beginning, 

these credit cards we now have are virtually all for the purchase 

of fuel.  And that's why credit cards are not used extensively, is 

because they are not easy to control. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I certainly have to agree with you that this 

wouldn't be easy to control if you can allow people to run 

helter-skelter with something that they don't even have their 

own name on and charge up any number of gallons of 

petroleum, for example, that they may put into their own car or 

the neighbour's car or the neighbour's wife's car or somebody 

down the road's car.  So you think you've missed the point of 

getting your credibility into this thing with what you've done 

there. 

 

My next question, sir, goes on to the subject of contracts that 

my colleagues were dealing with.  And I'm wondering, for 

example, in the Department of Rural Development which was 

discussed, are rural farm service centres owned by the 

corporation or are they leased from private individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The rural service centres are both 

owned and leased.  In some cases there is rural service centres 

within existing government buildings, so of course that's owned 

space.  In many cases they are leased from a wide variety of 

different landlords. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, could you supply me with a list 

of the names of those people that lease property to you and the 

amounts that you pay in lease fees to each of those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm forwarding to the member a list 

of the spaces and the payees for the space.  You can conclude 

in all cases that the payee is also the lessor. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  My next question 

is, in the area of these private contracts with private 

individuals, are there provisions within the contracts to have 

those leases broken if you decide to close the farm and rural 

service centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As the member will know, you have 

a lengthy list of spaces there in front of you.  The general rule, 

however, is that there is no provision to terminate the contract 

if the space isn't used.  We would have to negotiate some 

arrangement with the landlord.  There's generally no right to 

give notice if the space isn't used. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I may have read this rather quickly, but I 

don't see any terms of the lease in terms of length of time.  Is 

that also on this list or am I missing it or can you provide it for 

us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We can provide the term of the 

leases. 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That will be 

greatly appreciated.  Have you to date sent any termination 

notices to any of the people involved with either the leased 

facilities, or have you any indication of destroying any of the 

buildings that are owned by the government or knocking them 

down or eliminating them in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I am told that we have not 

terminated any leases. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  It would be a 

great relief to the people in the rural areas to know that none of 

these actions have been taken, and that their farm service 

centres are for the moment intact.  I have this list here but I 

don't have the numbers.  Are all of the rural service centres 

listed on here, did you say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am told that's a comprehensive list. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was wondering, 

does the department have any oral employment contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No we don't.  If the page will come, I 

can give you the . . . What I tore off that sheet was the rent per 

square foot.  The member will know that that's not . . . We don't 

normally provide that.  I will give you the expiry of the leases.  

It was just torn off because you hadn't asked for it when I gave 

you that list. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'm wondering if the minister would be able to 

provide for us the contracts of the president and vice-president 

of the corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there are no such contracts.  

There is no president at the moment, and the vice-presidents 

have not been replaced either. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there an acting president that has a contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's an acting president but no 

contract has been signed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How does he get paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm told by the acting president that 

he hasn't been yet.  I'm told by the acting president that he 

hasn't yet been paid. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that's not 

humorous, and I'm sure he's not working for nothing. 

 

What's he going to get paid the first time he gets paid in lieu of 

the services that he has rendered to this point?  And if there are 

others in the corporation that have the same kind of flippant, as 

the minister portrays it, cursory of employment contracts, then 

would you be able to provide them for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  I didn't mean to be flippant.  

The contract has not yet been finalized.  When it is, it'll be 

made public.  The policy of this government, as the member 

knows, is that all of these contracts are made 

public. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The acting president is going to have a 

contract.  How many vice-presidents do you have under 

Property Management Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- None. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, the heads of the departments within the 

SPMC, the ones that manage certain areas, are they part of a 

overall . . . Can you give me the titles of each one of them and 

their position in relation to the chain of command, or if you 

want to put it that way, for the department heads or the branch 

heads. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll ask the page to assist me.  There 

are no contracts with those people.  I'm giving you a list of the 

names, the positions, and the salaries, which the member may 

treat with confidentiality, I'm sure. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- When does the minister anticipate that his 

acting president is going to have a contract? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We expect it to be finalized in a 

matter of days. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Will he then be making him the president? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well that doesn't necessarily follow.  

He's being appointed as acting president.  That's not the same 

as being appointed as president. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Does he report directly to you, and if so do 

you have any people in your staff in your office who he reports 

to, or you report to have that individual in your office report to 

you, about the affairs of the Property Management 

Corporation? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, he reports directly to the 

minister -- through the board to the minister, the member will 

understand. There's a board of directors to whom he appoints in 

a technical sense.  There's nobody in my office who is 

interspaced between myself and the acting president.  He 

reports directly to me. 
 

(2115) 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, so when I call your office about 

some things in relation to Property Management Corporation, 

who do I have there that I talk to?  Do I talk to the acting 

president or do I try and get a hold of you?  Who do I talk to in 

your office that would handle that for me? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have some very able ministerial 

assistants, the details of which I gave the member the other 

night and will give you again if you want them.  If you called 

my office you'd probably be put in touch with one of the 

ministerial assistants who would in turn get the information 

from the acting president. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you have made, and other 

ministers have made, some very significant points about the 

responsibilities of the individuals and their relationship to 

Crown corporations.  Now I'm going to ask you this question.  

We had people in our offices who were 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

paid for by Crown corporations but who also responded to 

information under Crown corporations.  And if you don't have 

anybody that is . . . you have a department person being paid 

for by the department and not responsible to the SPMC, then 

you are just as much in error as we were if that's what you're 

saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I didn't understand the member's 

question.  The practice of having people in ministerial offices 

or reporting directly to ministers but paid for by Crown 

corporations has been brought to an end by the Premier.  That 

practice no longer exists in my office or at any other minister's 

office in this government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's precisely the point I wanted to make.  

Then you are curtailing the work of the Department of Finance 

by requiring that someone in the Department of Finance be 

responsible for SPMC matters.  When I phone you about 

SPMC problems, then you refer that to your Department of 

Finance paid employees, which is just as much in error as what 

you said that we were doing when we had Crown corporations 

paying individuals and they were supposed to report for service 

to the minister. 

 

You can't do this one way or the other.  It's equally 

misappropriating funds, if you want to put it that way.  And 

when you say that you're not doing it because we did it the 

other way does not make that wrong and you right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite were clearly, 

according to the Provincial Auditor . . . went well beyond what 

the member just described.  It is apparent from the special 

report of the Provincial Auditor that the former government 

was concealing workers who worked for the government by 

putting them in the Crown corporations.  In an effort to ensure 

that that comes to an end and that this government is fully 

accountable, all the staff for the ministers' offices must be in 

the budget of a line department so it will appear in Public 

Accounts. 

 

I'm surprised the member doesn't understand the problems 

which the Provincial Auditor found with your system.  You 

were concealing the size of the staff which served ministers, 

and your government was also concealing other expenditures 

which properly ought to have been disclosed.  That practice has 

been brought to an end.  There are some of my staff are in the 

Department of Finance and some are in the Public Service 

Commission.  All that detail was given to the member from 

Arm River.  But we do not have staff in the Crown 

corporations because the existing accounting system doesn't 

properly disclose them.  And we have given our undertaking to 

the public, and to the members of this Assembly, that we will 

follow sound accounting practices in disclosing our 

expenditures. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the point is:  

who are they working for?  Are they working for the minister 

and the Department of Finance or are they reporting and 

working on behalf of problems that occur in the province when 

SPMC has a problem?  And that's the point that I want to make. 

 

If SPMC has a problem and I phone your office then you 

should disregard it and allow me to go to SPMC and have 

the answer there.  But what . . . and that's not the right way to 

do it in my view and nor probably in yours.  However, your 

Department of Finance is paying for that responsibility when it 

isn't the Department of Finance's responsibility.  It is SPMC's 

responsibility.  And that's the point that I want to make. 

 

And the auditor can say what he wants about where the item is 

identified.  And I have no problem identifying it and where it 

should be.  However, the important part is who pays for what 

service?  And that's what he identified and I don't think you're 

any different than we were in relation to the Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I'm sorry to hear the member 

say that because it means you entirely missed the concern 

expressed by the Provincial Auditor.  The concern expressed 

by the Provincial Auditor was that you were concealing -- in a 

fashion that approached the fraudulent -- you were concealing 

expenditures in ministers' offices. 

 

The argument of the member opposite is ludicrous.  You seem 

to suggest that if a staff person in my office is responsible for 

relating to a commission . . . and are they paid for by such a 

person.  I would have a very large office if I did that.  I have 

responsibilities for the Gaming Commission.  I have 

responsibilities for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan).  I'm the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation.  I have responsibilities to 

Finance.  I have responsibilities to the Public Service 

Commission.  Is the member suggesting I need a separate 

executive assistant for all those responsibilities, all paid for by 

the separate agencies?  That's ludicrous.  That's ludicrous, Mr. 

Member. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now you're beginning to understand the 

position that I take in this, Mr. Minister, and that is, that is, that 

the service needs to be paid for by the demand placed on that 

from your office.  And that is the point that I think the auditor 

makes.  The second point that I believe that he makes is that it 

needs to be accounted for.  And that is also a part of what needs 

to be done.  I have no quarrel with that.  But what I have a 

quarrel with is you saying that the Department of Finance shall 

pay for SPMC concerns that are raised by constituents or 

provincial items and that is where I think that you're just as 

much in error if you're going to do it that way, because then 

Property Management Corporation is not carrying their 

responsibility in relation to your department and your office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Nothing they can do, Mr. Chairman, 

about what the member opposite thinks.  He is no doubt going 

to continue.  All I can say is, no one else thinks as the member 

opposite thinks.  The Provincial Auditor doesn't think that way, 

neither do other accountants who specialize in the public 

service or most significantly, the taxpayers do not think that 

way.  I can't do a thing about what the member opposite thinks.  

Let's just say he's experiencing a fair amount of independence 

and individualism in that particular line of thought. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, if you would go back to 1982, 

you would find that there were many, many times 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

when you had people working in Sask. Potash Corporation.  

You had other people working in there who were paid by 

departments and vice versa.  So it isn't new to the system and 

the accountability has to be there but it's not new to the system, 

I want to point that out to you too, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would have to take a moment to 

turn my mind through the ministers' offices prior to '82; I don't 

think that was the practice.  I think everybody who worked in a 

minister's office was accounted for by a line department, the 

name and salary appeared in the Public Accounts.  I'm virtually 

certain that's the case.  If the member can cite some examples, 

I'd be interested to hear it, but I don't think that was the 

practice.  That was a practice which members opposite devised. 

Why? Because you wanted to conceal the staff which you had 

working in the minister's offices. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a few more questions I'd like to ask you.  I wonder if you 

could provide a list of all employees that have been reclassified 

since November 1, '91? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I didn't catch the member's 

question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, provide a list of all employees 

that have been reclassified since November 1, '91. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There have been no reclassifications 

made since November 1, '91. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you 

provide a total cost to the department for all days for which 

employees were paid but during which employees did not 

actually work, including all earned days, special days off, sick 

leave, any other paid days off, breaking down the totals by 

category and the reason for the days off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, the member has a capacity to 

ask some very, very broad questions.  There's a thousand 

employees.  Virtually everyone of them since November 1 

would have some of those days off, etc.  I completely fail to 

understand what the member's . . . what information the 

member's trying to elicit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, those are the kind of questions 

you used to ask us in details .  . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes, you certainly did.  You talk about asking for information 

tonight that may bring in . . . you said it wouldn't hold in this . . 

. information, the answer is this building wouldn't hold them.  

You made that statement. 

 

I can remember in 1965 when your government was in 

opposition and the Liberals were in government, you asked 

some questions that were so . . . you thought they were so 

ridiculous but the government of the day, the Liberals, supplied 

it.  And I have the headlines in the paper yet, where they 

backed in a truck outside the buildings and had Jack Harrington 

and Jack Nichol and seven or eight people brought in boxes 

and piled right up against the wall back there. 

Now we're not asking you for anything as ridiculous as that.  I 

know that cost a lot of money.  But you just try to make light of 

it all the time when we're asking something that's a little bit out 

of the ordinary, and something that I want to know. 

 

And I don't think that it's a big thing because I think we have to 

get control on.  You've tried to get control on everything you 

could in the last six months.  You've cut back and cut back and 

cut back.  You've fired people.  We talked about it in question 

period today, where we've got so many people on 

unemployment and how we're going to handle it and how we're 

going to even police it.  And it got to be . . . We've got no 

answers on it. 

 

And we know that you fired so many people and we've got a 

list of the people you fired here.  And we know there's going to 

be such a list of people on unemployment that you're going to 

have to have maybe boxes of names to bring in here and it'll 

pile up because these people are going to be on unemployment.  

They haven't got any jobs. 

 

So I just asked you . . . I think it's important that maybe we 

look at . . . If you think it's funny to cut people off medicine 

and what not that affects your everyday health, if you think 

that's funny and still you can pay people . . . If you want to cut 

back, why don't you make people . . . change your positions 

and not have these days off?  Don't give them that.  Let them 

work that 10 days. 

 

And if they're going to take that nine days off, or work nine 

days and take one off every two weeks then let them not get 

paid.  So I'm asking how much it costs.  That's shouldn't be a 

big thing to come up with. 

 

And I'll repeat it again -- the cost to the department for all days 

of which employees were paid but during which employees did 

not actually work.  Now that's not a big question to ask, Mr. 

Minister.  What did it cost your department for people that took 

a day off and got paid and didn't work? 

 

So maybe you want to cut back on people like this, and let 

them go without salary or work 10 days rather than cut 

somebody off their insulin that may die in 48 hours.  Now get 

serious. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I am serious when I tell the 

member that that's a lot of work.  It cannot be compiled.  I am 

informed by the officials it cannot be compiled by the 

computer.  It would have to be done manually.  It's an 

enormous amount of work given the staff the size of what 

works in the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  

I would have more sympathy for the member if I could make 

any sense out of the question.  But, as many of the questions 

asked by the member opposite, I simply cannot make any sense 

out of them.  I do not know why you want it. 

 

If the member could make some Estimates, but I don't know 

why the member wants the cost of every day off, every sick 

day, every earned day off.  To provide you with a precise 

calculation is a lot of work. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister, let's do it this 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

way.  I realize that it's a big request to ask.  But I guess you can 

understand why I'm asking.  Cause I'm asking the question, I 

want to know how much it's going to cost.  Cause maybe it's 

where your department and all departments in government can 

start cutting back. 

 

(2130) 

 

We talked about it today.  People on social welfare that are 

offered jobs and won't work, and you're still going to pay them.  

If you got people in your department and all departments in 

government, if they're going to take a day off, not work their 10 

days a week, will you at least answer me this?  What about the 

philosophy of it?  Look into it and see if you can save some 

money by cutting back on these people.  You fired hundreds of 

them.  They're going to be thousands of people lose their jobs 

over your tax grabs and your cut backs.  They have no jobs at 

all.  So if you want to save a few dollars, maybe we have to get 

serious and everybody that works for government maybe 

shouldn't be. . .they have their regular holidays, but maybe they 

haven't got a day off at one in every ten days. 

 

Just see if you're interested in looking at that philosophy.  And 

I realize it would be asking you a lot of . . . I'm trying to get out 

a philosophy here more than I am to ask you to do some work 

that's impossible.  I just say, give me your response to the 

philosophy of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With respect to the in scope, these 

were negotiated as part of a collective agreement.  And my 

personal philosophy I am not sure is terribly relevant to that 

process.  They were part of a collective agreement.  As I 

understand, the member refers to earned days off, sick leave, 

that's all been part of a collective agreement.  And if we felt 

that -- and I emphasize the word if -- if we felt that a useful 

way to save money, it's not something we could unilaterally do, 

couldn't unilaterally cancel those things.  The contracts would 

have to be renegotiated. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've . . . the union 

people and the working class people in Saskatchewan are the 

mainly the people that elected you and they're all angry at you 

now so you might as well have them a little angry, more angry, 

and open up the collective bargaining and take a look at it.  

Because I'm sure that they're the type of people that would 

want to have this province survive.  So maybe we have to look 

at it. 

 

If you're a person that got fired completely . . . You got a list of 

people we're going to talk about a little more here, a list of 

people up and got fired and laid off.  Now what are these 

people supposed to do?  What are they supposed to do? 

 

If you're 40 to 50, middle-aged person, 30 to 50-60 years old in 

this here province and you all of a sudden got no job, and you 

worked for government for 20-30 years or whatever and you 

got house payments, and you got maybe 15-20 years to go yet 

before you can get any pensions, what are they supposed to do?  

In a year when their unemployment's used up, they're going to 

be on welfare. 

So if you want to cut back, maybe you should get serious and 

look at these things.  You've done everything else.  Even my 

doctor in the town of Craik has been molested by the 

Department of Health saying they can't have . . . he had to tell 

his senior citizens that come for treatments to the doctor's 

office: they're told that I can't have you come so often because 

the medicare system says cut back, cut back.  We don't want 

you to get sick.  You can't afford to get sick. 

 

So maybe you can take a serious look at it.  I mean you've cut 

back and cut back.  And I'm just talking abut a philosophy here 

that maybe you and all your departments . . . you're in the front 

row of Cabinet and you've been there a long time and I don't 

think it's wrong to ask you to . . . we didn't do that when we 

were in government, I understand that . . . but you're trying to 

cut back, and we realize we're in a serious financial state. 

 

Maybe we have to have the people in this government, people 

that work, people that work for a living in Saskatchewan, 

maybe have to have the philosophy that I was brought up with, 

and the older people here were brought up with: a day's work 

for a day's pay. 

 

So I'm just saying maybe these people that work nine days and 

get paid ten and then still get their holidays -- you have to look 

at it a little different matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the long-distance telephone 

bill for the department for '91-92 was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The officials are looking for that and 

and will have that in a moment.  Let me say with respect to 

member's . . . the question before the last one.  Your question is 

a good one and your point is a good one.  Members of this 

government have a responsibility to achieve administrative 

savings first before we cut back on programs and before we 

increase taxes, and we certainly intend to do that where 

possible. 

 

It will be . . . members of this government will be reviewing 

their departments and the Crown corporations in as thorough a 

fashion as time will permit in order to try to achieve 

administrative savings.  The public have asked that of us and 

we intend to achieve that. 

 

Some things will be easier than others and I don't know 

whether we'll specifically be able to . . . whether we'll 

specifically negotiate any changes with respect to earned days 

off.  But the general thrust of your question is a very sound one 

and I suspect a great many people in Saskatchewan would 

agree with you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate your remarks and I'll just wait now until you have 

that answer to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The long-distance charges for '91-92 

were $251,007. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Do you have a projected 

long-distance bill for '92-93? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The budget forecast for '82-83 is 

$280,418. 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, do you have a list of all 

committees, if any, created by the department or in which the 

department participates, including each instance?  Do you have 

anything like that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just so we understand the member, is 

the member interested in committees within the corporation or 

you want a list of all the committees on which we have a 

representative sitting?  I'm not entirely sure I understood the 

thrust of the member's question.  Perhaps the member can tell 

me his concern and we'll try to answer it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Any committee that's been created by the 

department, especially since November 1, any committee 

created by the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There have been none created by the 

department since November 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Has the department got a list of boards or 

commissions or agencies?  Do you have a board or a 

commission or agencies that are appointed under this 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The only board which is appointed by 

myself, or which I play a role in, is the board of directors.  It's 

the only board which I play any role in.  There are internal 

committees within the corporation but I'm sure the member 

doesn't want that.  There are internal management committees 

but I'm sure the member doesn't want that.  The only board that 

I participate in is the board of directors. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Can we have a list of the board of directors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They're all members of Executive 

Council.  The member from Canora, the member from Melfort, 

the member from Regina Plainsview . . . Got that wrong.  Yes, 

I'm sorry, Regina Dewdney, and the member from Churchill 

Downs. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So, Mr. Minister, the board of directors are 

all elected officials.  They're not just party members or 

whatever.  They're all elected officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Actually, they're all members of 

Executive Council at the moment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  That's fine.  A question I was 

going to ask the other day when we were talking, Mr. Minister, 

about space, and different contracts you have throughout the 

province for all the different space  

_- rentals and you own and what not -- has there been any new 

space purchased or rented by any new individual since 

November 1, '91?  Any new agreements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll ask again for the assistance of the 

page and we'll forward to you a list of leases which have been 

renewed or which are new.  They're all on the same page.  

There are, I see, three leases which are new: one, a garage in 

the village of Pense; and a couple of buildings on the 

University of Regina campus for the Saskatchewan Police 

Commission.  Those are the new ones. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now we'll go 

back to . . . Just to close off here.  We're not going to be too 

much longer, Mr. Minister. We'll finish this here quite easily 

this evening. 

 

I've just got a few more questions, going back to where we 

were when we started 10 days ago.  I asked the question, Mr. 

Minister, and this is one of the questions that you supplied me 

with tonight, the written information, a list of all employees, 

fired, laid off, retired, or otherwise terminated since November 

1, '91.  Now the list of names, Mr. Minister, are they the ones . 

. . Which list does that match, because it doesn't say what jobs 

they had.  There's about approximately 80 or 90 names on that 

list and I don't know where that matches with, what jobs or 

whether they connect with the list that you gave me the other 

day.  It just gives positions without names, because the list you 

gave me the other day only had names of positions, and I didn't 

ask you for the individual names, which I was going to tonight.  

And I was wondering if this matches that or is this a different 

group.  Because this says, space, listing of employees who left 

employment since November 1 -- the list that you gave me 

tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That includes the people who were 

terminated on May . . . who were laid off on May 7.  I 

incorrectly used the word terminate.  They were given their 

notice.  Some would bump and go down and so on and so forth.  

The list you got tonight included the list of May 7 and it also 

included the list on February 5. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right. Just, Mr. Minister, so I have it 

straight, the list that you gave me 10 days ago or whatever day 

it was, a week ago Friday, it started out with customer services, 

23 in scope on the top of the page.  That's the list that you gave 

me that day you had prepared, and it's postal clerk 2, part-time, 

and then AM 3, area manager, permanent.  Is that the list that 

matches? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, Mr. Member. I'm told by the 

officials it does not include the list of May 7.  This is a list of 

people who have quit for whatever reason.  They may have quit 

because their spouse has left the community; they may have 

found better employment.  This does not include the list of 

May 7.  This is the names of everybody else who left for 

whatever reason. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, there's approximately 80 

names on here and I see some of them even appear on some 

other lists.  There's some of the names that still appear on lists 

that were laid off or abolished.  Now are you telling me, when 

people are so short of jobs in this province, that . . . are you 

really telling me that 80 of these . . . these 80 people -- 80 or 90 

here; I didn't count them exactly, but approximately -- that they 

just up and quit?  That they weren't encouraged to quit?  That 

you haven't got a secret contract with them or done something?  

Because I just can't hardly believe that 80 people just up and 

quit.  I know people get moved around when you have a 

change in government -- which you people have done a 

masterful job of moving people more than any government I've 

ever seen -- but I can't see people that just up and quit on their 

own. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to add as well, for the benefit 

of the member opposite, this includes temporary and casual as 

well.  It also includes the people who left on February 5.  What 

it does not include is the people who were laid off on May 7.  It 

includes everybody else -- permanent, temporary, casual, for 

whatever reason they left. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Let's just talk about one name on here.  I can 

ask the question: what was Art Battiste?  Was he permanent or 

was he temporary or what was he?  His separation date was 

November 5, '91. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- He was part of Fair Share 

Saskatchewan.  When Fair Share Saskatchewan was 

terminated, so it was the need for Mr. Battiste's employment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, when I go through this I see quite a 

few names.  So that's not . . . no connection then, Mr. Minister, 

of this list that you gave me a week ago.  So now can you 

supply me with the individual names of the list given me 

before, like . . . what it starts out with postal clerk no. 2.  Can 

you supply the list of the names that matches each one of 

those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Dealing with the list of those who 

were terminated May 7? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, the paper you sent over tonight, it 

said: the attached list is the list of the abolished and terminated 

positions with associated salaries.  And the question that I had 

asked, that you were responding to, the salary and benefits 

associated with each position including related costs.  Now 

that's what's in that page and that's the same one that you gave 

me.  It's a repeat of exactly the same one you gave me 10 days 

ago, that you gave to me tonight.  But there was never any 

name attached.  So is that page there, Mr. Minister . . . There's 

about 4 or 5 pages, maybe 80 or 90 people, and I have no 

names.  I can't seem to match up the names.  Can you supply 

the names for that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The list which the member refers to 

was in response to a request that we provided you with the 

salaries which were attached to the positions which were 

abolished.  That's what this is.  There's no names attached.  

This simply provides you with the salaries which were attached 

to the positions which were abolished. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, but there must have been positions 

abolished, but you got it right down to clerk 2, and area 

manager, there's clerk typist 3, technician 1.  There must have 

been a name there at one time or another.  Maybe the position 

is abolished.  Well then give us a list of when that position was 

abolished, a list of the personnel that filled those positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry.  I was talking to the 

assistant Government Whip here about the night's proceedings.  

Can the member ask his question again? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Minister.  Now you say these 

positions are abolished and they're not there any more. 

But there must be some name attached to these positions 

because you've got each one's exactly what the salary was -- 

postal clerk 2, postal clerk 1, property officer, area manager.  I 

mean it's all itemized and their exact salaries.  There have to be 

a name attached if there's all these . . . There has to be a name 

attached to these.  So maybe they're not there now, it's an 

abolished position, but I need to know what the names are of 

each individual. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I refer the member to our discussion 

the other night and our comment about our undertakings with 

respect to the May 7 abolitions.  I simply refer you to those 

discussions.  We gave you an undertaking.  I think it's all . . . 

We gave you some undertakings with respect to the names to 

be attached to the abolished positions.  I honestly think it's the 

best we can do. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I'll take you back to Hansard 

when the question was asked in the first place when you sent 

this list over.  This is the list that you happened to have with 

you when we first started Estimates 10 days ago.  I said I'd like 

to have, Mr. Minister, a list of all positions that have been 

eliminated in departments since November 1, 1991.  Now I 

didn't say names, I said positions, and that's the list that was 

provided. 

 

So now what I'm asking you for is: the names attached to each 

one of those positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think I told you the other night 

our limitations in providing that information.  The week hasn't 

changed that.  We will stand by the undertakings we give to 

you the other night and we cannot expand upon them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Minister, that's got to be 

ridiculous because we were talking about what you said you 

could have a problem in supplying is where these people go to 

after they've lost their job if they got . . . because I've made it 

very clear that I don't believe that all these people lost their 

positions, and are just going to be left, hung out there to dry. 

 

I know that the people that had a PC card would be left, hung 

out to dry.  And maybe that's the way it should be.  But I know 

that your own card-carrying people, and there were lots of them 

among these, that they're going to find jobs throughout 

government some place.  And that's the position, and that's the 

question that you weren't able to answer and you said it would 

take awhile.  And I can understand that.  But there is no excuse 

for not knowing, who belongs, what individual belonged to the 

first name, postal clerk 2, part time, Saskatoon, $23,743 and it 

goes on through for about 80 or 90 names. That has to be 

impossible for you not to be able to attach a name to that and 

that's what I figured 10 days ago.  You didn't want to attach a 

name because there's where your politics is hit right in this here 

paper. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say something to the member 

opposite so we can resolve this.  We could probably give you 

the name of the person who was in the position on the morning 

of May 7, just as long as you understand that those people 

didn't necessarily leave the public service, 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

as that term is generally understood.  They may have bumped 

and gone elsewhere.  But if the member wants the name of the 

person who was in the position on the morning of May 7, we 

can probably supply you with that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that wasn't 

even my question.  So that means that you didn't answer my 

question right or give me the proper information.  You misled 

me 10 days ago, because I didn't say anything about May 7.  

You're the one that's adding May 7 in.  My question was 

clearly: a list of all positions that have been eliminated in the 

department since November 1 and that's the list I have.  I'm not 

worrying about whether it's May 7 or March 10 or December 6, 

it's everyone and that's supposed to be them all. 

 

Okay if this, Mr. Minister, if that's the list, since November 1, 

then I want the last name, the name that's attached to each one 

and every salary and position because it should be very easy.  

It's got, I can go through, they've got where they were at:  

Moose Jaw, it's got clerk typist 2, part time, Moose Jaw; clerk 

3, permanent, telecommunications, Regina, and the salary 

beside each one.  You'd have to have a name.  You couldn't 

have sent these cheques to them.  It would have been 

impossible.  So these are the names that I want. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I'm going to give the member 

what he wants.  It's the name of the person who was in the 

position at the time it was abolished.  I think that's what he 

wants.  However we are now bereft of pages.  Perhaps I could . 

. . no I can't.  Well I'll have to get it to you when a page returns.  

Well I'll give it to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, when we were having 

discussions here the last time we were on, approximately 10 

days ago like I said, I asked you . . . one of my first questions 

was, of these lay-offs, firings, abolishing positions, how many 

of them were political firings?  And I ask you again, as a 

minister that's under oath in this House, to say there was no 

political firings, or there was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, there were no political firings.  

These were job abolitions done with a view to achieving the 

best administration in the corporation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know who you're 

trying to kid.  Because I say you're misleading the people in 

this House and you're misleading everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Because you're not going to make me believe 

that these 10 names here that I'm going to read to you . . . It 

says, other SPMC terminations for the months November, 

December -- right after the election.  And it says their salary 

and the date of their separation:  Art Battiste, RoseMarie 

Frischholz, Dennis McKenzie, Norma Morrow, Ron Dedman, 

Rod Hiltz, Gord Dobrowolsky, Claire Watson, Wayne Walker, 

John Bradley. 

 

Are you going to tell me that these people aren't political hacks 

that worked for us, political people?  Well of course they were.  

Of course they were.  These people here were card-carrying 

Tories, nearly all of them; I think nearly every one of them.  

And rightly so.  And they worked for us and I make no bones 

about it at all. 

But I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, that you said, your 

Premier said very clearly when he was Leader of the 

Opposition that we'll never do such things; we will never, ever 

have a political firing; we will never have a political hiring. 

 

Now I give you 10 names and you cannot stand up in your 

position, Mr. Minister, and tell me that you didn't mislead me 

10 days ago when you said there was no political firings.  And 

you've done it again today.  So you have absolutely misled this 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No I didn't.  You asked me the other 

night if any portion of the May 7 firings were political.  I said 

no.  This list, if the member would read the title, it says, other 

SPMC terminations for the months of November, December 

'91.  The first four were employed by Fair Share Saskatchewan 

and there was no need for their services when the program was 

abolished.  The balance, well I can only refer and thank the 

member for his assistance in answering that question. 

 

As you have described them, they were your political hacks.  It 

is normal on a time of a change in government that political 

assistants change with the government.  It goes with the 

position.  But you did not ask me the other day about any 

changes that might have occurred at the time the government 

changed.  You asked me about May 7 and that was my answer.  

These were people who were terminated at the time the 

government changed.  The member is confusing -- and that's 

the most charitable thing I can say about your question -- the 

member is confusing the two different terminations. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I have never 

mentioned . . . you'll never find in Hansard where I ever 

mentioned a date, May 7.  I said eliminated, fired, or otherwise, 

since November 1.  And you very clearly . . . because you can 

read the Hansard here and find out yourself, because it says 

here that there were none. 

 

I asked you the question, "a list of all positions that have been 

eliminated in the department since November 1", and, Mr. 

Minister, I did not say May 7 or March 5 or December or 

whatever.  And your answer was very clearly that there was 

none. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, I'm glad that we finally, after sitting in 

December . . . we sat in this House in December, we sat here 

for a month now and finally we have a minister that admits . . . 

He has admitted that they're firing the political people. 

 

So why . . . I ask you this last question.  That's the last question 

I'm going to ask you.  Why did you mislead this House in 

saying that there was none, no political, no political firings 

when you have fired people every department, you've fired and 

you've fired political hacks.  And you just finished saying well 

it's kind of the procedure of government that you do that when 

you change government. 

 

Well now, what is your Premier going to say when you finally 

admitted what they would never admit for months here.  They 

would never admit it, that . . . oh no, we just reorganized . . . 

You said it right in here.  It's in Hansard. 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

All we are doing you said to the member from Arm River is 

reorganizing.  And there isn't going to be any of them are going 

to be back in that reorganization.  Then you get up and 

qualified yourself and said well there's four or five of the 

directors or vice-presidents that may be around for the 

reorganization. 

 

(2200) 

 

So you will not fool me, Mr. Minister.  You will not fool the 

people in this Assembly.  You will not fool your 

back-benchers.  You will not fool the voters in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that you have been firing like I've never seen.  

I've never seen anybody that's out and just blatantly fired 

people. 

 

You are so terrible at it and you've got the people . . . I met 

people out there in Arm River that said well you know they've 

fired people, but why are they firing their own.  Out in Crop 

Insurance I know some card-carrying NDP that got fired.  But I 

followed it through and they've got a job again.  You're fooling 

people. 

 

And that's what I told you 10 days ago here, that these people . 

. . And we're going to watch these names.  We're going to 

follow these names through.  If you think that you're going to 

get away with leaving it for one or two years to tell me where 

these people went . . . cause we're going to follow them and 

your card carriers are going to come back into the position.  

You're not that foolish.  But you fired a few NDP, you done it, 

and your own people, just to make the public think well we're 

just down-sizing. But watch them come back in. 

 

And you've admitted tonight, and I thank you, Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for admitting that we do once in a while get rid of 

some hacks.  You finally admit it, and I thank you for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, I'm pleased to end this 

discussion on such a harmonious note. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, other than just the 

disagreement we've had about the political hirings and firings 

and where they're all going to go, I think we've still had three 

or four hours of good Estimates.  And I will say to the minister, 

thank you for giving your information.  And I do believe that 

your department will be supplying the rest of the information. 

 

So this is my last remark, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that I 

thank you, Mr. Minister, other than holding back for about 

several hours on this business of political firings, and I do 

thank all your people that's here, the people that's here helping 

from the department, your assistants, and I thank them.  And I 

thank you, Mr. Minister, for being very straightforward and 

straightforward in saying yes, we do fire some political hacks 

once in a while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to thank the members opposite 

for what I thought were a useful set of Estimates.  We explored 

a number of issues and I think many of them would have been 

a concern to the members' constituents. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we're aware, Mr. Chairman, that these are the 

Estimates of . . . which include a period of time when 

those members were in office.  Some of my colleagues who are 

not here at 10 o'clock at night, may have some questions. 

 

We're therefore I think going to adjourn these Estimates and 

call PSC (Public Service Commission) Estimates.  And we'll 

deal with the PSC Estimates now, but I think we're going to 

technically adjourn these and not go through the subvotes. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I was going to suggest to the 

members opposite that the officials will be here momentarily.  

Why don't you begin with your questions.  We will reserve 

them if it's something I need assistance for; if not, I will answer 

them.  Why don't the members begin with their questions and 

we'll begin the exchange. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

we'll just do a few of these here questions that will be . . . but 

you'll have to get them from your department.  I understand 

that.  We'll start with . . . maybe you'll know this, Mr. Minister 

-- your own staff that's responsible for Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What I'm going to give you is the 

rsums.  I will just wait a second and welcome the new 

chairman of the Public Service Commission to the Assembly.  

I'd ask members to join me in welcoming the new chairman of 

the Public Service Commission, Shiela Bailey, who has joined 

me. 

 

I will provide the member with the rsums of the people who 

are working in my office.  It provides not only their names but 

also their qualifications.  And we once again do not have a 

page.  As soon as a page comes back I'll send it over. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I can't get through that now.  

Does that include the people in the department that report to 

you, or just in your office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's just the staff in my ministerial 

office.  It includes three people paid for by Finance and three 

people paid for by the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Is there duplicates here, because I haven't 

had a chance to look at those names, Mr. Minister, that are 

responsible for SPMC also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I explained to the member when 

we were doing the SPMC Estimates, there's nobody in my 

office who is paid for by SPMC.  Certainly the staff will relate 

to and service the public as matters come up with respect to 

SPMC, but none of them are paid for out of SPMC. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So this is kind of going back to SPMC,  



632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

but SPMC and Public Service Commission, either one or none 

of your staff are paid by those departments or paid by the 

Department of Finance.  Is that right, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Finance pays for three and SPMC 

pays for three.  They divide it equally. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Finance pays for three.  I don't understand, 

Mr. Minister, that you would allow this.  Because I have heard 

this . . . not that it isn't all right with me, and I don't see what is 

wrong with it.  But you condemned the last premier of this 

province when he had his Executive Council paid from other 

departments.  We've found several times where you have had 

people working . . . we found last December that we had a Marj 

Benson who was working for Ruby Vallement and was being 

paid out of Agriculture, and still you condemn us for that.  

Now, is this a common practice in your government that there 

will be certain people in the minister's offices that will be paid 

out of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It isn't common practice, it is the only 

practice.  All the staff of all the ministers are now paid for out 

of a budget of one of the line departments.  None are in Crown 

corporations.  That was the abuse to which the Premier 

addressed himself and which he brought an end to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well that's policy and there is nothing 

wrong with that.  It is just that . . . well, there is nothing wrong 

with it as long as we on this side of the House can follow them 

through to see who they are and where the money comes from.  

Because we were sure condemned when we had someone that 

was paid from another department.  I had staff working for me 

paid from another department.  I was condemned over that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You should have been. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Somebody said, you should have been.  But 

the minister just stood to his feet tonight and said that's going 

to be the new policy.  So I mean, come on now let's be fair 

here.  We don't need back-benchers saying something that we 

were wrong in doing and that the policy of the new government 

is fine.  Now, Mr. Minister, the rest of the department, a list of 

all the positions that have been eliminated in that department 

since November 1. 

 

The Chair: -- Prior to answering the question, if the Minister 

might introduce the other officials that have joined him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As accustomed as I am to my 

responsibilities, Shiela Bailey is sitting beside me.  

Immediately behind Shiela Bailey is Ray Smith.  He is the 

executive director of the employment services.  And Mary 

Kutarna is behind me.  She is the director of administrative and 

information services division. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you seem to be so flippant 

tonight.  And I don't mean to be rude by saying that, but I asked 

you a question.  Your memory don't seem to be very long.  

Maybe you don't want to remember this question any more 

than . . . because that's where we got into a problem in SPMC.  

I asked for a list of all positions that 

have been eliminated in the department since November 1, '91. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Let's respect those who are asking the 

questions and those who are providing the answers. 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm providing the list as given to me 

by the officials. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, so we don't get into that 

problem like we did in SPMC, can you supply the names of all 

these positions -- the names of the individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The officials assure me we can 

supply that tomorrow.  They just don't actually have it with 

them this evening.  They didn't anticipate it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I can understand that.  And also, Mr. 

Minister, when they're getting the names, if we could have a 

job description of each position eliminated, or is that in this?  

No, it's where they work but the job position's not here.  So if 

we could also have the job position, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we'll give you that undertaking. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now let's make this very clear so we don't 

get into a problem again.  The name of the person, if any, 

holding the position when it was eliminated.  So that's what . . . 

we finally did get it straightened out.  If we can have the same 

commitment there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I've already given you that.  

We'll supply that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now, Mr. Minister, it looks like, just 

glancing at this page you sent over, it looks like the numbers 

are quite high here. 

 

I would like to have also the rationale for the elimination of 

each position of this here list you sent over.  The rationale for 

eliminating or firing or abolish or whatever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In the light of budgetary restraints, it 

was felt that those positions were in excess of our needs. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, when you're providing the 

information so things will go quicker, could they have a 

breakdown on it so we know the ones that the positions that 

were abolished, the ones that were eliminated, the ones that 

were . . . the positions were abolished or eliminated, and the 

ones that were strictly fired, and the ones that will be replaced.  

And I'll need the same information if you can follow through to 

see where these people are going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There were no terminations in the 

same way . . . There were no firings in the same way there were 

on the change of government.  There's no equivalent here.  The 

only positions which were terminated was done as a part of the 

budgetary exercise on May 7.  There was nothing earlier than 

that and no 



May 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

firings or terminations here, I'm told by the officials. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Am I reading this paper right, Mr. Minister, 

when it's giving under the different positions, when it adds up 

to these here figures, 154, and 85, 69, 318, 349.  Is that the . . . 

What is the total positions?  Kind of hard to read this paper.  Is 

it 349 we're talking about, total positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now that's a lot of positions, and we're 

going to have quite a job following these through to see where 

they go, but we're going to ask you to do the same thing, Mr. 

Minister. We'll want to know where these people have gone, 

and how many are working for government now, and if they 

got new jobs, or just whatever.  The same information that we 

asked in SPMC, Mr. Minister -- we'll want the same 

information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, I think we can supply that.  I 

think that's a reasonable request.  We'll supply that when the 

process is complete.  The chairman of the Public Service 

Commission informs me she anticipates it will be about three 

months before the bumping process is complete.  When it is, 

we'll supply you with the list of names. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we haven't got much time left 

and tonight I think we'll . . . instead of going on to the questions 

that the departments would have to get information for, I'd like 

to maybe wrap up tonight on asking you about an article I seen 

in the Leader-Post, a month or two ago or sometime this late 

winter, early spring.  Where the students . . . all student jobs . . . 

I don't recall, Mr. Minister, but you would, it's regarding 

student positions and student jobs. 

 

And the article said that if the student had a position maybe one 

or two years or more, they won't automatically be going back 

to that position like they have been in the past.  That it's going 

to start absolutely afresh.  Could you explain what this was all 

about, Mr. Minister, and why that . . . as you recall that article.  

If you could explain what that was all about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What it was all about was, it meant 

was, the patronage . . . it was the raw, shameless patronage 

engaged in by members opposite when they were in 

government.  Students were hired through the ministers' 

offices.  The member opposite will recall -- I think he'll recall 

very well -- how the students were hired.  They were hired 

through the members . . . through the elected members. 

 

As a means of ensuring some degree of fairness -- because 

many of the former students had not obtained their employment 

in a fashion which anyone would regard as fair -- as a means of 

ensuring fairness, the names were chosen at random by a 

computer.  There was by and large no system for permitting 

people who had worked in a department to return there -- that 

was a part of the problem. 

 

And so it is now cleansed.  Another year there may be 

modifications to the program which will allow students 

who worked in a department or worked in a given agency or 

area, it will allow them to return to the area providing they're 

satisfied and the department's satisfied. 

 

Frankly, the system that you people engaged in was so raw, so 

-- I'll use the word -- outright corrupt, that we wanted to bring 

it to an end, and we did.  And the system was done this year 

with fairness and without any patronage involved. 

 

The article to which you refer in the Leader-Post was a 

complimentary article.  And if the member's memory is failing 

him, I'll read the article for you.  It was quite a complimentary 

article. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the minister is 

not going to give his political rhetoric to me and get away with 

it.  Because you're looking at a man, the member from Arm 

River, that has many students that had positions, and you're 

saying that you didn't let them have their jobs back because 

you're going to clean them out.  But I've had students phone me 

for the first time that I ever knew them -- never knew them 

before, didn't know what politics, didn't even have any idea 

what they were -- that, we have lost our job.  And then I'll find 

another person, I'll hear about them, that were my strong 

supporter, and they're still working and have their jobs. 

 

So there was no rationale for what you did.  So don't tell me 

that you just up and said there was no politics.  Because you 

can't tell the member from Arm River that you didn't just clean 

this out, clean this out, Mr. Minister, stop all positions.  

Because you can't tell me that many MLAs, if not all, are 

getting phone calls from their political hacks that, I need a job 

for my children.  You can't tell me that isn't happening because 

it's automatically happened.  It happened to me; it happened to 

all of us. 

 

But I'm going to tell you how the member from Arm River did 

it.  And so don't you tell me that I played politics with my kids 

because I didn't.  If I had somebody in the town of Davidson, 

Craik, Holdfast, as soon as I'd have a student that would apply 

for a job through the Public Service Commission, they would . 

. . I couldn't stop the call.  They would phone and say: Mr. 

Muirhead, is there any way that you can help me get that job?  I 

said, if you've applied, you're either going to get the job or 

you're not. 

 

And I followed that through.  And then when somebody would 

get a job, I would have . . . and I'm thinking of one particular 

from my town of Craik.  A little girl came to me, just got out of 

grade 12 and said, Mr. Muirhead, is there any way you can help 

me get a job?  How do I get a job?  And they worked against 

me.  They were polling captains for the NDP. 

 

And I would not use politics on a child.  I would not do it.  You 

people can scoff me, you can do what you want, but you can go 

to Craik, Davidson, Holdfast, and you can ask.  I would not 

take my politics out on children and students.  You people are 

going to do it because that's why you had this change.  That's 

why you've had the change.  But I can tell you that if you go 

check out, you go check out the people that had jobs in my 

constituency and check out their politics.  Mr. Minister . . . 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1992 

The Chair: -- Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It seems to be 

that if I say something in this . . . I've been here for 14 years 

and as soon as I say something that kind of touches the heart of 

somebody, they get to be an awful noisy bunch.  It's been going 

on for 14 years.  They're a group that can't stand the facts.  

Because we know that we're talking about Mr. Fairness back 

here.  We know the member from Quill Lakes. He used to sit 

over here and we used to ask him, have you got any family that 

hasn't got a job in government?  Have you got any family, have 

you got any family that hasn't got a job in government? 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we know for a fact that this is the 

most . . . We've been watching politics through SPMC, we've 

been watching politics in the Public Service Commission.  

We're going to see it like you've never seen it before. You're 

going to tell me that your president and your workers aren't 

having their kids phone them for jobs.  You got rid of anybody 

you possibly could to get jobs, jobs . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Oh, Mr. Minister, I won't talk the clock out tonight.  I'll let 

you put it on the record right now because it won't be true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I want to read some 

correspondence for the member opposite.  The first is a letter 

which begins: 

 

 Dear Gerald: (It says) How are you all?  (It's in a lady's 

handwriting.  How are you all.)  We spent the winter in 

Calgary and will be there until next spring. 

 

And then it says: 

 

 Our daughter, Carmen and her husband Dean Norrish, good 

supporters of the P.C. Party, have asked me if I would just 

add a note concerning their son Bradley, 16 . . . 

 

The letter goes on to describe in glowing terms both the lad's 

qualifications and the loyalty of the parents, if I may put it that 

way.  And that is dated . . . is undated actually, the note is 

undated. 

 

Then there's a letter signed by one Gerald Muirhead. I think the 

rules allow me to use the name on the letter to one Colin 

Maxwell. I have enclosed a letter from the above mentioned. 

 

 He is interested in a summer position with your department. 

 

 Please . . . consider him for any available position, as I feel 

he would be . . . energetic and enthusiastic . . . 

 

Then there's a letter back to . . . from Mr. Muirhead to Mr. 

Norrish. 

 

 Thank you for sending me your letter regarding your interest 

in summer position. 

 

 I . . . forwarded a copy of your letter to the Honourable Colin 

Maxwell, Minister of Parks, 

 Culture and Recreation.  He will contact you directly in this 

regard. 

 

Then there is a memo from Dolores to Colin Maxwell's office, 

June 8.  It says: 

 

 re: Bradley Norrish.  Resum will go through the system in 

the usual fashion -- Don Pringle and Cy McDonald. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Then the last letter is again dated 

August 4, 1987, signed by one Gerald Muirhead.  I'll just read 

the first paragraph.  It says:  On behalf of the government of 

Saskatchewan, I'd like to take this opportunity to congratulate 

you on obtaining summer employment. 

 

That, Mr. Member, is your system. 

 

The Chair: -- It being 10 . . ..  Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister to 

table that  correspondence so that we can see if this was 

privileged information from individuals through the minister's 

department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We'll relieve members opposite of 

their misery and move that this committee rise and report 

progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If the minister wouldn't mind having his 

officials leave because they are not allowed in when the 

Speaker is in.  You did that the other day already, Mr. Minister, 

and I don't think it's proper for the etiquette of this House. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 

 

 

 


