




















































Hansard: August 06, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2023 

 August 6, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again today, Mr. 

Speaker, I have more petitions concerning the chiropractor 

treatment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to 

the Canadian economy; 

 

that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low 

cost, conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent 

with the true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

that the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more in both dollars and in 

patient disability. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent 

from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed 

for any other medical treatment. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I have four pages.  They are from various 

places in the province.  This one here is Tyvan, Pilot Butte, 

Regina, Swift Current.  They're from all over; it looks like 

about six different places. 

 

The next one is mostly Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker. 

Biggar, Allan, which is my constituency -- several from Allan, 

the constituency of Arm River.  And more from Saskatoon, 

Perdue, and from Kenaston, which is also my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker; from Dalmeny. 

 

This page it looks like all Regina; these are all Regina 

addresses.  Some are just signed Regina.  This page is so full, 

Mr. Speaker, that they went beyond the lines right to the 

bottom of the page.  And there's a couple from Moose Jaw at 

the bottom of the page, and some from Grand Coulee. 

 

And the last page, Mr. Speaker, is nearly all Regina.  And of 

course I left this page to the last because this is where Churchill 

Downs addresses are on this page.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

today to lay before the Assembly, and I'll only read the prayer 

part because my colleague from Arm River has indicated what 

the petitions are about today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we have people on my petitions from 

Saskatoon, a whole page here from Saskatoon; Regina, Fort 

Qu'Appelle, Lemberg, Qu'Appelle, Dysart, Southey, Indian 

Head, Wolseley, Regina, Cupar, Balcarres, obviously Lebret -- 

people from all over southern Saskatchewan -- and the city of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, who have a great deal of trouble with 

what's happening in this particular area. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too will be tabling 

petitions with respect to chiropractic care.  I'll just summarize 

with the last sentence and then inform the House where most of 

these names are from. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have people here, about 50 names, Mr. Speaker -- people 

from Estevan, Carievale, Frobisher, Macoun, Roche Percee, 

people from Prince Albert and district, a page of those, and two 

pages of people from Saskatoon 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

and Martensville, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'll now table these petitions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure as well to join with 

my colleagues in presenting petitions to this Assembly, 

petitions that have been sent in from people from the northern 

part of the province again, as well, asking the government to 

reconsider their actions regarding chiropractic services and 

pray that they would give serious consideration to their actions. 

 

The petitions come in from Saskatoon, a number signed from 

P.A. (Prince Albert), and a number of communities in the 

northern part of the province -- Candle Lake, Mr. Speaker, 

Tessier, Meath Park, and Grandora, Weldon, and Melfort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I humbly present these to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions I'd like to table today.  And as the prayer has been 

read once or twice, I'll bypass that. 

 

These petitions too, Mr. Speaker, are from various parts of the 

province, and they are to do with the chiropractic treatment of 

patients.  They're all the way from Weyburn, Saskatoon, 

Radville.  They cover the province pretty well, and there's 

several -- Bromhead, Radville . . . And I present them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to present a 

number of petitions from petitioners who are concerned about 

chiropractic care in the province of Saskatchewan.  I have 

individuals here from Saskatoon, Landis, Waldheim, 

Martensville, Balcarres, Fort Qu'Appelle, Kelliher, Cupar, 

Leross, Lipton, North Battleford, Yorkton, Leoville, and 

Spiritwood. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 

like to present a number of petitions to the Assembly today, 

dealing with the chiropractic care.  These petitioners have 

underlined one sentence in here that they thought was 

particularly important: 

 

 . . . to cause the government to reverse its decision to 

eliminate full coverage and universal access to chiropractic 

treatment, and that your Honourable Assembly withhold 

consent from any government proposal to discriminate 

against chiropractic patients by charging them fees not 

assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

And the people who have signed this, Mr. Speaker, are from 

around the province -- Regina, Saskatoon, Delisle, Warman, 

Frobisher, Torquay, Alameda, Estevan, Carievale, Bienfait, 

Stoughton, Lake Alma, Macoun, Yorkton, Steelman, Carnduff, 

and Forget.  I present these petitions to the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to 

present petitions today on behalf of the residents of 

Saskatchewan.  The main paragraph, just to outline the need: 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to reverse 

its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal access to 

chiropractic treatment and that your Honourable Assembly 

withhold consent from any government proposal to 

discriminate against chiropractic patients by charging them 

fees not assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 

These come from the towns of Hazel Dell, Togo, the city of 

Regina, Glenavon, White City, Balgonie, Yorkton, Springside, 

Kelliher, Langenburg, Saskatoon, Pelly, Kamsack, Preeceville, 

Canora, Veregin, Invermay, Sturgis, and Churchbridge.  And I 

have several, several pages of these to present today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to deinsure optometric 

services. 

 

 Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this 

year. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the rest of the Assembly 

through you, a person who I believe has a unique association 

with the Assembly.  The father of Judy Gerich, wife of the 

former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) John 

Gerich, and of course my father, Robert Renaud, who is seated 

near the front entrance here. 

 

The spirit of Saskatchewan politics of course is not only very 

evident in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but it's quite evident at 

family reunions in our family.  And of course without the 

advantage of having a Mr. Speaker like yourself, sir, as a 

referee. 

 

I would ask the Assembly to please welcome my father. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you, and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, Robert Hawkins and his son, 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

Collin, who are sitting in the west gallery.  Robert is the 

president and CEO (chief executive office) of Del-Air Systems 

in Humboldt, which is the major shareholder in Bay Trail Steel.  

And he's down doing some business today, and I'd like all 

members to welcome him to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Yesterday all our worst fears about this 

government and what it would do to 60,000 farm citizens has 

been confirmed by the introduction of your GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) Bill.  Your GRIP will void actions 

taken and deny farmers their legitimate right to the judicial 

process. 

 

Can the minister continue to claim . . . how can the minister 

continue to claim that he represents farmers and then allow 

them . . . or deny them, the access to the court or their day in 

court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should 

be aware, as I outlined in the House yesterday, that we have 

introduced changes to the GRIP program consistent with the 

recommendations of a broadly representative committee, a 

committee that the member opposite himself praised in his talk 

just a few days ago, and it is in representing farmers in that 

fashion that we've brought forward the new GRIP legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, everyone knows changes to the 

GRIP were necessary.  But everyone also knows that breaking 

your word is wrong.  And to ask legislators in this Assembly to 

sanction your untruth is also wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you not admit that one of the main reasons 

for your Bill is directly targeted at those farmers who have 

taken you to court so as to cancel any case they may have 

against you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I can say that the allegation 

of the member opposite is not true.  The purpose of this 

legislation is to clarify in legislation things which were very 

unclear in the fashion in which the legislation was originally 

constructed. 

 

It would be very difficult to have any farmer define the 

program that they were in last year from any formal papers 

designed by the members opposite.  And it is in the new 

design, that in the legislation and in the regulations that will 

follow, that the farmers will have a full description of the GRIP 

program as it applies to them in 1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, isn't it true that 

you are so paranoid about losing the case that you are using the 

ultimate club of a Bill in this Legislative Assembly to destroy 

those farmers and their legal case.  Is not that the reason why 

you're doing it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no club being used in 

this legislation.  What this legislation very simply does, in 

addition to implementing the new provisions of the new GRIP 

agreement, is to remove the requirement for an unworkable 

notice provision that was in the context of the 

federal-provincial agreement, an impossibility to work around 

because the federal-provincial agreement provides for a 

mechanism for changing programs inconsistent with the very 

rigid deadline issue the member opposite refers to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, everyone knows 

that without this legislation you would lose in court.  And in 

fact you, as a minister, would have had to testify and defend 

your indefensible actions.  Would the minister not admit that 

the real reason for this unacceptable contract-breaking 

legislation is that you are personally afraid to testify in court? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite I think 

by now ought to be aware that I am willing to engage in any 

discussion with anyone about any issue around this matter at 

any time.  The provisions in the new legislation have to do with 

the implementation of a GRIP program.  They have to do with 

the clarification of carelessly constructed rules, unworkable 

rules by the members opposite -- rules that in fact the members 

opposite themselves ignored repeatedly over the last number of 

years and last year again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, those same rules 

apply in Alberta and Manitoba, and nobody complains there, 

Mr. Minister.  You were afraid, Mr. Minister, you were 

actually afraid that you might actually have to tell the truth in 

court.  And isn't that the reason why you are afraid to go to 

court on this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the provisions of the new 

program, as designed by the farmer committee -- I will repeat 

again, as the members opposite praised the other day -- were to 

do away with some serious errors in the design of the original 

program, errors which encouraged farmering practices which 

are inconsistent with the best management for farms, costs for a 

program that are unbearable by the taxpayers, a process that 

was unworkable.  And the new legislation provides for a 

clarification of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, will you tell 

this Assembly whether you are breaking contracts with this 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan with 60,000 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand the 

nature of the question of the member opposite.  The fact is that 

the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've been listening very 

carefully, and there's too much interruption when the minister 

is answering.  I ask the members to please . . . If you want 

answers, let's not interrupt.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I fail to recognize the nature 

of the question of the member opposite.  If he is raising the 

question of the deadline, I've indicated that the legislation 

provides for the removal of the requirement for the rigid 

deadline and replaces it with a more workable, adequate notice 

provision -- a provision that we actually respected ourselves 

this year in giving notice on March 13, and giving farmers 

originally until April 30 and then till May 15 and later to July 

20, to understand and respond to the program.  The member 

opposite is aware that the Conservative . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, if you aren't saying in that 

legislation that you're breaking the contract with 60,000 

farmers, why are you making everything done prior . . . or after 

1991, January 1, 1991, void?  Why are you doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is 

now on to the subject of retroactivity, I had our officials do a 

little bit of research into the record of the members opposite.  

In the period of 1986 until 1991, the members opposite passed 

70 -- seven, zero -- 70 independent pieces of legislation, all 

with retroactive provisions.  So if that's the concern, I think 

you're being hypocritical. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, by that very statement, Mr. 

Minister, you are admitting that you are going retroactive in 

this legislation back to January 1, 1991.  Is that for the 

purposes, Mr. Minister, of breaking the contract with farmers 

in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite needs 

to understand that it is no great revelation to read from his 

document that there is a retroactive provision relative to notice, 

which I have already discussed with the member opposite 

relative to the reasons for it.  It was in fact . . . the fact that it 

was an unworkable provision, an unworkable provision that 

under the crop insurance program the members opposite never 

respected, and under the GRIP program the members opposite 

began, they never respected.  And it was in fact an unworkable 

provision. 

I remind the members opposite that not only were there 70 

pieces of legislation in the period '86 to '91 that were 

retroactive, that doesn't deal with the ones from your first term 

of office, including the land bank legislation, nor the matter on 

which you did not . . . the members opposite did not legislate, 

which was on the matter of the mortgage protection plan where 

by press release you changed the rights of home owners in 

Saskatchewan and required us to make legislative changes 

later. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, is it not true that 

the real reason, the real reason for the legislation, is so that you, 

the Premier, and the Minister of Justice will not have to be 

called before the court in the public of Saskatchewan to tell the 

truth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I could repeat the answers 

around the question of notice that the member asks, and I will 

if he continues to ask the question. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that he is certainly out of 

touch with the farming community if he believes that the 

question of whether they had two months notice in order to 

understand and accept the program was enough notice relative 

to the two weeks provided for in the document that the member 

refers to. That's not the concern of farmers.  They had adequate 

contact, they had adequate information.  The member opposite, 

if he were in touch with the farmers, would understand that 

income . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Before I allow the next 

question I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition he has 

now interrupted about six times since question period started.  

I've asked the members to please let the minister answer and let 

the member ask his question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

you said on June 23 in the Star-Phoenix, it's reported: 

 

 "I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is.  

But we've got that point, and the public has that point, and 

they can use that to remind the public right up until (the time 

of) the next election and they can still come back to the 

legislature." 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, is it not true that you are going to 

deny an opportunity in a court of law when you, through the 

constitutional debate in 1980, '81, and '82, gave constitutional 

rights to individuals in the province of Saskatchewan both in 

the charter and in the constitution?  And now, sir, your 

government is denying that right.  Is this not true that you are 

denying the right in court to these individuals who are taking 

your government to court? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of the 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

member opposite is astounding when one considers that on the 

question of a provision to clarify a carelessly constructed piece 

of legislation that has a retroactive clause within it, that 

somehow he interprets this into the exaggerated statement that 

he just made.  The fact is that it is from time to time necessary 

to do that in order to correct the kind of misconstructions the 

members opposite made. 

 

I want to say that the issue that farmers are really concerned 

about is their incomes.  The member opposite will understand 

that for 30 years farmers lived with a crop insurance program 

with which they were reasonably satisfied.  Why is it that now 

when they have an increase in their level of crop insurance 

coverage, they are facing income shortfalls? 

 

It is because the federal government has not met their 

requirements with respect to third line of defence.  It is because 

the members opposite and the members opposite in their 

self-righteousness, will not support the call for that kind of 

support to solve the income shortfall of farmers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, you have said over and over in 

the last few weeks and the months that you have worked on the 

constitution on the basis of consensus and compromise.  My 

question to you, sir, is this: is this consensus and compromising 

forcing farmers to go to court against the Saskatchewan 

government and then turning around and denying them access 

in the legislature to that court?  Is that what the constitution is 

all about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

continues to engage in exaggerated rhetoric.  The Bill that we 

introduced yesterday that the members have held up the 

democratic process for about 60 days for, that Bill simply does 

away with the requirement for a very strict time line that was 

repeatedly ignored by the members opposite and that is 

unworkable in the delivery of farm programming in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, 

you have on two occasions in the history of Saskatchewan dealt 

with the constitution.  Twice, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, and 

twice you have said compromise and consensus is the way to 

go in this whole issue. 

 

Mr. Premier, it's time for you to address this problem.  You 

have a minister who is bringing to this Legislative Assembly 

what constitutes an illegal action under the constitution in my 

opinion and many others.  Are you going to continue to stand 

behind that minister in defending something that is not 

legitimate in the constitutional debate? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the minister answers, I have 

now tried to get the member from Humboldt not to intervene at 

least two or three times.  I ask him to please not intervene. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, may I remind the members 

opposite again that the way in which the changes came forward 

to this program were as a result, if I may briefly review history, 

of a program that was slapped together in preparation for an 

election campaign; that had, by the time I got to my meeting 

where I learned about the program, change number 95 and 

number 96 was being made, the changes being made well 

beyond any March 15 deadline; a program that farmers 

expressed a great deal of concern about in its implementation 

and throughout the summer and in the fall, and the members 

opposite are aware because they avoided the meetings where 

farmers expressed those concerns; a program that we then 

followed the legislation for reviewing and established a 

committee, a committee that heard 300 representations from 

farmers and farm organizations who recommended these 

changes to a program which we then implemented in a fashion 

more disciplined than the original construction of the program.  

If the members opposite have a concern with that, then I guess 

they have a concern about good and orderly government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, if you are so 

sure that this is only about individual contracts within the 

province of Saskatchewan, why on three occasions in that Bill 

do you make it so explicit that nobody can take you to court 

anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan based on the Bill 

that is being presented?  Where do you find in your constitution 

that right for you to do that against the rights of individuals in 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to read the newspaper some time and address the questions of 

the content of the program that is here.  I appreciated that 

yesterday you would have quoted one of the local journalists in 

a part of his article, but ignored the part where he said, what is 

the basic, substantive concern of the members opposite relative 

to the program? 

 

The members opposite have completely ignored that in favour 

of playing political games around the issue of deadlines with 

their friends on an issue that . . . on the issue of deadlines 

which the members opposite ignored for a number of years 

before implementing this legislation, and ignored in fact in the 

implementation of the original program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to address this 

question to the Premier.  And I wish the Premier well and all 

first ministers well on their constitutional debate. 

 

My question is with respect to the line of questioning just 

carried on by my colleague and the Minister of Agriculture.  

And I go back to June 23 when we're talking about breaking 

contracts and people's rights.  And I quote, this is the Premier 

of Saskatchewan, the NDP (New Democratic Party) Leader, 

Mr. Romanow.  And it says:  "I worry about contracts . . .  This 

is about GRIP.  And it says, quote: 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights. 

 

And then the Premier goes on to say: 

 

 That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Now we have in this legislature, in this particular piece of 

legislation that we've been debating here for months, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that the fear the people might lose their rights, 

their contract rights.  Union contracts are valid.  We don't want 

them broken retroactively.  Teachers have contracts, nurses 

have contracts, health care workers, construction workers. 

 

Is this kind of legislation that we see, that we've been debating 

here for months, the kind of thing that we could see extended to 

other contracts?  Not just farmers and crop insurance, but could 

it be extended to unions?  Could it be extended to teachers, to 

nurses, to health care workers, other people throughout the 

province?  Is this something that you believe that you could 

extend to all forms of society in the province of Saskatchewan 

now that you've introduced this piece of legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, who 

asks the question, ought to know the answer to the very 

question he asks.  The provisions in the federal-provincial 

agreement very clearly describe the circumstances under which 

changes to the program can be made.  It is obvious to the 

member . . . it ought to be obvious to the member opposite that 

when one is not unilaterally in charge of program changes, 

when in fact it requires the consent of a number of provinces 

and the federal government, that it is impractical to have and 

unworkable to have a fixed-time deadline around which that 

then functions. 

 

The members opposite themselves ignored that deadline last 

year.  In fact they had no federal-provincial agreement until 

September 18 last year.  It is in that context that farmers had an 

agreement with respect to the federal-provincial agreement 

between Saskatchewan and Ottawa to have a program which 

could be changed, and it defined the rights of farmers with 

respect to significant change, that they would then have the 

right to opt out, opt out of the program. 

 

And the member opposite knows that we provided a very much 

enhanced opportunity for opting out for farmers who felt these 

changes were changes that were not changes they wanted to 

participate in.  That is the federal-provincial agreement that the 

member opposite signed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question will go back to the Premier.  You 

can have unions that will continue to work, but they don't have 

a contract.  The contract expired and they've been without a 

new contract.  And it holds, and it continues to hold. 

And then in the newspaper article it says . . . and it's just one 

sentence here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 The (political) stand-off relates to a court action farmers have 

brought against the government.  They were not informed of 

changes to the GRIP program by March 15, as required. 

 

So the contract was valid.  The contract was there.  And 

retroactively now you are going in -- and you've admitted it's 

retroactive -- you're going to say no, anything after January was 

void. 

 

I'm asking, are you in the position now to do that with anybody 

that's had a contract?  And you've other lawyers here sitting in 

the benches in the NDP.  Can you go to them and say no, even 

though you had a valid contract, we can bring in retroactive 

legislation and your nurse's contract can be void on the date 

you pick, or the contractor's contract can be void on the day 

you pick, or a union contract, an SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) contract, a telephone contract. 

 

The Speaker: -- Would the Leader of the Opposition put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is:  what 

is to prevent you, given this Bill and given the way you've 

passed it, and this precedent, from applying this retroactivity to 

every contract in Saskatchewan?  And I believe the answer is 

there's nothing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it's virtually impossible 

to know with certainty what the question is.  But I will try to 

discern what I think the questioner was asking.  I think the 

questioner was asking, is whether or not either this Bill or some 

future Bill or policy of the government is directed toward 

retroactively breaking all contracts in all cases.  And the 

answer to that is no, it's not the policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier.  

Then, Mr. Premier, it must be selective.  If you're not going to 

do it for everybody, then you are going to pick and choose 

which contracts that you can break. 

 

You've decided to break the contracts with tens of thousands of 

farmers.  Will you ever consider breaking the contracts with 

government employees, with teachers, with other farmers, or 

with anybody else that has contracts? 

 

Because once you have done this and justified it in 

Saskatchewan's legislature, then you'll obviously have the 

support of anybody else or any NDPer in here that says it's 

okay, we've selectively picked this group to discriminate 

against, to retroactively change their life. 

 

What's to prevent you, Mr. Premier, from selectively using this 

kind of legislation any place else in society? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is 

guided on this matter . . . I shouldn't say in the same way as the 

former government was guided in it's dealings with public 

policy, but certainly in some ways similar to the way the 

former government was guided. 

 

When the former premier gets up and accuses us of being 

selective and ignores the fact that he brought in land bank 

legislation which specifically broke contracts retroactively, and 

selectively forgets to admit that, is an indication of the sheer 

hypocrisy of their position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, we, as you know, 

never denied people and people on land bank, access to the 

courts.  What the difference is with GRIP is and what we're 

afraid of in your legislation is you have not given the courts a 

role in this retroactive changing of contracts because the 

Minister of Agriculture doesn't have to go to court.  His 

officials don't have to go to court.  His advisors don't have to 

go to court.  People on Crop Insurance, who were fired, don't 

have to go to court.  That's the reason. 

 

Now we want to know if the court has a role in deciding what 

selective people you can apply retroactivity to because we 

always let the courts function in the province of Saskatchewan, 

where you have denied it in this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition's attack rings hollow.  When he argues about denial 

of rights, I remind the Leader of the Opposition that he violated 

one of the most fundamental rights of any democracy, when he 

adjourned and prorogued this legislature about one year ago 

exactly, denying the democratic rights of democratic members 

of this Assembly to even pass judgement on your budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What hog-wash. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the Leader of the Opposition says 

that that is hog-wash.  I say to the Leader of the Opposition, 

your nine years has been marked with a litany of denials of 

individual rights.  Believe me, sir, we don't intend to follow 

your practice or precedent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray: -- To introduce some guests, Mr. Speaker.  

Leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'm delighted to 

introduce to you, and through you to members of the 

Assembly, a group of Voyageurs -- 24 students from the 

Toronto area. 

They are here hosted by Les Benjamin, who's the member for 

Regina-Lumsden.  I believe they've had a tour of the buildings.  

And I'm looking forward to meeting with them later on this 

afternoon.  I'd ask all members to welcome them to this 

Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Power Corporation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 

some short remarks I will move a motion along the lines: 

 

 That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, following 

the adoption of the motion, meet on Mondays, Tuesdays, 

Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 9 a.m. until 11 

p.m. with a recess of two hours at 12 noon and 5 p.m., with 

orders of the day being called at 9 a.m. and routine 

proceedings being called at 2 p.m. each day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason the government is moving with this 

motion, which is similar to motions moved by the members 

opposite in the role now of official opposition, we are at day 60 

of the session. We have many Estimates that haven't been 

started.  In fact we've completed only 2 of 32 Estimates in this 

session. 

 

We have not had a budget passed in this province for almost 

two years because the member from Estevan, while he was 

Premier, ran from the House about this time last year when he 

couldn't get his budget passed.  And the members of the media 

and the public will remember that very well.  He then went to 

the public, campaigned for a couple of months, and then the 

people decided that he should be in opposition. 

 

And what we are saying here is that because of the slowness 

and the filibustering of the members opposite, the lack of work 

that they are accomplishing on a day-to-day basis, we believe 

very clearly that more hours have to be sat here. 

 

And I'm sure the members opposite will agree that in order to 

bring forward the Estimates and in order to have many hours to 

debate the GRIP Bill -- and I've heard them say they want to 

have long periods of time to debate the GRIP Bill -- that this 

motion will in fact get their support in order to allow them to 

put forward ideas and 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

amendments that the public and the members of government 

will want to look at. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member 

for Saskatoon River Heights: 

 

 That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, following 

the adoption of this motion, meet on Mondays, Tuesdays, 

Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 9 a.m. until 11 

p.m., with a recess of two hours at 12 noon and 5 p.m., with 

orders of the day being called at 9 a.m. and routine 

proceedings being called at 2 p.m. each day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 2:45 p.m. until 3:15 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Hamilton 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Wiens Sonntag 

Simard Flavel 

Tchorzewski Roy 

Lingenfelter Cline 

Teichrob Scott 

Koskie McPherson 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Carson Crofford 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Hagel Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

Calvert Haverstock 

Murray  

-- 39 

Nays 

Devine Britton 

Muirhead Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 8 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of this Bill, The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 

1992, (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, is a major 

piece of legislation setting out the powers and the duties of 

urban communities in Saskatchewan.  These include cities, 

towns, villages, and resort villages. 

The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

individual municipalities, and other groups have asked for 

amendments to this Act to update the legislation and to ensure 

it responds to the needs of those who live in these 

communities.  Most of the amendments being proposed at this 

time relate to administrative changes and minor policy 

questions. 

 

Under The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, there are provisions 

authorizing municipalities to enter into agreements with other 

municipalities in groups for various purposes including the 

provision for municipal services.  However, there is no 

reference to agreement with the federal government. 

 

Municipal legislation in a number of other provinces permit 

municipalities to enter into agreements with the federal 

government.  In a recent SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) resolution, municipalities 

requested the authority to enter into such agreements. 

 

In particular, municipalities wanted authority for agreements 

respecting the development of federally owned land near 

airports.  This amendment will thus formally authorize 

municipal agreements with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another amendment will allow taxi licences to be 

issued by public tender rather than by limited to a fee that 

covers only the cost of administration and regulation.  Existing 

taxi licences have a significant market value when transferred 

from one owner to another.  Issuing new licences at nominal 

cost undercuts this, creates opposition in the taxi industry, and 

ignores a potential source of municipal revenue. 

 

This Bill will also permit municipalities, if they so choose, to 

attach conditions to new taxi licences requiring vehicles to be 

accessible for the physically disabled.  This can provide 

another means of providing transportation for the disabled.  It 

could complement existing transit-for-the-disabled services.  

The accessibility requirements would be an option that councils 

could use when issuing taxi licences, but such requirements 

would not be applied respecting existing taxi licences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some urban municipalities perform custom work 

for the residents on their own land.  For example, clearing 

snow.  Currently there is no authority in the legislation for 

performing such work on private land at the request of the 

owner.  Further, there are not adequate provisions for collecting 

charges for such services.  Custom work may be requested 

often in smaller communities where no contractor is available, 

or when it is more convenient or less expensive to have the 

municipality do the work. 

 

The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, includes similar authority 

for custom work.  At SUMA's 1992 convention, delegates 

passed a resolution calling for similar legislative authority for 

cities, towns, villages, and resort villages.  This amendment 

authorizes this practice for urban municipalities and provides 

for the collecting of charges by adding any unpaid charges to 

the tax roll. 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

Another amendment addresses establishment of operating and 

capital financial reserve funds.  Operating reserves are now to 

be created by resolution, acknowledging the greater flexibility 

required for the operating side.  Capital reserves will still be 

established by bylaw.  Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

approval for existing funds will apply only to capital reserves 

and not operating reserves. 

 

At present communities under 1,000 population require 

approval to expend reserve funds.  This is being reduced to a 

population of 500.  This retains a board's supervision of smaller 

centres but recognizes that places over 500 in population must 

employ qualified administrators and require less supervision of 

their financial affairs by the Municipal Board. 

 

Municipalities have requested that the limits on penalties on tax 

arrears be adjusted.  They have requested a sliding scale with 

penalties on arrears increasing as time passes.  By permitting 

the penalty to increase over the year, the taxpayer is 

encouraged to pay as soon as possible.  This Bill provides 

authority for the minister to prescribe maximums on penalty 

rates if required. 

 

Another area where some administrative adjustments are being 

made is respecting tax exemptions.  One amendment will 

clearly provide that exemptions for independent schools are 

only to be for non-profit K to 12 schools.  In the last couple 

years, proposals for development of several non-profit private 

schools have been put forward, and one is now in operation. 

 

The initial intent of the legislation excepting private schools 

was to have it apply only to non-profit schools.  However, 

Justice has advised that regulations cannot be used to limit the 

exemption in this way.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we propose to 

amend the Act to clearly limit this exemption to non-profit 

schools only. 

 

Another amendment relates to taxation on non-reserve land 

held by, or in trust for, Indian bands.  Indian reserve lands are 

exempt by virtue of being owned by the federal government 

and by federal legislation.  However, an existing clause of The 

Urban Municipality Act may be interpreted as expanding the 

federal exemption to exempt non-reserve holdings of bands and 

their holding companies.  These are often commercial in 

nature. 

 

Repeal of this exemption will not affect this tax-exempt status 

of any urban Indian reserve lands.  A similar provision was 

removed from The Rural Municipality Act several years ago. 

 

Another amendment clarifies the existing tax-exempt status of 

the Saskatchewan Legion, making it clear that the exemption 

includes their provincial headquarters building. 

 

In response to a SUMA resolution this year, we are proposing 

to allow the use of the term "councillor" interchangeably with 

the term "alderman" to refer to members in the urban municipal 

council.  This reflects a current status in a number of cities 

already.  Apart from these legislative amendments, there are 

also a few minor housekeeping amendments. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this Bill is an appropriate response to 

requests for legislative changes made by elected municipal 

councils and various groups.  They also reflect our duty as a 

provincial government to help ensure effective local 

government.  I urge all members to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will first of all 

want to state for the viewing public of this Assembly that urban 

affairs are not my speciality.  I've never had a whole lot to do 

with urban affairs, but my colleague who is expert in this area 

has to be away today to open a hospital in his constituency.  

And now that the Assembly has graciously consented from the 

government side to allow him to speak at that function, he is 

going to be there today. 

 

The minister, when she was addressing the Assembly on this 

Bill, says that she wants the government . . . or the people in 

our province to have the opportunity to make agreements with 

the federal government, as is the case in other jurisdictions.  

And on that point, I'm sure that my colleague would probably 

say we would agree that the people of Saskatchewan in urban 

centres should have the same basic fundamental rights as all 

other jurisdictions in our country.  And if in fact what I heard 

turns out to be a fact, I'm quite sure we would support that part 

of this Bill. 

 

The development of airport lands around towns and cities being 

into the jurisdiction of the urban centres involved certainly has 

merit as well, Mr. Speaker.  However I am thinking that there 

might be some implications here that should be researched.  

And so again, we're going to want to take a long, hard look at 

that potential of some things being in there that might effect 

other people. 

 

For example, I can see where rural municipalities might also 

want to be involved in the process of determining the land uses 

around airports.  Obviously airports take a considerable amount 

of space, and I suspect that you would rarely put them into the 

city limits.  Therefore giving urban municipalities control over 

land around the airports might, in fact, have a conflict with 

rural municipal needs.  In fact it might even have a conflict 

with the people who own and operate agricultural operations in 

and around certain areas. 

 

I can think of a potential of a disastrous situation such as . . . I 

recall hearing about in Ontario where an individual had built a 

silo at the end of one of the runways of a major airport.  Both 

sides naturally thought they were right.  The people who built 

the airport thought that they had jurisdiction to have this airport 

where they wanted it, and the food producer also thought that 

because his land was owned by himself that it gave him the 

right to build his agricultural buildings on his property 

wherever he liked. 

 

And there became quite an incident that was recorded through 

the news media for many, many months in that conflict.  And 

I'm not sure that that situation was ever resolved even to this 

day, Mr. Speaker.  So I see that there is definitely a need to 

discuss and debate and to study the full impact of the 

motivations in the Act on who should have authority on 

properties around an airport. 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

It sounds on the surface as though it would be good for the 

urbans to have some control over an airport that naturally 

would be mostly tied to their city.  But with all of these other 

things that I've mentioned, I think we'd better take a little bit of 

time to take a look at this whole matter and find out who might 

be profitted in this process and who might be hurt in this 

process.  So I'm going to ask the minister to give us some time 

to study that. 

 

I also note that in her next amendment in this Act she mentions 

the taxi licensing and conditions of taxi licensing.  Here too I 

think the on-the-surface implication that we would be trying to 

help the physically handicapped or the physically disabled to 

have access to taxis, is an admirable approach.  However I can 

see where if you have to equip every taxi in a city as big as 

Regina, there's going to be a tremendous amount of cost 

involved. 

 

And I'm wondering if the taxi industry has had a chance to 

think about this.  I wonder if they've even been consulted.  I 

wonder if they know that this is even going on.  And I wonder 

if they can afford, Mr. Speaker, to redesign or rebuild every 

one of their cabs in the city of Regina or the city of Saskatoon.  

There must be hundreds of taxis involved here.  And while I 

support vigorously helping disabled people, I'm wondering if 

it's proper to do it in such a massive way. 

 

(1530) 

 

I suspect that if a fleet had four or five or six of their cars 

equipped to be able to handle handicapped situations, and when 

an individual like that phoned in and simply stated that I am 

handicapped and required the handicapped car, those cars then 

could be designated by radio to go to those places. 

 

And an all-encompassing kind of an approach to having every 

car fitted might be not only impractical but impossible.  It 

might just financially ruin the taxi industry.  And you may just 

simply see them saying we don't want your licences any more, 

we're shutting her down and leaving the province with 

everybody else that's taken off out of here. 

 

We also in the next item, Mr. Speaker, talked about collecting 

monies and the processes that could be used.  Certainly there 

are needs for rural . . . urban municipalities like rural 

municipalities or any other municipality, there's a need to have 

to be able to collect money that is owed. 

 

But this can be a really touchy area. And you have to be very 

careful that you don't discriminate against people when you set 

up collection formulas.  My experience in the rural areas of this 

particular type of situation would suggest that here again we 

had better contact some of the people that are going to be 

involved.  I think they ought to have access to this Bill.  I 

would suggest to the minister involved that we ought to make 

this Bill available to those peoples in those centres that are 

going to be affected so that they can study the implications that 

will arise from the Bill. 

 

We talked about another aspect of the Bill here, the 

reserve funds, the capital revenue bylaw. As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, by the way the Bill is worded, reserve funds are not 

anything new. They're already built into the system.  But when 

you talk about changing the principles of reducing it from 

1,000 to 500 people that could spend their money without 

having to get ministerial consent, I think you're almost sort of 

slapping the folks in small towns across the head and saying 

that because you live in a small urban centre, you can't be 

trusted. 

 

And I'm wondering why we have that kind of a figure at all.  If 

you can trust people in a town between 500 and 1,000 people, 

how come you can't trust the people in a town of less than 500 

people to know what they're doing with their own money? 

 

After all, these capital trust funds, these reserve funds, these are 

not monies that the federal or provincial government put into a 

fund; this is money that the local people have paid in their 

taxes on their properties.  And when there are excessive dollars 

around, they are put into that special fund and they're used for 

such things as buying equipment.  For example, I suppose you 

might have a reserve fund for a water plant or for a well, and in 

a smaller centre it might be for a grader to grade your streets if 

you don't happen to have pavement. 

 

So I'm suggesting to the minister that maybe she ought to 

reconsider this aspect of her amendment and take out the 

number altogether.  If you're going to treat people equally in 

the province, let's treat them all equally in this respect as well 

as others. 

 

We talked about . . . Then the next segment of this Bill, it goes 

into the tax arrears penalties on a sliding basis.  Now on the 

surface again this seems like a good idea.  If you are going to 

have people who don't pay their taxes and after a certain length 

of time you increase the penalty, immediately on the surface 

you would say, yes, that's going to be a great incentive for them 

to pay. 

 

But I would argue very strenuously against using that 

philosophy because what happens is that in reality the people 

that can least afford to pay their taxes are the ones that are in 

arrears.  If they can't afford to pay their taxes, how are they 

going to be able to pay bigger penalties? 

 

And they're not only then going to say after a while, I'm not 

going to bother paying my taxes or my penalties; I can't afford 

to pay them any more, because I couldn't afford to pay them to 

start with . . . So now the penalty itself becomes a deterrent 

from encouraging people to actually pay.  So I'm totally and 

absolutely opposed to that sliding mechanism being used 

because it will backfire. 

 

I don't think this is anything new.  I think this has been tried in 

history before, and I think if the minister takes some time to 

study a little bit, she'll find out that this is a process that has 

been tried and tested and has failed to produce the kind of 

results that she was hoping to get. 
 

And I think that it's got to be noted that very likely this will 

backfire and you will even cause yourself more problems at 

collecting.  In fact I think you might even consider sliding it the 

other way, that . . . not in all cases, but you have to open the 

door so that you can relieve some of the 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

penalties on some people if in fact they offer to pay after a 

certain period of time. 

 

Municipalities have to have that ability to deal with cases on a 

piece-by-piece basis, I believe.  And if an individual comes in 

and says, I'm flat broke; I'm going to go out of business; I'm 

either going to have to have some relief on my taxes or I'm 

going to give you the land, but I could pay you three-quarters 

of it; if I could get a break on this thing, I might be able to 

survive; in some jurisdictions, it might make sense to say, 

okay, we'll take three-quarters rather than all and keep you in 

business rather than confiscate your property. 

 

Now that probably wouldn't hold true in Moose Jaw, but it 

likely would in a small town like, say, Carmichael or a village 

or something like that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister ought to take a real 

hard look at her accomplishing what she wants to accomplish 

with this aspect of her Bill.  Because I think it'll backfire.  I 

think she has to rethink it and look at the possibility of giving 

individual jurisdictions the right to sort of treat each case on its 

merit. 

 

We also talked in this Bill about the amendments going on to 

the exemptions no longer being allowed on certain school types 

of property.  Here again, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the people 

that are involved and are going to be affected by this change, 

may not know about this Bill.  If they did, I'm surprised that 

they would accept this without some kind of protest.  

Obviously what you're saying is that some people should in 

fact pay more.  And I guess my colleague wants your attention, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'd like to have leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Seated in the east 

gallery is a gentleman from Balcarres who is a farmer in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and has called me and wants to 

come see me about the impact of GRIP '92.  His name is Wes 

Pinay. 

 

And he has some other significance I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

is of merit to this Assembly.  He was a page in this Assembly 

in the early '60s.  And I would like to have the members of this 

Assembly welcome him back to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well the guest that 

was just introduced -- kind of ironic that the next item on this 

particular amendment deals with the taxation on native lands. 

And I wonder if the minister has notified those people with 

native lands that might be affected by this Bill.  I wonder if she 

has passed this Bill and the information thereto on to those 

folks for their consideration.  It would seem to me that those 

people that are going to have to pay more taxes as a result of 

changes certainly might want to have something to say about it. 

 

I was about to make that point a minute back.  And it seems to 

me, Mr. Speaker, that if you're going to be asked to pay more 

taxes, likely that's a motivation to set up some kind of an 

argument or some kind of a discussion with the people that are 

going to cause you to pay those extra monies. 

 

I've rarely in my life seen people willing to pay more in taxes 

without saying something against it.  And I'm surprised that 

nobody is saying something about this Bill, because it increases 

taxes for an awful lot of people.  And I suspect that the only 

way that we could see this happening, is the fact that they don't 

know it's going to happen to them yet. 

 

And so I'm saying that we have to get this information out to 

people.  We've got to give them a chance to respond to the 

legislation, and to consider the impact on themselves and their 

personal lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's ultimately impossible to have peace and 

harmony in a province if you have legislation sneaked in on 

them that's going to affect them in a very serious way.  It seems 

also that if money's involved, it even becomes more critical. 

 

We also noticed in this legislation that there are certain tax 

exemptions for people involved with the legion that, if I heard 

right, it sounds to me, will be gone.  And if the legionnaires are 

going to have to pay more taxes in some areas, then they 

certainly would want to know about that.  Now if in fact I 

misunderstood it, and they are going to get some exemptions 

that they now don't have, I'm supposing they're going to be 

pretty happy. 

 

So here again, Mr. Speaker, because I didn't really get a good 

listen to that last part and haven't had a chance to read it all, 

and because my colleague, who is the critic for this area, can't 

be here, I'm going to suggest that we lay this over for a little 

time, allow people the opportunity to get a hold of the Act and 

to be able to read it and study it. 

 

And after that process has gone by and we can present the 

arguments on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan for and 

against the different segments of the Bill and handle it in a 

responsible manner in that way, then I think after that period of 

time it would be proper to deal with the Bill. 

 

And so I'm going to move that we adjourn debate on this Bill at 

the present time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act respecting Fire Prevention and 

Certain Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of this Bill, The Fire Prevention Act, 1992.  Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill provides a comprehensive update of The Fire 

Prevention Act, 1980.  A new approach of fire prevention in 

this province is required at this time.  Key elements of this 

approach include enhanced authority for municipalities to deal 

with fire prevention matters at the local level and provisions 

allowing for provincial adoption of the National Fire Code to 

ensure consistent and effective fire prevention standards. 

 

Fire chiefs, fire investigators, and others concerned with fire 

safety, have been lobbying for reforms in the fire prevention 

legislation.  With the Grand Coulee fire and the report 

commissioned by the government on that fire, the need for 

action has become more apparent.  More uniform standards and 

effective action are needed throughout this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1990 there were 2,660 fires in Saskatchewan 

that resulted in 22 deaths, 100 injuries, and $43.6 million in 

property losses.  These figures have not changed significantly 

over a number of years.  We are committed to working with 

our communities to take any necessary action to improve fire 

prevention and fire fighting capabilities.  The amendments 

contained in this Bill support a local approach to addressing 

these matters. 

 

This Bill will provide for education and training for the 

fire-fighters that meets provincial standards and certification 

procedures.  It will provide more flexibility in the appointment 

of local assistants that investigate fires.  It will provide more 

authority to conduct investigations, including authority for 

local assistants to temporarily close buildings and to take 

evidence.  It will provide more assurance of independent 

hearings of fire inspection orders by using the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board for appeals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a fire advisory committee was set up last year to 

assist the Fire Commissioner's office in developing these 

initiatives.  This committee, which includes representatives of 

the fire chiefs and fire-fighters association, as well as SUMA 

and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), has been consulted and provided input into the 

development of these proposals. 

 

The report on the Grand Coulee fire included as one of its 

recommendations that the province adopt the National Fire 

Code.  This Bill includes a provision for its adoption on a 

province-wide basis.  The National Fire Code is a set of 

minimum standards respecting fire safety in buildings and the 

community at large.  Its primary purpose is the promotion of 

life safety through the application of uniform fire safety 

standards.  Property protection is also an important objective of 

the code as large fires can have a serious social and economic 

impact on the community as a whole. 

 

(1545) 

 

The fire code is not rigid in its requirements.  It is recognized 

that total application of property protection requirements to 

existing buildings may not be economically feasible in that the 

degree of application 

must be based on experience and judgement.  The fire code 

will complement the National Building Code that is already in 

effect in this province.  The two codes work together and this 

Bill will make the administrative procedures for enforcing both 

codes more uniform.  Fire chiefs have requested greater 

consistency in the enforcement provisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SUMA passed a resolution at its 1992 convention 

asking for a program to provide training for local fire 

departments.  We are pleased that the new fire-fighters' training 

and support program, as provided for in this budget, will 

respond to the need for increased training.  In particular this 

training can address special needs such as dealing with 

hazardous substances.  This Bill will allow for establishment of 

training and certification standards for fire-fighters.  This can 

facilitate more consistent training levels throughout this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will now more clearly outline the 

responsibilities of the Fire Commissioner.  In addition it allows 

for the delegation of the Fire Commissioner's duties to fire 

chiefs and local assistants.  This will ensure that in 

communities where there is a considerable fire safety 

capability, activities can usually be handled without the on-site 

presence of the Fire Commissioner, and in the past I understand 

this has proved costly and time-consuming to have the Fire 

Commissioner involved in these matters that could have been 

handled locally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act strengthens the enforcement provisions 

by updating the fines level.  In addition, the Bill provides that if 

building owners do not comply with the fire inspector's order, 

the fire chief can carry out the work or have it carried out by 

someone else. 

 

Finally, another reform will be the provision for appeals to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board.  This will allow matters to be 

cleared up more quickly by avoiding the use of courts.  Further, 

it ensures that orders that are initially issued by the staff or the 

Fire Commissioner's office can be heard on appeals by an 

independent tribunal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm confident that this new Fire Prevention Act 

will provide a stronger foundation for our work with 

communities to improve their fire services.  Fire chiefs have 

indicated that new legislation provisions such as this would add 

significantly to the effectiveness and the efficiency of life 

safety and fire prevention in this province. 

 

This Act will provide communities with streamlined 

procedures and increased powers to deal with fire prevention 

matters.  In addition, this Bill contains a number of minor 

administrative amendments.  This legislation responds to needs 

identified by the Saskatchewan fire chiefs association, the 

volunteer fire fighters association, fire investigators, and the 

municipal organizations, for new legislation on fire prevention. 

 

By sharing resources and working together with various 

involved organizations, we can meet the challenges through the 

1990s of protecting our communities from the dangers of fire.  

By continuing to work together, we can accomplish the mutual 

goals of life safety and protection of property.  Mr. Speaker, I 

urge all members to 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

support this Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, everyone in this province is aware of the hazards and 

the cost both to human life and to property caused by fire. And 

in that sense, everyone wishes to participate in the elimination 

of fire as a hazard in our society. 

 

But when we look at the Bill, everybody around the province 

realizes that the Fire Commissioner plays a very important role 

in our communities and that he exercises considerable power 

within our society, within those communities, when it comes to 

construction of buildings, when it comes to maintenance of 

those same buildings. 

 

And what we need to know, Madam Minister, and what the 

society, the people at large need to know, is whether you have 

consulted with all of those groups that will be affected by this 

Bill as to just what powers, what new powers the Fire 

Commissioner will be given, and how the powers that he had 

before will continue to affect them. 

 

I think of situations such as public buildings.  But it deals also 

with not only public but with private buildings.  In Oxbow they 

were looking at the hospital there.  They needed some 

renovations because of the Fire Commissioner's ruling that the 

hallways were too narrow.  Well the building itself was in not 

that bad a shape, but to meet the Fire Commissioner's rulings 

they had to expand the hallways, and that meant a total 

restructuring of the inside of the hospital at a very prohibitive 

cost.  So the decision was made to build a new hospital. 

 

But if there could be some latitudes and leeways given . . . and 

I notice in the Bill that there is some exemptions to be granted.  

But we need the opportunity, the public needs the opportunity, 

to present their ideas, their concerns about this Bill to the 

House, to the minister, and to the opposition, as to what kind of 

exemptions might happen to be available. 

 

This Bill also talks about taxes on premiums for insurance, and 

has the insurance companies been consulted? Have the people 

who are paying those taxes on their fire insurance premiums 

been consulted about this?  They may have some ideas that will 

be relevant to this Bill as to what should actually take place and 

how it should affect them. 

 

The Bill also deals with the installation and the type of 

equipment that can be used in buildings.  A few years ago, 

Halon was an acceptable fire prevention or fire-retardant 

material to be used in buildings, in construction, in 

automobiles, etc.  But today Halon is no longer acceptable 

except in very special circumstances. 

 

Well the people who manufacture, who supply, who install, 

who use the fire prevention equipment, have you discussed this 

Bill with them?  Have they had any input?  Have they had time 

for any input?  So they need to have the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to have some discussion on this Bill, to look over this 

Bill and to see what it means. 

 

The Bill was presented on July 30 to this House.  That's, 

what? -- six days ago, seven days ago.  So the public needs a 

better opportunity, I believe, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, to 

have a look at your Bill. 

 

The Bill also deals with The Municipal Board Act and its 

powers to review an order made by the Fire Commissioner.  So 

we need the opportunity to have a look at what changes may 

have been made in that area. 

 

The types of equipment that are dealt with under this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, deal with anything that is a potential fire hazard.  It 

deals with people's furnaces, with the chimneys that they may 

have in their houses.  Indeed it even deals with their fireplaces 

and what kind of material that will be constructed of, in what 

manner. 

 

It deals with the training of the installers and the people 

inspecting it, so we need to have a look at . . . a chance to 

consult with these people to find out what are their concerns.  

What changes did they foresee that were needed in the 1980 

Act that should be incorporated into this Act today? 

 

One of the things that comes to mind when you talk about 

emergency fire prevention or fire-fighting units occurred down 

in my constituency at Carnduff.  Across the border, there was a 

major fire in which a number of fire-fighters were killed and 

severely maimed.  The town of Carnduff, Mr. Speaker, 

volunteered their fire department to go across the international 

border and provide fire protection for that community of 

Sherwood, but they ran into a number of snags because the Act 

and their insurances did not cover themselves for crossing the 

U.S. (United States) border. 

 

And I wonder if the Madam Minister would consider in this 

Bill something along the line to allow Saskatchewan licensed 

and insured fire equipment -- in cases of emergency, as it was 

in the case that happened with Carnduff and Sherwood -- to 

take their equipment across the border and still be covered with 

the insurances and under the legislation from Saskatchewan. 

 

It was an act of charity on the part of the town of Carnduff's 

fire department and their volunteer employees.  They knew that 

they were not going to be covered once they crossed that 

border, but they were willing to make that sacrifice and provide 

that kind of protection for their neighbouring community.  And 

I believe that is something that we need to take a look at, Mr. 

Speaker.  We need to talk to the other communities around the 

province and find out just what kind of changes they would like 

to have in a fire prevention Act that impacts on their 

communities. 

 

Because of this, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that there needs 

to be some more time given to all those that will be affected by 

this Act, I believe at this time we should adjourn this Bill.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 

of Bill No. 87, The Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all recognize the importance of agriculture to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  The agriculture industry provides 

our province with an economic base and with a valuable way of 

life that could only be appreciated if you've lived in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have come to know the ups and downs of an industry 

which competes and competes effectively in an international 

market-place. 

 

We have learned that every period of difficulty we experience 

is not the end of our industry.  In short, we have learned 

optimism and faith in the future.  Because in spite of periodic 

crisis, we know from experience that persistence will lead to 

opportunities and a stronger agriculture and a better way of life 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have also learned that there are ways to ease these periodic 

crises in agriculture.  Farmers know measures to take on their 

own farms.  We also know the value of safety net programs. 

 

Adequate safety nets to stabilize farm income are critically 

important to a healthy farm sector.  Safety nets do not just give 

money to farmers.  Safety nets are really about providing a 

reasonable level of stability in recognition of the extreme 

production and market circumstances faced by farmers. 

 

Safety nets provide a level of certainty so that farmers can have 

the confidence to invest.  Safety nets are about lessening the 

harshest impacts of production hazards and the market-place on 

the livelihood of farmers and their families and their 

communities.  Finally, safety nets stabilize agriculture so that 

all those who depend upon agriculture benefit as well. 

 

Safety nets need to be designed to assist the agricultural sector 

to make decisions that are consistent with a profitable and 

growing agricultural industry.  We need to ensure that an 

effective program is in place to provide the foundation of 

stability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government and this Legislative Assembly 

recognize that farm income insurance programs should 

encourage good farming practices, provide reasonable 

protection to farmers, and be efficiently administered in the 

interests of the Saskatchewan taxpayers.  The gross revenue 

insurance program needed to be changed for 1992 in order to 

achieve these objectives. 

 

The gross revenue insurance program, called GRIP, was 

introduced in January 1991.  This was well before the 

provincial legislation passed in June 1991, well before a formal 

federal-provincial agreement was signed in September 1991. 

 

GRIP was created by a combination of revenue insurance 

provided under The Agricultural Safety Net Act and crop 

insurance provided under The Crop Insurance Act. 

The 1991 program was hastily put into place and contained 

some very major design flaws.  Even the former administration 

recognized these problems and created an advisory committee 

to make recommendations for program changes for 1992.  The 

major design flaws in 1991 GRIP were highlighted by the 

advisory committee which reviewed GRIP from November 

1991 to February 1992.  That committee was composed of 

representatives of farm organizations.  This is the same 

committee appointed by the previous administration with only 

a few changes. 

 

From the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Barry Senft, chairperson; 

from the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Keith 

Hayward; from the United Grain Growers, Roy Piper; from the 

University of Saskatchewan, originally named by the members 

opposite, Jack Stabler, who was replaced by the university by 

Hartley Furtan. 

 

From the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association, Brett 

Meinert; from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, Sinclair Harrison; from the Saskatchewan 

Cattle Feeders Association, Brian Perkins; from the Western 

Canada Wheat Growers, Gordon Cresswell; from the 

Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association, Leonard Kehrig; 

from the National Farmers Union, Gil Pedersen; two members 

at large, Nettie Wiebe and Lloyd Johns; and the deputy 

minister of Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, Stuart 

Kramer. 

 

(1600) 

 

This committee received written and oral submissions from in 

excess of 300 people and organizations.  That committee said 

the program could not continue with the three major flaws they 

identified. 

 

These are the three major design flaws identified by the 

committee.  Firstly, crop selection.  The individual commodity 

guarantee resulted in farmers looking at the guarantee when 

making seeding decisions rather than examining what they 

could produce best on their farm or for the market. 

 

The 1991 GRIP design caused major problems in a number of 

areas, most astoundingly in the lentil markets and had to be 

changed in Manitoba for 1992.  The support level for lentils 

had to be significantly reduced in Manitoba in late spring at a 

time well after March 15 in order to prevent excess production 

from flooding the lentil market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does this sound like an effective safety net 

program? 

 

The second problem identified by the committee was 

inappropriate farming practices.  According to the committee, 

farmers were encouraged by 1991 GRIP to adapt their farming 

practices to GRIP to maximize their farm returns.  They were 

encouraged to reduce fertilizer use and chemical use because 

the lost revenue resulting from lower production would be fully 

paid for by GRIP.  Farmer premiums and taxpayers picked up 

the bill for this lost revenue that could have and should have 

been taken from the market. 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

Mr. Speaker, does this sound like a program that will 

contribute to the development of Saskatchewan agriculture?  

Farmers know that a program that gives the same total revenue, 

whether they produce 5 bushels or 40 bushels, is wrong. 

 

The third problem identified by the committee was the 

problems of administration.  The 1991 GRIP required bin 

police and the measurement of production.  Farmers know it is 

difficult to accurately measure production by measuring bins.  

When every dollar of production offsets a dollar of GRIP 

payments, the impact of measurement errors for both the 

farmer and the program is extremely significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous government was well aware of these 

problems.  The GRIP advisory committee ultimately made 

recommendations leading to the 1992 program, which has the 

following features.  The advisory committee recommended 

that: 

 

 (a) GRIP should be provided as separate crop insurance and 

revenue insurance programs; 

 

 (b) (that) the crop insurance program should operate as it was 

prior to 1991, and that the crop insurance price be set at the 

same level as the market price used in the revenue insurance 

program; 

 

Crop insurance under the new program is being offered at 80 

per cent of the farmer's long-term individual yield. 

 

 (c) the revenue insurance program should operate more as a 

deficiency type program; 

 

Under the new program revenue insurance is a regionally based 

acreage payment, indexed for a farmer's individual yields.  It 

provides the benefits of individual responses while removing 

the temptation to look at a particular crop for maximizing farm 

revenue.  The revenue insurance plan will offer producers 

protection based on their seeded acreage of eligible crops, a 

per-seeded acre payment for each crop insurance risk area, 

individualized by an adjustment index based on each farmer's 

long-term individual yield on crops compared to the long-term 

area yield.  Recommendation: 

 

 (d) that no offsets between price and yield should be included 

in the revenue insurance program; 

 

In other words, farmers should be able to retain all market 

revenues.  Recommendation: 

 

 (e) that both crop insurance and revenue insurance should 

reflect the management ability of individual farmers in 

determining coverage and payments; and 

 

 (f) that only the revised program be offered to farmers in 

1992 (i.e. current GRIP should not be continued as an option 

to farmers). 

 

Those were the recommendations of the committee. 

 

I want to emphasize that these are not just the 

observations of the GRIP advisory committee.  The report on 

the future program designed by the national GRIP committee, 

July 7, 1992 states, and I quote: 

 

 . . . "the goal of providing a highly individualized program 

which is fully predictable for producers, (and which) is crop 

specific and maintains full price-yield offsets at the 

individual level, is in direct conflict with the objective of 

maximizing the level of market responsiveness and 

minimizing the potential for moral hazard and program 

abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to some of the concerns we 

have heard about the new 1992 GRIP program.  The revised 

GRIP program has been designed in a way that provides 

income support within the confines of the agreement with the 

federal government when the new GRIP program was 

constructed.  Farmers continue to suffer from income shortfall 

in Saskatchewan.  That was known when the original 

agreement was signed with the federal government. 

 

In fact the provinces did not sign into their cost sharing of 

second line programs like GRIP and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) until the federal government, through 

their Agriculture minister, Mazankowski, committed to paying 

for a third line programming, paying for the disaster relief that 

needs, from time to time, to be addressed in our province.  The 

risk of these events is far too great for producers of the 

province to bear through GRIP premiums. 

 

And it is absolutely appropriate that in a country like Canada, 

different regions of the country support regions that are in 

distress when distress occurs.  These events have traditionally 

been dealt with by the federal government, and it must stay that 

way. 

 

I also want to be very clear as to why GRIP premiums 

increased in 1992 from 1991, another major concern for 

producers and farmers in Saskatchewan.  The federal 

government has been anxious for several years to push more of 

the cost of providing safety net programs for farmers onto the 

provincial governments and the farmers themselves. 

 

One of the measures taken by the federal government in 1991 

was to pay 25 per cent of the producers premium as a one-time 

carrot to get the producer and the province into GRIP.  It made 

good sense for the federal government to do this for one year to 

get producers in the province on the hook for years to come to 

pay almost 60 per cent of the cost of GRIP. 

 

Keep in mind that prior to GRIP, the federal government 

picked up the vast majority of the cost of income support 

programs for farmers.  It made good sense for the federal 

government to invest in some 1991 carrots in order to reduce 

their long-term obligation.  What astounds me is why we, as a 

province, would have taken on that share of responsibility, 

except for the election pressures that faced the previous 

government at the time. 

 

The effect of what the federal government did was to make 

1991 GRIP look like a much less expensive 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

program than it really was for farmers.  When 1992 came, 

reality set it.  Producer premiums sky-rocketed because the 

federal government withdrew the 25 per cent premium 

reduction.  Reality also set in for the provincial government as 

Saskatchewan taxpayers were now faced with a massive 

burden as a result of the shifting of costs for the federal 

government to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The former administration not only allowed this to happen, but 

participated fully in making it happen.  That for the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan means that between 1988 and 1992, the 

province of Saskatchewan -- or 1991 -- the province of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers increased their contribution to these 

types of programs from virtually zero to $260 million -- $260 

for every man, woman, and child in this province in a period of 

four years.  And our previous administration encouraged that 

kind of off-loading. 

 

Producer premiums also increased in some areas because crop 

insurance premium rates increased to reflect yield loss 

experience in each risk area, and because of increased crop 

prices.  We need to be clear that these increases would have 

happened whether or not we had changed GRIP for 1992. 

 

I want also to respond, Mr. Speaker, to what some people 

would lead us to believe is a real issue -- the question of 

whether producers were adequately notified of the revisions to 

GRIP. 

 

Saskatchewan was prepared to announce revised 1992 GRIP 

before the end of February 1992.  The federal government 

stonewalled the process to implement revised 1992 GRIP.  The 

federal government had allowed virtually every other province 

to customize GRIP to meet their own provincial needs in 1991.  

Yet the federal government hesitated to allow Saskatchewan 

the same privilege in 1992. 

 

Saskatchewan made every effort to inform producers about 

how GRIP would operate in 1992-93.  A press conference was 

held on March 13, 1992, to announce how the new GRIP 

would operate.  A brochure was prepared and sent to all rural 

post office boxes in the first week of April 1992.  Extension 

staff and crop insurance agents met with producers individually 

through April and in groups.  The deadline for producers to 

make decisions on GRIP was extended from March 31 to April 

30 and then to May 15. 

 

And because of the delays in implementing the amendments to 

The Agricultural Safety Net Act, 1992, the deadline for opting 

out of GRIP was set at July 20, 1992.  The extension of 

decision deadlines gave farmers ample opportunity to review 

1992 GRIP, meet with their crop insurance agents, and make a 

decision to opt out or stay in GRIP. 

 

These rigid deadlines that were originally in the 

slapped-together program that was put together last year were 

unworkable and inconsistent with the provisions of the 

federal-provincial agreement, as evidenced by the fact that the 

previous government repeatedly ignored the deadline in their 

own crop insurance programs and in the 

first year of implementing the GRIP program. 

 

We have replaced this provision with a more practical 

provision, ensuring farmers have adequate time to consider 

program changes; a provision that is consistent with the 

federal-provincial agreement. 

 

In addition, we implemented an enhanced opting-out provision; 

a provision more favourable with the farmers than that called 

for in the federal-provincial agreement.  Producers who did not 

want to participate in the 1992 GRIP were able to opt out by 

repaying any payments in excess of the premiums paid by 

themselves and the federal and provincial governments on their 

behalf. 

 

In recognition of the change in program design, we wanted to 

allow producers who wanted out of GRIP or wanted to 

participate only in crop insurance to withdraw with as little 

penalty as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real issue that this House should be debating 

is whether 1992 GRIP is better than 1991 GRIP.  Producers 

have told us that 1992 GRIP is a better and more responsible 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while 1992 GRIP is a drastically improved 

program, I want everyone to be aware that a severe income 

problem remains.  Saskatchewan farmers are facing an income 

shortfall for the last two years as a direct result of the 

inadequate federal payments to farmers in Saskatchewan 

approaching $1 billion.  How can we expect farmers to feel 

good about any program when they are strung out on a debt 

load from the federal government not meeting their 

responsibility over the last two years? 

 

These are problems that programs like revenue insurance and 

crop insurance cannot address and were not designed to 

address.  These are issues that are the responsibility of the 

federal government.  These are the third line of assistance 

problems that are, for example, evidenced by drought or frost 

or prolonged international trade war subsidies. 

 

While we continue in Saskatchewan to suffer from trade 

problems, we are encouraged that this year the area of serious 

crop concerns are small, that we presently have less 

plough-down than we had in last year's bumper crop 

conditions, and that present indications are for a slightly better 

than average crop. 

 

Farmers are more optimistic this year.  They have increased 

their input use by 22 per cent, hopefully a reflection of the new 

program, because in the neighbouring provinces, in both 

Alberta and Manitoba, there is virtually no increase in input 

use.  Saskatchewan farmers have seen the opportunity to farm 

the way they always did farm before last year's flawed program 

was put in, and they responded.  And we need to be thankful 

for the energy and the commitment of Saskatchewan farmers 

and for the conditions that make it look like we're going to 

have an average crop this year. 
 

We still need to address those third line of defence problems 

and we are still going to continue to negotiate with the federal 

government for appropriate support for Saskatchewan farmers.  

And we hope that once this Bill is 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

passed, members opposite will join us in that struggle. 

 

(1615) 

 

I want to say that the legislative amendments contained in Bill 

No. 87 do provide for a farm support review committee.  The 

existing farm programs continue to be inadequate even after the 

improvements that have been made, and Saskatchewan farmers 

want an opportunity to contribute to the design of a program 

that is much better than anything that has come forward to date, 

and we will give them that opportunity and will be announcing 

the structure for that committee within the next couple of 

weeks. 

 

This committee will receive and prepare reports making 

recommendations on the need for improvements to farm 

support programs and recommendations for future safety net 

program design.  The 1992 GRIP does not meet all of the 

farmers' needs for safety net protection.  There is still much to 

be done.  And these issues will be reviewed with farmers. 

 

The committee will also look carefully at how we can 

encourage the federal government to meet its obligation for 

safety net programs so that our farmers can be poised for the 

kind of contribution that they can make to the Saskatchewan, 

the Canadian, and the international economy when conditions 

return and they are able to again function independently of 

government support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this Assembly to support 

these amendments.  And I move second reading of Bill No. 87, 

The Farm Income Insurance Legislation Amendment Act, 

1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to be 

dealing with this motion and this Bill in a number of areas.  

And I want to deal with it in a preamble today because, at the 

conclusion of my remarks, I'm going to adjourn the debate. 

 

However I'm want to point out to the people of this Assembly 

that the process that we had become involved in, in relating to 

the GRIP Bill, have a number of areas that I think need to be 

addressed.  We have, Mr. Speaker, the legal implications.  We 

have the history involved in the discussion and the agreements 

reached with the provincial government, the former 

government, and this government.  We have how they impact 

on the farmer and the farmer's relationship to the process, also 

the farmer's relationship to the end product and the variables 

 

We have the program differences.  We have the government's 

role in obstructing justice.  And we have what I believe to be a 

significant affront to the justice system. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that when matters of this 

nature were brought to our attention in times past -- and I will 

point out two of them, Mr. Speaker, that we dealt with -- when 

issues of a controversial nature which dealt with an 

infringement on the rights of individuals, these matters were 

referred to the Supreme Court for an opinion, a 

constitutional reference. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members of this 

Assembly that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

have been asked through this Legislative Assembly committee 

to deal with the constitutional matters.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

committee is going to be asking this Assembly for almost 

$200,000 to provide them access to go around and ask 

questions about the constitution.  On one hand we have people 

talking about the constitution, and on the other hand they have 

them breaking the constitutional rights of individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no other way that you can read 

sections of this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, people have taken this 

government to court. It has been ruled, Mr. Speaker, that there 

is a prima facie case against the government.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the ruling that was given would have provided an 

opportunity for the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to 

have their constitutional rights validated by giving them an 

equal opportunity in a court of law. 

 

And what has happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government under deliberate actions are going to void all of the 

things that happened.  They're going to take them away. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker . . . We had, for example, a reference 

to the appeal court when the discussion on abortion took place 

in the early . . . or the mid-'80s.  We had an appeal to the appeal 

court to have a decision made on whether it had constitutional 

validity.  And, Mr. Speaker, that was done at the decision of 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second time that there was a constitutional 

reference was a little over a year ago when the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan made representation in a serious 

way, through the courts, to say that the division of the province 

in an electoral basis was not correct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constitutional right of individuals was 

accepted by the government of the day.  And I was a part of 

that administration that said we will make an observation and a 

reference to the Supreme Court for a decision, a decision, 

ladies and gentlemen of this Assembly, a decision that would 

have allowed for a reference and said, is this constitutionally 

correct? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the decision of the government was put at 

the hands of the justices, the supreme justices of the country of 

Canada. 

 

And what was the response, Mr. Speaker?  The response was 

that the individuals and the decision to have the electoral 

boundaries as presented in a Bill in this Assembly were 

constitutionally within the framework of individual rights.  It 

was a decision based on reference to the constitution, the 

Supreme Court for a constitutional assessment.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that came back, and they said yes; you go ahead with 

the Bill.  It is within the constitution and the framework of the 

human rights of individuals in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what have we got today, Mr. Speaker?  We have reference 

to nothing.  These people won't even let the 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

appeal court deal with reference, let alone the Supreme Court, 

as it relates to the constitutionality of denying access in a court 

of law to the kinds of things that they've proposed in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I honestly and firmly believe that the people in 

executive branch of this government are hiding behind this 

Legislative Assembly.  This Legislative Assembly is going to 

put the Bill forward, and they are going to force farmers to pay 

for that constitutional reference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the one hand we have a committee that is 

prepared to spend $200,000 going around the province and 

telling people what the province, what the executive branch of 

government is doing in the constitutional debate -- not asking 

them, Mr. Speaker.  The process and the involvement has been 

outlined by the Minister of Justice that that is what he expects 

them to do.  They've got an advertising budget.  They've got a 

transportation budget.  They have all of this set out, and what 

are they going to do?  They're going to put this information out 

into the hands of the people, of what the Premier and the 

Minister of Justice have decided. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why I think, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan should have a better deal.  And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to at this point in time ask this Assembly 

to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to introduce to you, 

and through you to other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, a friend and a former minister in a neighbouring 

community of Plenty, Jim Osborne is in the gallery here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the Minister of Education, and this is 

continuation of review of Estimates.  I'll ask her to introduce 

the official or officials who are with her here today. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thanks, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce on my left, Arlene Hynd, the deputy minister of the 

Department of Education. 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, it's been a few days since we've had the chance to 

discuss education in this Assembly.  I have a couple of 

questions, and I'm not sure whether they've been dealt with in 

depth, regarding the student assistance program for university.  

And I'm wondering what kind of dollars are included in this 

year's budget to help with university educations through the 

student assistance program. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the member 

opposite would be referring to the operations of the student aid, 

the provincial student aid plan, financial assistance which is 

available to all -- not just university students -- but all students 

entering post-secondary education in the province: SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 

the universities, regional colleges, the private vocational 

schools, and SIAST. 

 

There is an allocation from the consolidated revenue fund for 

loans.  It is approximately $45 million basically, but then there 

is recovery from student repayments from loans that are in 

place right now.  So the net amount in the '92-93 year is 

estimated to be just over $30 million.  So there would be the 45 

million and then the repayments. 

 

In addition to that of course there is the federal funding, the 

Canada student loans program, which in most cases must be 

accessed first.  And then the student aid provincially is a 

supplement to that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, Madam Minister, is that 

the province does have in place $45 million. However, a 

number of students are now repaying some of the original loans 

so that money is flowing in, which means that the Consolidated 

Fund this year is actually putting up $30 million.  But with the 

funds that are being repaid, you're still going to have $45 

million in place.  Do I understand you correctly? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Yes, that's right.  The level is 

approximately the same as last year.  It hasn't been reduced. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- How many students would be, or have applied, or 

would be accommodated through this funding for this year, 

Madam Minister, as I'm sure a number of students have already 

applied with the university and the extra educational school 

year is just being around the corner.  Would you have those 

numbers available? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- For the upcoming year, although 

within the private school system and with summer sessions at 

the university, the academic year isn't quite as clearly defined 

as it used to be.  I wouldn't have accurate figures yet on the 

numbers of applications because they would be still being 

processed, and applications really are received throughout the 

year for various semesters of study. 

 

But certainly the number of people in Saskatchewan 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

accessing or applying to access post-secondary education is 

higher as a percentage of our population than in any province 

in Canada, and increased between 1989 and 1991 by over 40 

per cent.  So that the demands on the provincial student aid 

program are certainly very high, and we are at the moment 

having a review of the policy of the student aid -- the 

provincial student aid program -- to determine how we can 

priorize the funds that are available to make sure that, although 

it has always been means tested, to make sure that as many 

people have access to post-secondary education as possible.  

And the objective being that no one who has the will and the 

academic qualifications will be denied the opportunity for 

post-secondary education because of lack of money. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, of the student loans that are out 

to date, what percentage of the student loans would be in 

arrears as far as repayment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we will look for the 

actual numbers for the most recent date possible, and we'll 

undertake to provide those.  But it normally runs about 20 per 

cent of the whole portfolio, which at the moment would be 

about 18,000 students. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You're saying 18,000 students would have arrears 

on the loan, or you're saying 20 per cent of the student loans 

available are normally in arrears?  And of that 20 per cent, does 

the department normally run into a number of those 20 per cent 

that they have very great difficulty in obtaining repayment of 

those student loans?  What would the percentage be of the 

number of student loans that just don't get totally paid back? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the 18,000 figure that I 

referred to would be the entire case load of the provincial 

student aid program at the moment, in which some of those 

loans would not yet be in the repayment phase because the loan 

doesn't become repayable until some months after the student 

has graduated from the program. 

 

And then there are a number of provisions made for students 

who, for instance, have difficulty finding employment after 

they graduate and are not in a position to repay, or whose 

salary is not what they projected and they have difficulty.  So 

the 20 per cent would be the amount that is actually due, that 

would be in arrears.  And I believe that last year -- or I'm not 

sure now whether this would have taken place in this fiscal 

year or just prior to the end of the last fiscal year -- but 

approximately $6 million was written off as being 

uncollectable. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, that figure of $6 million 

disturbs me somewhat.  And the reason I say it disturbs me is 

because I believe the purpose of the student loans was certainly 

to help students coming from family situations that really didn't 

have the wherewithal to provide the financial funding for their 

teenager to attend a further educational program. 

 

And I know over the . . . in the six years since I've been an 

MLA representing the Moosomin riding, certainly a number of 

people have raised concerns with regards to the student loan 

program.  I guess one of the major areas 

that comes up -- and a contentious area -- is the fact that there 

is a means test available or a way that the department is 

looking at assessing whether a student requires or should have 

access to a student loan. 

 

And I don't have a great deal of difficulty with the fact that 

parents, I believe, should have some responsibility.  And 

parents are asked to have some responsibility in the further 

education of the children, providing for that education, as I 

believe there are a number of families in this province who do 

have the ability.  And we as parents should accept the 

responsibility to educate our children as well and to provide for 

their education. 

 

The problem I do have is with individuals who seem to feel . . . 

and you've probably heard it and I've heard it.  A one-parent 

family will argue, well my daughter is 18 now and they're on 

their own.  And they should, because they're on their own, 

generating their own income, they should be able to apply for a 

student loan and get their student loan without coming to me 

for assistance. 

 

And I've run into situations where individuals are professionals, 

and maybe both the husband and wife are working in 

government-sponsored job occupations where there's 

substantial dollars coming into the home.  I think . . . I'm not 

sure how the department is trying to assess the program and 

assess the needs, because I believe we should, or the 

department should, be doing whatever it can to make sure and 

give every student the opportunity to gain further education. 

 

So in light of the fact that there's only $45 million of aid 

available from the provincial government and I believe 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of about 50 from the federal 

government, we realize this doesn't go that far.  So therefore it's 

our responsibility to try and make sure it reaches and is placed 

in the hands of individuals who need it the most. 

 

And I'm wondering what steps the department is taking right 

now because there'll be pressure on the department.  There's 

pressure on individuals, on individual MLAs to say, well under 

these circumstances, even though maybe a household has 

$60,000 coming into it, that my son or my daughter is out.  

And they only were able to get a $5 or a minimum wage job 

this summer.  They should be able to get some funding.  I 

wonder if the minister could respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there are a 

number of different ways to respond to.  There are a number of 

facets to the question. 

 

As the member understands, the current program is means 

tested.  And if you do take a look at the application form, it 

takes into account the parents' income.  And if a parental 

contribution is deemed able to be made, then it's expected. 

 

There's also a provision for a contribution by the student in 

some cases.  And in the cases like you cite, where a student is 

living in a fairly affluent home and the parents think they 

should be able to access, a student is not considered 

independent of the parent's income until they've been living 

away from home independently of 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

parental contributions for at least two years. 

 

And it is, always has been, a means-tested program.  This is the 

reason that we have set up, in recognition of problems in this 

area that we recognize . . . although no applicant who meets the 

income criteria is ever turned down.  So the funds are not 

limited in that respect. 

 

But there is an attempt, through a very rigorous application 

form . . . although it was simplified this year quite a bit.  We 

reduced the length of the form from 20 pages to 10, attempted 

to make it simpler, but arrive at the same result.  We didn't 

change the criteria. 

 

But that is the reason that we have set up a review committee to 

review how student aid is made available.  The other area that 

we're attempting to improve communications in is to high 

school students and their parents, through brochures and 

information, at an earlier age in high school so that students 

and parents can begin to plan for the post-secondary 

educational opportunities that the students want to access. 

 

These programs . . . the federal one, the Canada student loan 

program, has been in place for about 20 years.  It has similar 

criteria, but it's not administered by the federal government.  It 

is administered by banks and credit unions as agents.  And the 

default rate in the federal program is much, much higher than 

in our provincial plan which we administer in-house. 

 

But we're attempting . . . it seems over those 20 years, although 

it's always been means tested, even the federal one and the 

provincial one which came into place in 1986, that the longer 

it's in place the more there seems to be sort of a feeling 

growing that, well, I don't have to provide for my education, I 

can always get a student loan.  And we will never be able to 

afford to operate in that mode, not just this province but any 

province. 

 

So we're developing information, as I say, that will go out at an 

earlier age to high school students who are planning to 

continue their education, to alert their families and the students 

that we do expect that this is a shared responsibility, that it 

should be planned for, and that a parental contribution, 

wherever possible to the maximum extent possible, and indeed 

a student contribution through working between semesters and 

contributing and supporting their own ambitions for education, 

should be a requirement at all times, that it is a shared 

responsibility. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair has recognized that while the minister 

was making her remarks one of her officials has entered the 

Assembly. And I would ask that she would introduce her 

official before I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

I didn't notice him coming up behind me.  Seated behind the 

deputy minister is Robin Johnson from the Department of 

Education. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, I appreciate that 

because I believe personally that each one of us, as I indicated 

earlier, as parents have some responsibility for 

the education of our children; and the fact that as a department 

we are taking the time to inform people and lay out what the 

guidelines are for the student loan program.  And it, even in the 

earlier years, I think would get the information out there so 

parents are aware of what the guidelines are, students are aware 

of the guidelines, and parents will plan ahead, for one simple 

reason. 

 

I don't think it's any easier for a student.  It might look nice to 

apply for and obtain a student loan and not have to worry about 

start paying it off till six months after you graduate, but over a 

period of maybe four or five years, that student loan could 

accumulate to the neighbourhood of 20, 30, maybe even 

$40,000 which that's a substantial debt to all of a sudden have 

on your back and on your shoulders as you get . . . just nicely 

get started in the work force and maybe you're looking at 

starting a job and maybe starting a home and looking for a 

home. 

 

So I think any efforts that can be taken to help people realize 

the responsibilities they have, help students recognize the 

responsibilities that they have, and encouraging them in the 

fact that the more they can set aside today for tomorrow is 

going to be to their benefit.  Because of the fact that we all 

know, even in government, it's very difficult to plan for 

tomorrow when you have long and heavy debt resting on your 

shoulders. 

 

(1645) 

 

So I would suggest to the . . . And the Minister of Finance said, 

thank you.  I wish he would acknowledge and appreciate the 

fact if he would've said thank you when we were trying to let 

the people of Saskatchewan know of the debt load that we were 

trying to work around as well. 

 

Anyway, getting back to the educational process, as was 

indicated, the student loan program in this province did make a 

substantial contribution and did add to that . . . increase their 

contribution during the '80s.  In fact it was in the mid-80s that 

the student provincial assistance really took a substantial hike, 

as we saw a greater number of students and even older people 

going back and furthering their education. 

 

Madam Minister, another thing I would like to bring up 

regarding student loans, and it came up . . . one question in 

particular that came across my desk was a family where the 

husband had passed away very suddenly and the widow had 

contacted me because she had an older, well-kept car.  It didn't 

cost a lot.  She had purchased it . . . and her daughter -- it was a 

lot easier for her -- she had transferred ownership of the vehicle 

to her daughter, and when her daughter applied for a student 

loan, the value of that vehicle was taken into consideration 

even though she hadn't paid for it.  And it took away from her 

ability to get a student loan. 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, that that wasn't . . . The fact that 

the ownership was transferred to the daughter, I personally 

don't believe that that should have affected the daughter's 

ability to obtain the student loan, and certainly the widow and 

the mother realized later that she should have kept ownership 

and just given it to her daughter to use. 



August 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

And I'm wondering if the department has set some criteria to 

address this situation and maybe at least letting people know 

that . . . I believe the ability of obtaining student loans . . . so 

even your assets can come into play on your ability and where 

the department stands on that question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned, we 

recognized very early on that there were problems in the area 

of student aid.  And indeed in November, 1991, we engaged a 

consultant to work together with the administration in the 

student aid department in an effort to look at the systems and 

management and attempt to streamline and simplify the 

process. 

 

We think that was very successful.  We did, as I said, shorten 

the application form, make it much simpler to understand, 

reducing it from 20 pages to 10.  The turnaround time which 

used to average about 10 weeks before students would have a 

reply as to whether they were eligible and at what level, has 

been reduced in most cases, if the application is complete, to a 

week or as little as a day.  So there have been a number of 

changes. 

 

One of the changes that we made -- although the Canada 

student loan criteria have not changed so we have to make sure 

to make a distinction because they're not exactly the same -- 

but we did make a change in the exemptions.  There's an 

exemption for a vehicle up to $4,500 and there's exemption for 

cash savings of $1,500 for single students and $3,000 for 

married students.  So we did change that to alter the value of 

the . . . the effect that a value of an owned vehicle would have. 

 

I don't know how recent the case is, the specific case that 

you're referring to, but if it was prior to the rule change, I 

would welcome you, Mr. Chairman, welcome the member to 

contact my office with the specifics.  And if a review is 

warranted, then we would be glad to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, I 

brought that up as an example because I wasn't sure of the 

changes, the fact that changes had been made.  Because I 

believe the student in question may have even graduated from 

university just this past year. 

 

But the other thing I was going to mention is I believe you 

indicated that changes have been made on the provincial side; 

however federally changes haven't been made.  And if I 

understand it correctly, a student must apply and obtain a 

federal loan before they're able to access a provincial loan.  Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that's correct.  The 

Saskatchewan student aid plan is intended to be a supplement 

to the Canada student loan plan.  And indeed the provincial 

ministers of Education in every province and territory have 

been asking for a meeting with the federal Minister of State for 

over a year now to discuss much needed changes to the Canada 

student loan plan.  Because none of the weekly loan limits, the 

provisions, the criteria, have been changed in the federal plan 

since 1984. 
 

So with inflation and changes in the cost of living and the 

situations of students, certainly we feel that an updating is 

warranted.  And in fact a meeting did take place with the 

Secretary of State close to the end of March of this year, 1992, 

at which time the federal government did table a paper 

acknowledging the various changes, the various areas where 

they recognized that the current provisions were likely out of 

date. 

 

They undertook to make some changes but they did say that 

they would not be in time for this fiscal year, that they project 

that no changes will be made in the federal plan until at least 

the September semester of 1993. 

 

We did prevail upon the federal government, if they weren't 

willing to make changes in any other areas, to at least eliminate 

the 3 per cent administration fee on loans which they added last 

year.  They recognize it as a problem but said that because of 

the large defaults in the federal plan, being at least 30 per cent 

if I recall, that they felt that until their collections improved, 

that they didn't want to proceed with the enhancements to the 

federal plan.  But we are encouraging them to bring it up to 

date. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  And you did get 

into what was going to be another question.  That was asking 

what the provincial department was doing regarding 

consultation with the federal department on changes so that 

there was basically the same guidelines right across Canada.  

And I'm glad to hear that it's not just Saskatchewan contacted, 

but all the other provinces, as I firmly believe that we must 

work towards more reciprocal agreements right across Canada. 

 

So regardless of where a student goes or people transferring in 

and out or going to further their education in another province, 

that we have basically the same guidelines and rules applying, 

because I'm sure that would simplify the process as men and 

women and teenagers look at furthering their education. 

 

In view of that, Madam Minister, I'd like to change my 

questioning a bit.  I have a request that has come in -- and I'm 

not sure where it has gone -- but I would like to ask the 

minister whether any action has been taken or anything has 

been received or agreed to or have we've come to some kind of 

an agreement down in the area in the Maryfield and Moosomin, 

Rocanville area, right along the border.  And I'm sure I believe 

the Alberta border would face the same situation. 

 

There are areas where Saskatchewan communities happen to be 

a lot closer and more easily accessible for say Manitoba 

students and vice versa.  So there are some situations where 

Saskatchewan students would be a lot closer to a Manitoba 

school.  And I have a letter that indicates in the Maryfield area, 

an article in the World Spectator, February 25, '92, informed 

us that Manitoba children will not be allowed to attend schools 

in this unit without paying a tuition fee of upwards towards 

$4,000. 

 

And they also indicate that there are several students from 

Manitoba attending the Maryfield School, with the potential for 

more . . . with a number of these are older students and a 

number of the families still have younger students that would 

be coming in. 

 

And they're afraid that, with the fact that the parents are going 

to be asked to pay this tuition fee now, that they will 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard August 6, 1992 

have to look at sending their students to a Manitoba school, 

which is a longer bus ride, which means it takes away from 

their unit, and certainly some of the Manitoba schools along the 

border are facing the same scenario. 

 

And I'm wondering what the department has done, whether or 

not agreements have been reached or where things are sitting as 

we draw closer to the school year, as many parents would like 

to know where we stand on that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, it is the responsibility, 

as the member opposite knows, of the school divisions to 

negotiate these arrangements.  And as he rightfully points out, 

there are obviously a fairly large number of school divisions 

where these situations arise, both upon our Manitoba and 

Alberta borders. 

 

In the past -- and it's not unique to Saskatchewan; all the 

provinces of course are feeling some fiscal pinch if you like -- 

there was sometimes an overlooking of the school division if 

there was some cross-over between provincial boundaries in 

school divisions.  But I think the situation is that we're now 

asking that out-of-province students pay tuition to the school 

division in which they are attending, and likewise that 

Saskatchewan students who would be attending in Manitoba or 

Alberta would pay tuition to those school divisions. 

 

And that is a cost that in the foundation formula, the funding 

that the provincial government provides to school divisions, 

that we do recognize.  Because we realize how important it is 

for the configuration of education in an area for families to be 

able to stay together and for the bus rides that students are 

exposed to to be minimized. 

 

So we rely on, you know, the common sense of the elected 

officials at the local level to sort out what is the best situation.  

But what we're saying now is that once that's determined, that 

the students on either side of the border should pay tuition to 

the board that is providing their education.  And as I say, when 

a Saskatchewan student pays that to another province, we 

recognize it as a cost, the department does.  And we reimburse 

it. 

 

In the specific instance that you mentioned, I'm not sure 

whether there's been a resolution there, but the department has 

been having meetings with some school divisions that are 

affected and certainly stands ready to assist in any local 

negotiations where there are those difficulties. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Madam Minister, is 

this process of negotiation is basically taking place between 

school units along the borders.  A unit in Manitoba will 

negotiate.  And if there are 20 students coming from that unit 

into a unit in Saskatchewan, if there are 20 students going back 

and forth there was . . . would that mean there wouldn't be a 

tuition fee charged at all if it happened to work out that there 

was roughly an equal distribution of students? 

 

And are you also saying, Madam Minister, that the department 

is not involved at all in trying to reach some kind of reciprocal 

provincial agreement that would alleviate the need for unit 

boards to derive and come to 

agreements between boards? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I may not have made 

myself quite clear when I talked about some ongoing 

negotiations that the department was involved in, as indeed we 

are attempting to arrive at an arrangement, an umbrella 

arrangement or a blanket arrangement interprovincially 

between the respective provinces so that school . . . so that the 

situation is well understood and so that school divisions don't 

have to, on a one-to-one basis, make those arrangements 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, when you're talking of students 

paying tuition fees and the sum of $4,000 was brought up, you 

also indicated that and, if I understand you correctly, if a 

Saskatchewan student ends up going to school in Manitoba and 

is paying, and if it's -- I'm not sure but I'll throw out the sum of 

$4,000 as the letter indicates here that Manitoba residents 

would be paying -- if a Saskatchewan student was paying that 

amount and I'm not . . . it would . . . I'm not sure what the 

funding per student is that is sent to each division. Are you 

telling me that . . . telling the Assembly that the Saskatchewan . 

. . the parents of that student can apply to the unit board to be 

reimbursed for that amount? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the recognized costs 

average over the province . . . and of course it varies, 

depending on the size of the school and distances travelled and 

so on, but it's approximately $4,500 per student.  And I'm very 

familiar with these arrangements, not on an interprovincial 

basis but because my own children attended . . . we were 

residents of a rural school division that was close to a major 

urban centre, and the local school division, the rural school 

division, made the determination that rather than expending a 

lot of capital building schools in the urban fringe, that they 

would make an arrangement and have a number of children, 

again with the objective of minimizing the length of the bus 

ride, educated in the adjacent urban municipality.  And 

certainly that was the range in which the tuition fees were.  It 

was established as the recognized cost in the unit that one 

division would pay to the neighbouring one. 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  It being 5 p.m. the Committee of 

Finance stands recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


