




















































Hansard: August 12, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2313 

 August 12, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, late last night at the conclusion 

of proceedings -- and this is my first opportunity to raise this 

point -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt had been 

repeatedly cautioned by the Chair, and then he did make up a 

statement calling the member from Estevan a liar.  You asked 

him to apologize, sir, and he did by making the statement: I 

apologize for calling the member of Estevan a liar. 

 

Now, sir, I know that you do not want precedents like that 

being said in this House and never before has any apology, 

except an unequivocal apology, been accepted by this House.  

And, sir, I would ask you now to see to it to rectify the 

situation. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member's point of 

order is well taken, and I do apologize for the members here for 

the lateness of the hour last night and not being as careful as I 

should have been with the member from Humboldt.  I do 

remember thinking about it last night, that the practice in the 

past has been that the words are unconditionally withdrawn 

without any comments.  And I think that we would do well in 

that regard and I ask the member from Humboldt that for the 

sake of the order of the House that he unconditionally 

withdraw those remarks that he made last night in the House. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like at this time to 

apologize for the unparliamentary language I used last night in 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right.  I appreciate that.  And I hope that 

today we can conduct ourselves in the way that we should in 

this House. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Devine and the proposed 

subamendment moved by Mr. Muirhead. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking the other evening, 

we were speaking to a subamendment to the amendment to the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) motion that is 

speaking about the fact that the government didn't follow a 

process and also invoke closure on the motion to bring forward 

and introduce the GRIP motion to this Assembly. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I understand and I'm quite well aware of the 

fact that we also have notice of motion given that is going to 

invoke the ultimate form of closure and time allocation on this 

debate as well. 

 

As I enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker, this morning, I'm 

mindful of the fact that the whole process has evolved around 

the fact that the government would dare to change and 

unilaterally change contracts that would affect people's lives 

and affect people's rights. 

 

And as I'd look at process, certainly the process we are faced 

with today is a forum or an avenue being used by a government 

with such a large and overriding majority to stymie a small . . . 

and I think at one point in time possibly the government even 

felt that being as its shortly following an election where they 

received a large percentage of the vote that the small 

opposition they were facing may very well roll over and not 

really pay attention to a number of . . . the process in this 

Assembly and the Bills that they were bringing forward. 

 

And I understand and see and we all are aware of the number 

of changes and the number of Bills that are giving . . . putting 

more authority in the hands of Executive Council, placing more 

authority in the hands of our departments, Mr. Speaker, 

authority which I believe interferes with the very rights and 

privileges, not only of the members of this Assembly but of 

individuals right across this province. 

 

And as I also indicated, Mr. Speaker, as we're discussing the 

Bill and as we discussed the process here, I note a number of 

headlines prior to getting back into the official debate on the 

GRIP Bill.  Headlines that read: government getting prepared 

for another GRIP battle; opposition ready for the GRIP battle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe everyone in this Assembly has laid out 

the guidelines by which they would be operating, laid out the 

fact that we really feel the opposition has laid out very strongly 

and very firmly their opposition to the changes and to the GRIP 

Bill that is actually proceeded to this Assembly.  And we've 

laid it out, I think, very clearly. 

 

We've laid it out because the government has indicated that 

they are not willing and will not change their position or move 

from their position.  As one of the headlines reads, Mr. 

Speaker, it says: NDP won't change GRIP -- even though they 

acknowledge there are . . . the process may have been 

circumvented, even though they would acknowledge that many 

producers, in fact all producers across this province whether or 

not they . . . Some producers feel comfortable with the '92 

program, and many producers would prefer the '91 program.  

The options have been placed out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We find that the NDP (New Democratic Party) have indicated, 

no, they're not willing to change the process or to change GRIP 

or to backtrack on their GRIP amendments and GRIP proposals 

and sit down and talk with the farming community.  Because 

what happens to the GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker, affects everybody 

across this province. 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

It affects not only the farm community and the people, men and 

women directly involved in the production of agricultural 

products to grain farming or to livestock production, Mr. 

Speaker, but it affects the men and women in our small 

communities.  It affects the teachers of our small communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our small communities, our schools are built 

around the boys and girls that attend schools -- children that 

live on and in most cases on the farm.  Most of the students in 

our schools come from a farm background, Mr. Speaker.  And 

if those farm families are not there, then our schools don't have 

the number of pupils and eventually the schools start to close 

down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the same thing in our health system, Mr. Speaker.  We 

find that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member that he is 

on the subamendment.  The subamendment is very narrow in 

its scope.  And he must . . . his words must relate only to the 

subamendment. 

 

And the subamendment simply says that the words "House 

leaders" be substituted with the words "the Minister of 

Agriculture and the opposition member responsible for 

Agriculture" and that "because closure was used to unilaterally 

force introduction of this Bill in the Assembly." 

 

So your debate on the subamendment has to be very narrow. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank you for the 

observation and certainly for just reminding me of the process.  

Obviously even though the night was short, a number of 

members have woken up very sharp.  And I appreciate the fact 

that you have brought that to our attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the process, talk about the fact 

that the government has invoked closure, and one of the main 

arguments that we bring forward in the subamendment is the 

fact that closure was used to bring forward the GRIP motion 

limiting the debate on the original motion that would 

reintroduce GRIP, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, we're all aware 

of the hoist that was placed on the Bill, and asking and 

allowing or hopefully allowing the government and the 

Opposition House Leader to come to some form of an 

agreement. 

 

And as we've indicated in our subamendment, Mr. Speaker, 

recognizing the fact that possibly even the Agriculture minister 

and the opposition member responsible for Agriculture would 

have taken the time to sit down and even adhere to some of the 

changes that we talked about, and sit down and come to a 

workable agreement. 

 

And when we look at process, I'm reminded of the process that 

is taking place at the present time within our country, Mr. 

Speaker, regarding the constitutional debate.  And I think when 

we talk about process, a form of process of conciliation, the 

process of sitting down and negotiating . . . And we're all aware 

of the fact that 

negotiations take time; negotiations don't happen overnight.  

Negotiations sometimes take long hours. 

 

And many people across this province will be aware of that -- 

not just in the province of Saskatchewan but across Canada.  

When it comes to negotiations, people in unions sitting down 

with employers to negotiate contracts, the process of 

negotiation takes time.  As we've seen in this Assembly over 

the years, it has taken time for members of all parties to sit 

down and finally come to a consensus on how the process 

should evolve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We find it very abhorrent that the government would indeed, 

instead of following the process of the legislature and the 

legislative agenda and how the House should operate and it 

would be appropriate for the House to operate, we find the 

government indicating that, no, they're not willing to follow the 

process any more but they are going to use their heavy hand 

and use their majority to push through and to change the 

process if that's necessary. 

 

As a number of my colleagues have indicated, that there are 

many forms and many processes that we face.  Certainly we 

find in the area of our everyday lives and in the sport field there 

are rules and regulations that we must follow, we must adhere 

to when we are . . . when you're playing the game.  Regardless 

of what the game may be, there are rules to follow, Mr. 

Speaker; there's a process to be adhered to. 

 

And if the umpire or the referee or whoever was in charge 

would change those rules or if any team would change . . . dare 

to try to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, the umpire or the 

referee would step in and say, no, these are the rules and this is 

what we will be calling you on; this is what the books state and 

we're going to follow those rules; we won't change them simply 

because they don't suit your needs on this occasion. 

 

And I find it to be the same thing in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Assembly has rules, has a process to follow, 

and it would be appropriate for the Assembly to have . . . so we 

have the committee in place to set out the process, set out the 

rules, and that then the leadership of this Assembly should be 

following in that process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about closure and talk about how 

you use closure, we look back over the period . . . look back 

over how this legislature has operated for a number of years, 

Mr. Speaker.  The process and the form of using closure has 

only been invoked once an Assembly has been been speaking 

for hours -- hours on end -- regarding a particular motion or 

regarding a particular debate or whether it affects a certain area 

of government.  Mr. Speaker, generally speaking, the process 

has always been to allow the opposition ample and substantive 

time to debate the motion in the Assembly while at the same 

time moving forward with government business. 

 

(0915) 

 

And I guess the part of the process that I'm disturbed at and 

discouraged that hasn't really been allowed or followed forward 

or followed through, it is the fact that 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

any substantive government business has not been brought 

forward to this Assembly.  And on many occasions the 

opposition has been left with nothing but debate on very 

non-controversial-type Bills because there wasn't anything else 

on the order paper that was really made available. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the process I'm talking about.  The 

fact that we should be following them, allowing the Minister of 

Agriculture and the minister responsible on the opposition side 

of the House to sit down and negotiate and work out a form of 

coming to an agreement on the process of debate that will take 

place in this Assembly. 

 

And to invoke closure, Mr. Speaker, is taking away the ability 

of the members to do that because there is no need for these 

members to sit down and negotiate.  And there was no need 

from the start because the government opposite and the 

members also knew that the House Leader would eventually 

bring forward the closure motion; would bring forward the time 

allocation motion that would take away the ability or limit the 

ability of the opposition to speak and limit the time so that 

indeed at the end of the day this Bill, the GRIP changes would 

go forward, would be brought forward, would be passed. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what I also suggest, that in light of the 

changes that have been made, it may be very difficult for 

certain individuals to even give final approval to the changes 

and to the GRIP if the GRIP does reach that stage, Mr. 

Speaker.  And certainly the time allocation motion that's been 

brought forward is going to allow for that change, and in fact 

force that change, not only on the opposition but on the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I believe men and women 

across this province are very concerned that the form of debate 

and their limitations, by limiting the opposition, are being 

hindered. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we should have the opportunity 

to stand in our place and indeed debate this motion to its 

fullest.  And in the time we have, I believe, Mr. Speaker, we 

will indeed bring forward the proposals we have indicated over 

the period of time showing that it isn't necessary, it wasn't 

necessary, and shouldn't have been necessary to invoke closure 

on this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day, as I was speaking in the Assembly, 

I talked about the last time closure had been used.  And I talked 

about the fact that many members, present members of the 

government when in opposition, spoke very loudly on the 

closure motion.  And they indicated that it was, in their 

opinion, a way and a form of the government abusing their 

rights and their privileges, taking away their right to debate in 

this Assembly and that it was shameful that a government, a 

majority government, would indeed use this form of debate by 

limiting the debate on the motion. 

 

As the member from Regina Hillsdale indicated, talked about, 

this debate is about a government with its own agenda, an 

agenda that is not in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I would suggest that certainly the agenda 

that is being placed before this Assembly is not in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan. 

But I can appreciate where the government is coming from in 

trying to limit debate, because by allowing debate and allowing 

appropriate debate, not only on the GRIP Bill but on the critical 

wildlife habitat, on the changes to health care funding, Mr. 

Speaker, they have indeed forced the legislature to sit even 

longer than . . . I shouldn't say longer, because I believe we're 

in our 63rd day in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that closure wouldn't 

have been needed if the government would have indeed called 

the House, as they had indicated prior to the election of 

October 1991, if they would have called the House at a more 

normal time. 

 

And I know many members on that side of the House would 

agree with the fact that there's no reason why this House can't 

sit around the end of January, the 1st of February, begin their 

sitting.  And in the normal process of time, the House would 

adjourn at a fair and reasonable time to give members the 

ability to spend time in their constituencies when there are so 

many activities taking place. 

 

And I believe that's the reason for the closure and the time 

allocation that has taken place right now, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that the opposition has . . . opposition of 10 members have 

actually and effectively spoken very strongly regarding issues 

that they're concerned with, specifically on the GRIP 

legislation.  And then of course, Mr. Speaker, we must look at 

the other debates that would take place and will take place.  

And one has to recognize the fact that there are very serious 

Estimates that must come before this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all realize that at the end of the day the 

government will have a stay.  But we must have the ability to 

voice our opinions and our concerns regarding the process and 

the ability of the opposition to speak. 

 

As the member from Regina Hillsdale said, the debate is about 

muzzling the opposition.  And I guess many people sometimes 

wonder and would say, well if you're invoking closure are you 

really muzzling the opposition?  Because I believe closure 

allows each member then 20 minutes to speak. 

 

Time allocation, as I understand from the motion presented to 

this Assembly last night or placed on the Table, it's going to 

give another two days.  But we must say, Mr. Speaker, does 

that effectively give us the appropriate time to ask the 

government to reconsider the process they have followed 

regarding the GRIP legislation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that the motion before us . . . I think I 

have brought forward a number of arguments why the Minister 

of Agriculture and why he should have taken some time to 

consult with the associate . . . or the opposition critic for 

Agriculture.  And I've also taken a fair bit of time, Mr. Speaker, 

to argue against the idea that the government would use closure 

on this motion.  I think a number of my colleagues would also 

like to speak to the amendment and the subamendment. 

 

And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will take my 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

place and I would invite any of the members on the 

government side of the House to enter into the debate as well, 

and offer their opinions and see if their opinions are as strong 

as they were in the debate on closure that took place back in 

1989. 

 

So therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will give room for 

other members to speak in this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I recognize the member from 

Souris-Cannington, I again want to draw the members' 

attention that we are on the subamendment.  The 

subamendment has deleted the process in which it has been 

brought forward.  And it only says that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture could not reach 

agreement and because closure was used to unilaterally force 

introduction. 

 

When you're speaking to the subamendment, you must keep 

your words to those two things.  You cannot speak to the 

amendment.  This is not . . . you only speak to the 

subamendment, not to the amendment at this time.  Otherwise, 

members -- if I would allow that -- members would be 

precluded from speaking to the amendment later on.  So you 

must address your words only to the subamendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, can I ask for a 

clarification? 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, you certainly may. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the subamendment is 

changing the amendment from House leaders to the Minister of 

Agriculture, along that line.  Can I speak as to why it should 

not be the House leaders as opposed to the Minister of 

Agriculture? 

 

The Speaker: -- Certainly, the member may.  I would assume 

that that would be one of the reasons you would be giving.  

You certainly may. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted 

to get that clear in my own mind because that is indeed where I 

wish to start at, is why we are proposing to change it from the 

House leaders negotiating to the Minister of Agriculture and 

our critic for Agriculture. 

 

The House leaders are in continuous negotiations over various 

issues, and at times, things get heated and personalities become 

an issue whenever these debates take place.  Also, the House 

Leader on the government side represents an urban seat and I'm 

not just too familiar how familiar he is with the entire issue of 

the GRIP program and how it affects rural Saskatchewan.  

There's always a lot of subtle implications when we're dealing 

with a particular program, especially one as complex as GRIP 

and the farm scenario. 
 

Our own House Leader, while he resides on a farm, is a hog 

producer.  And that has a different connotation than one who is 

a grain farmer and whose entire livelihood is tied up in the 

production of cereal crops and oilseeds.  But if we were to go, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture and our critic for 

Agriculture, then we have people who are out there on the 

farm, dealing with these 

issues on their own personal basis.  They have their own 

personal understanding of what the implications are.  There are 

many legal implications, but there is also a lot of subtle 

feelings involved in the discussion of GRIP. 

 

Our member, the member from Morse, who is our Agriculture 

critic, was involved in the whole process of developing GRIP 

initially.  So he's quite familiar, Mr. Speaker, with the intent of 

the Bill and what was hoped to be achieved by the production 

of GRIP, by implementing that safety net in place for the 

province, for the farmers of this province. 

 

The member from Morse not only helped develop GRIP, but 

once the Bill had been introduced to this legislature back in 

1991, toured the province and talked to the farmers to find out 

what they wanted, what changes they would like to have seen, 

and why they needed this program to be put in place, and what 

they hoped to achieve with it at the end of the day. 

 

Even in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, there were two 

meetings to deal with this issue where the farmers came 

forward and presented their ideas, talked to the ministers about 

what was involved in this program, what they hoped to 

achieve, and what the farmers hoped to get out of it. 

 

So our critic for Agriculture is very aware of what the farmers 

wanted out of this program and what they wanted to achieve 

with it.  He was also the member who looked after ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) as his 

portfolio while a cabinet minister.  So he's also aware of the 

financial needs of the farmers when it comes to being able to 

make their payments and the process that you have to go 

through, the time frame that these payments become necessary. 

 

He is familiar, as I'm sure the member from Rosetown is 

familiar, that our crop year doesn't start on January 1; it starts 

on August 1.  And your cash flow comes in after that.  So the 

GRIP program was developed to take that into account.  That 

after the crop year started, the production would have been 

measured in some manner or another, estimated.  People would 

know, the farmers on the land would know what their 

production was, what the projected price was, and they could 

receive a payment that fall and then it would carry on. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture is also aware of that, whereas the 

House leaders may not be, because our House Leader is a hog 

producer and the member from Elphinstone represents a riding 

in the city of Regina. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- But does he farm? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I have no idea if the Government House 

Leader does indeed farm.  I don't know if he does or not any 

more.  I know that he used to, but I'm not sure if he still does. 

 

But if the two, the member from Rosetown and the member 

from Morse, Mr. Speaker, had the opportunity to sit down, with 

a good feeling of how the GRIP program should work and what 

should be in place with it, then there is the possibilities there 

that some compromises 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

could be developed.  But unless that opportunity is provided, 

unless that opportunity is taken advantage of, well then that 

won't happen. 

 

And there are some differences between the proposed GRIP 

and the one that was in place last year, and those differences 

need to be ironed out and discussed.  But unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, we haven't been allowed . . . that process hasn't been 

allowed to take place -- the discussion between those two 

members.  Indeed what has happened as this Bill has come 

through the House is that closure has been used to force it into 

play. 

 

(0930) 

 

The bells rang, the Bill was suspended, a motion was made to 

reintroduce the Bill into this House and that motion included a 

motion of closure that debate on that Bill would be limited to 

force the Bill onto the floor of the Assembly.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, it worked, because the Bill is indeed here. 

 

Before that happened, closure was also used to force an end to 

the bell-ringing, not the bell-ringing itself but the ability to use 

bell-ringing as a tool for the opposition, by using closure to 

eliminate the bells, by using closure to force the Bill onto the 

floor of the House.  And then again last night, Mr. Speaker, 

time allocation notices were given which means that closure 

will be introduced on the GRIP debate itself. 

 

All of this has made a very tight time frame for the opposition 

and a tight time frame for farmers on the land to be able to 

express themselves, to gain knowledge of the program.  When 

you look back at the previous GRIP legislation, it took farmers 

six months to figure out for themselves after all the meetings 

had been held around the province just what GRIP meant to 

them and how it was to operate.  They had a year to learn that 

and they were just starting to become comfortable in their own 

minds as to how the GRIP program was to operate. 

 

With these changes coming forward, farmers are again placed 

in a position of limbo where they do not understand what the 

process is all about, what they expect, how they should expect 

the program to work at the end of the day.  In my own 

communities this spring while groups were touring the 

province to discuss the GRIP program -- the Pool had meetings 

down in our area -- the next day you'd go and talk to people 

and they'd have an impression that there is a fixed amount of 

money on the table to be paid out at the end of the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that does not seem to be the case.  And that's 

where you get involved into the principles of what is happening 

here -- the principle being that time has not been allowed for 

people to become familiar with the program. 

 

Because closure was used, this unilaterally forced the Bill onto 

the floor of the House and it's also going to unilaterally in the 

end close this Bill off to debate for the opposition and for the 

government members also.  Because once closure is brought to 

the floor, it eliminates our ability to . . . we would have 200 

minutes, I believe it is, to talk about the Bill, and also closure is 

also going to 

be used, from what I gather and what was introduced last night, 

on Committee of the Whole. 

 

And Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, is where 

everybody has the opportunity to get clarifications on how the 

Bill is actually going to work, the nuts and bolts of it, to get the 

explanations from the Minister of Agriculture.  And not only 

do we need to know those answers, but the government 

members need to have an opportunity to ask those questions 

also.  Their constituents are just as concerned as ours are. 

 

If you look around the province . . . I was listening to the radio 

this morning, they were giving a crop report, and the 

west-central part of Saskatchewan supposedly has very bad 

crops.  I know that the north part of the province has very poor 

crops.  So those constituents need to be able to have their 

members ask the questions to find out how it's going to operate 

in their area.  And because of time allocation, because of 

closure, those members and us are going to be limited as to 

how much we can actually ask when it comes to questions. 

 

I've noticed through a number of the other Bills that have gone 

through the House, that in many times there are a lot of small 

details that are not printed in the Bill but actually become part 

of regulation later, that need to be clarified to the people out in 

the public and to the people sitting on the floor of this 

Assembly, the members. 

 

And without having a decent amount of time to ask our 

questions in Committee of the Whole or to bring up those type 

of questions in second reading, it becomes very difficult to 

determine exactly what is in the Bill and how it will operate.  

And not only do we need to have that ability, but the people out 

in the general public, the farmers who are going to be dealing 

with this, who have been trying to deal with this ever since this 

spring, need to have more opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's why we feel that this Bill needs to be given 

more time.  It needs to have an extended period of time to go 

through this House to allow everyone to gain some knowledge 

of it.  There are particular items that will come forward that 

should be discussed out in the general public, but with time 

allocation in place that indeed will not take place.  I believe the 

time allocation that has been proposed will limit the debate to 

approximately four days, and this will make it very difficult for 

the people in the general public to gain a knowledge of what is 

going to happen and what is going to be said. 

 

One of the items that I know has come up in my own area as to 

what the general public would like to see, is the question of a 

basket situation versus individual crops.  Now I have some 

people in my area who like the idea of going to a basket 

situation, and others who just find it totally abhorrent.  And yet 

the two of them need to be able to get together and discuss it, 

the same as we need to be able to discuss it in this legislature. 

 

There are some advantages and disadvantages to both methods.  

And our Agriculture representative . . . our agricultural critic 

and the Agriculture minister are aware of these.  They know 

what some of these differences are.  They realize that if you're 

looking at a premium that is 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

fairly high, by going to an individual case, some farmers 

cannot afford that.  But they should be able to sit down together 

and debate -- negotiate perhaps would be a better word -- the 

advantages and disadvantages of both. 

 

And perhaps what needs to be allowed is that both can be 

presented through the Bill, that the farmers be given an 

alternative, that you can take either a basket situation with a 

lower premium, if that's what you would like, or perhaps take 

an individual crop coverage and pay a higher premium for that 

privilege. 

 

What happens with the individual crop coverage is you may 

have an excellent crop in crop A, a poor crop in crop B, but 

they don't offset each other, whereas that's what happens in a 

basket situation.  A basket situation, because there is less risk 

involved in it, would mean that you could reduce the 

premiums.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our critic for 

Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture understand those 

things and they could sit down and talk about them and 

negotiate it. 

 

One of the options that has been talked about in my area is a 

buy-back option for dry-land producers.  This would allow 

them to over-produce their GRIP guarantee and still not be 

penalized.  A similar sort of method is used in Alberta and in 

Manitoba.  Our Agriculture critic has looked at this.  He looked 

at it last year prior to the implementation but didn't have time at 

that time to put it into the Bill.  And it would have been coming 

up again for considerations. 

 

And I believe there is something very worthwhile in that 

because what happens under the current circumstances is that if 

you produce a greater amount than what your guarantee is, this 

is deducted from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member must be very careful 

here.  He's getting into discussion of the detail of the Bill.  And 

in your subamendment, you can't do that.  You must stick by 

what the subamendment . . . It's very narrow, I recognize.  But 

the member must stay on the subamendment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will indeed 

try to stay to the amendment . . . subamendment.  Sorry about 

that. 

 

Part of the things involved here that we're discussing involves 

the principles of the issue.  We're changing this amendment 

with a subamendment to read:  this Bill should not be read a 

second time because the ministers of Agriculture and the 

opposition member responsible for Agriculture have not 

reached agreement on the principles involved, and unilaterally 

forced introduction of this Bill in the Assembly.  So we also 

are, Mr. Speaker, talking about the principles involved in this 

Bill. 
 

And I believe that is part of what I'm trying to bring out, is 

some of the principles involved here, and part of the principles 

that are involved is the protection of agriculture, of farmers in 

this province.  Rather than having peaks and valleys in the 

income for farmers, is to try and stabilize that income and to 

allow farmers the ability to plan a little better how their farm 

economy is going to work and how their farm financing is 

going to 

operate. 

 

One of the problems that farmers have, Mr. Speaker, in 

financing their operations, is that we have income coming in in 

the fall and very little income coming back in in the spring.  So 

the principles of a safety net program is to -- partially -- is to 

try and stabilize that, to allow that income to come in 

throughout the year, not all in one lump sum at one particular 

time, but rather spread it out.  And the GRIP legislation, when 

payments are due, does exactly that.  It allows payments to 

come in the fall, the spring, and again in the fall.  And that's 

one of the principles involved in a GRIP, in a NISA (net 

income stabilization account), in a safety-net, farm program. 

 

One of the other principles involved in this is why the whole 

legislation has been brought into play.  Is that because of low 

commodity prices?  Farm prices were way down.  Agriculture 

was in trouble.  And this GRIP legislation allows farmers to be 

protected a little better than what was in place before. 

 

And because our critic for Agriculture, the member from 

Morse, was involved in the establishment of this program, he's 

very familiar with the entire operations of it.  The Minister of 

Agriculture, I believe, is probably becoming familiar with the 

GRIP legislation, because he's been dealing with it now for 

these past number of months. 

 

Between the two of them, I believe they understand that what 

the principles actually involved are and why this kind of a Bill 

is being put into place.  This Bill is being put into place to 

provide protection for agriculture, as I have stated earlier, and 

that protection is to deal with low commodity prices, to deal 

with crop failures, to stabilize farmers' income. 

 

Part of what needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, when dealing with 

the Minister of Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture, is that 

consultation needs to take place with them and with farmers 

around this province.  And that's one of the things, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been lacking in this entire process, is the 

consultation that should have taken place to allow the Minister 

of Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture to gain a more 

intimate knowledge of what the farmers are thinking out there 

after having had the opportunity to go through one crop year 

with the previous GRIP. 

 

The leaders of the . . . the House Leader for the government 

and our House Leader should also have been involved in that 

kind of a process.  But because that did not take place, I believe 

it's incumbent that the agricultural representatives of this 

Assembly, the Minister of Agriculture and our critic for 

Agriculture, do take advantage of the opportunities to go out 

there and consult. 

 

There were a number of farm rallies around this spring where 

that consultation could have taken place.  Our member from . . 

. our critic for Agriculture was down at Shaunavon where a 

number of farmers wished to talk about the new GRIP 

legislation, wished to have their say.  The minister for 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance was there and also took the 

opportunity to become aware what the farmers had to say, but 

unfortunately the Minister of 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

Agriculture was not there.  And it would have been important, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture, if he had 

been there, to learn what the farmers concerns were. 

 

There is talk in the paper of another rally being held up at 

Melfort and I think there would be an opportunity for both of 

these gentlemen -- the member from Morse and the member 

from Rosetown -- to find out what the farmers think of the 

current program.  Whether they would like '91 or '92 or what 

changes they would like to see in either or both of those 

programs. 

 

Because while these gentlemen do have a very intimate 

knowledge of the program, as you look through a program 

there's always small details which have been missed, which 

may affect one particular area more than another, that should 

be brought forward and the program perhaps adjusted to deal 

with that kind of a situation. 

 

When these farmers do have ideas, Mr. Speaker, they are 

generally very good and very practical ideas.  And I think it's 

incumbent on the government and on the opposition to take 

advantage of these opportunities to listen to what the farmers -- 

the producers -- have to say, to find out how they think the 

programs are affecting them, and if need be, to make the 

adjustments to accommodate both the needs of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and the 

producers of Saskatchewan.  Because both are a player in this 

whole affair. 

 

(0945) 

 

And if our members were to go out and to consult, to deal with 

the issues that the farmers are bringing forward, I think we 

could have a much better piece of legislation than what we 

seem to have today. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture and our member from Morse, our 

Agriculture critic, should be getting together, Mr. Speaker, to 

try and discuss some of the ideas because they come at it from 

slightly different points of view.  And this would allow an 

opportunity for some negotiations and for perhaps some 

adjustments. 

 

Since we're going to be limited in the amount of time that we 

have to deal with this today, to deal with this in the next 

coming weeks, then perhaps some negotiations outside of this 

House would be worthwhile for all concerned.  I know 

sometimes it gets to be very difficult to accommodate that 

because of times, but perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the 

alternatives that could be looked at by the members to solve 

this impasse that we have and to get some adjustments made 

into the program to make it more acceptable for everyone. 

 

One of the things that would have made this entire process, Mr. 

Speaker, run a lot more smoothly is if the Minister of 

Agriculture and our critic for Agriculture had had the 

opportunities to review the draft Bill before it was introduced 

to the House.  This has been done, not necessarily between the 

minister responsible and a critic, an opposition critic, but the 

consultation process has been allowed to take place with other 

Bills such as the labour Bill and the health Bill with the people 

in the 

general public that are concerned with it. 

 

Had the two agricultural representatives in the Assembly been 

allowed to take a look at the draft Bill and work through it 

together, Mr. Speaker, this would have facilitated its passage 

through the House.  It would have also been beneficial I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, had the general public been allowed, or 

at least certain farm groups and organizations, to have had a 

look at the draft legislation.  And perhaps some of the 

acrimony that has become involved in this would have been 

avoided. 

 

As a caucus and through the Agriculture critic, we're prepared 

to offer advice to the Minister of Agriculture, free of charge, to 

aid in this process.  And I'm sure that the Minister of 

Agriculture, because he's cost conscious and his government is 

cost conscious, would have been prepared to accept any free 

advice that they were given.  But when you offer free advice, 

Mr. Speaker, and it's accepted, then you hope that at some 

point in time some portion of that advice might be listened to 

and taken. 

 

We have a number of ideas over here, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member from Morse has a number of ideas on how the GRIP 

legislation could be improved, how you could make it more 

beneficial for the farmers of Saskatchewan, to deal with the 

principles involved of stabilizing farm incomes and providing 

for those times when commodity prices are lower than normal 

and the farm economy is in a crisis as they are today. 

 

Part of the principles of the entire concept of farm safety nets 

and this particular GRIP legislation is to protect farmers in 

times of hurt, not necessarily just to protect the government 

from being hurt by low commodity prices, but the actual 

producers on the land and their families.  Because the families, 

Mr. Speaker, are indeed suffering because of the farm 

commodity situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would have been better throughout this whole 

discussion had our two representatives been able to sit down 

and talk about alternatives between the GRIP '91 and the GRIP 

'92. 

 

And it would have been much more beneficial to all of us had 

both of our representative sat down with the farmers to find out 

what they would have wanted, to find out whether they 

preferred '91 or a portion, or '92 or a portion of that, and 

somehow combine them together to come up with a Bill that 

would have been acceptable to everyone.  And I believe those 

kind of negotiations could have and should have taken place. 

 

Part of the things they could have considered, Mr. Speaker, was 

the new federal offers that were made.  We were prepared to 

discuss with the Minister of Agriculture, to offer him our 

advice as to how to implement, how to bring forward, how to 

accept those new federal offers which would have put 30 to 

$40 an acre on the table for all the farmers of this province.  

And yet because those negotiations never took place, because 

of the hard feelings in the House, this money has perhaps been 

lost to the people of Saskatchewan.  And in a time of low 

commodity prices, Mr. Speaker, farmers cannot afford to lose 

that kind of money. 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Because these negotiations have not taken place, and I believe 

they should, Mr. Speaker, between the Minister of Agriculture 

and our House critic for Agriculture, thousands of farmers are 

having their contracts broken.  This is going to cost them 

money.  This is going to cost the province money, Mr. Speaker.  

But if these negotiations between the two House Agriculture 

representatives could take place, then perhaps we could avoid 

this.  We could avoid the concept of taking the Bill to the 

Supreme Court.  Because no matter how it gets there, Mr. 

Speaker, it is going to cost us money and it will indeed get 

there. 

 

The principles involved in this case, Mr. Speaker, is that 

farmers, the provincial government, and the federal 

government have formed a compact . . . have a contract to deal 

with the situation of stabilizing farm incomes, to protect 

farmers from low commodity prices.  But this does not just 

deal with the province, it does not just deal with the farmers, 

but the federal government is also involved in it.  And I think 

they are the lost player in this, and somehow or another, they 

have to be brought back into the process before it costs us a lot 

of money.  And I'm sure that our Agriculture critic is prepared 

to work with the Minister of Agriculture to discuss with the 

federal government the implications of this Act, of this 

amendments to the GRIP legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when contracts are broken in this province, it's 

not only farmers that are involved, but everyone else who has a 

contract with the government.  So the implications here can be 

very wide-ranging.  And as we're suggesting, with the 

Agriculture critic negotiating with the Minister of Agriculture, 

all other sectors of society are watching this very carefully to 

see if there are implications for them.  They're also watching 

when they see this government unilaterally force the 

introduction of this Bill onto the Assembly because they 

wonder, how is this going to affect us?  How is it going to 

affect the legislation that affects us? 

 

The closure rule, Mr. Speaker, when I came into the House, I 

thought this was a rule that was used only on the rare occasion, 

that it was only used in the most dire of circumstances.  And 

yet I have seen it used three times already in this session and 

it's to be used again.  It seems to becoming the rule, the norm, 

rather than the exception.  And I think that has to be frightening 

to everyone, not only in this Assembly, not only in this 

province, but across the Commonwealth, because once a 

precedent is set, as we're all aware, it becomes the rules for 

everyone. 

 

And if closure becomes the rule in this House, it's going to be 

very difficult to move things along in this House.  Closure has 

been used previously in this House.  It was used in the potash 

debate after 120 hours of debate.  It was used in The E&H 

(Education and Health) Tax Act after two months of debate.  

But we've had it used after five hours of debate.  We've had it 

used after a number of hours of debate, but not that many -- 10, 

15 hours -- and again we're going to have it used now after only 

two or three days of debate on the GRIP legislation. 

 

And I find that unacceptable, Mr. Speaker.  It's unacceptable 

that we should be using closure to end debate on an issue of 

such vital importance to the farmers and to the whole 

provincial economy, Mr. Speaker.  The 

whole of this province needs time to look at, to review, and to 

adjust to the proposed GRIP legislation. 

 

This type of heavy-handed action, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe 

is acceptable to the majority of people in this province.  They 

want to see this Assembly operate but they want to see it 

operate in a manner which is proper, in a manner in which they 

would conduct their own business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it's very incumbent that our Minister of 

Agriculture and the opposition minister responsible for 

Agriculture sit down together to go through the principles that's 

involved in the GRIP legislation and try and find some manner 

to accommodate both of them, to find some manner to 

accommodate the wishes of the farmers, the needs of the 

farmers, and the needs of this Assembly.  Because to 

unilaterally force through the introduction of this Bill, I don't 

believe is acceptable to anyone, particularly to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I believe I will allow my colleagues 

to have an opportunity to speak.  We have many more items we 

wish to bring forward, and at this time I would like to thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The GRIP legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that's been brought forward by the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose has been a botched-up process right from the 

start. 

 

On March 13, Mr. Speaker, the minister brought forward the 

legislation . . . pardon me, the changes in the program that 

essentially, as all farmers in Saskatchewan know now, changed 

the program to a program that's totally unworkable, to a 

program that is . . . guarantees the farmer virtually nothing 

other than crop insurance, which he had before, to a program 

that . . . the only beneficiary seems to be in this whole process 

is the provincial government.  The only beneficiary in the 

program seems to be the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Farm organizations that designed the program, as Mr. Minister 

of Agriculture points out, I think they regret the day they ever 

sat down with you, sir.  I think they regret that day more than 

ever.  The member of the committee from Shaunavon 

practically . . . Gull Lake, practically broke down in the public 

meeting in Shaunavon down there and admitted that he did not 

want to be part of the signatories of this program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from the Moosomin area on the . . . SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

representative has said he didn't want anything to do with it.  

My guess is Piper at Elrose doesn't want anything to do with 

you any more.  My guess is there isn't a single representative of 

the wheat growers that want to have anything to do with you, 

and that probably is the reason why you exclude them from 

your meetings now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The GRIP '91 program, as you're aware, Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, was introduced early, early in the year of 1991.  

There were public informational meetings held all over the 

province, which ministers from the government 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

side attended all over the province -- something that the 

Minister of Agriculture wouldn't extend that same courtesy to 

farm families around the province. 

 

He didn't even leave this building to speak to farmers about the 

program -- didn't extend that kind of courtesy to farm families 

in this province, Mr. Speaker.  And then he has the gall to stand 

in here and say farmers want this program, Mr. Speaker -- the 

unmitigated gall to suggest that farmers want this program. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, the farm families of 

Saskatchewan deserve and expect better.  One thing they know, 

Mr. Minister, is after this session is over, you will no longer be 

the Minister of Agriculture.  And that's something that I think 

will be welcomed by all farm families in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Probably it'll be somebody like the member from Humboldt 

will be the new minister of Agriculture, or maybe even the 

member from Shaunavon, or maybe the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, if she sticks around long enough to 

accept that appointment. 

 

(1000) 

 

Then we would truly know that we could expect incompetence.  

We would truly know that we could expect incompetence from 

one of those three.  But we expected more, we expected more 

from the member from Rosetown-Elrose in the fine tradition of 

bringing down to Regina the type of people like the previous 

member, Mr. Swan.  We truly know we could expect 

incompetence from those three, but we expected better from 

the Minister of Agriculture today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the GRIP committee was told by the Minister of 

Agriculture to cut this program back, was told by the Minister 

of Agriculture to cut this program back.  And he knows it and 

we know it.  Members of the committee have told us that. 

 

You went into that committee, sir, and said to them, this 

program has to be cut back approximately $200 million, and 

however it's done is fine with me.  You guys find out the best 

way possible and deal with it, and then we'll come up with 

recommendations.  And that, Mr. Minister, is how it was done.  

And you know it and I know it and every other person in this 

province knows it. 

 

So they came up with a solution that was what they thought 

was acceptable to farmers under the worst of circumstances, 

Mr. Speaker.  And the Minister of Agriculture laughs over 

there.  But the farm families of Saskatchewan know that that's 

the case.  They know that that's the case.  The evidence is clear, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

On April 27 when the budget come down, the departments of 

Rural Development and departments of Agriculture were all 

cut back, and the evidence is there for all to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why at this time we think that the Minister 

of Agriculture and the critic for Agriculture here should be 

involved in these negotiations.  He at least has a handle on the 

program, at least has some degree of 

knowledge of the program, some . . . qualify, I have to qualify 

that and say, some degree of knowledge on the program.  He 

knows that he cut back the program; he knows that farmers of 

Saskatchewan don't like the program; he knows that even his 

back 

_benchers in some cases don't like the program; he knows that 

the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster has opposition to the 

program; he knows that the member for Humboldt has 

opposition to the program; he knows that there were meetings 

in Humboldt that farmers were upset at.  He knows that there 

were meetings in Shaunavon, in Regina at the Agridome, and 

on the front steps of the legislature here, Mr. Speaker.  He 

knows all of those things. 

 

And that's why he should be standing up in his place and taking 

this legislation off the order paper or, at the very least -- at the 

very least -- taking it to the Appeal court.  Even your Premier, 

even the Premier of the province has suggested that, Mr. 

Speaker.  People all over the province have suggested that, Mr. 

Speaker.  At Shaunavon they said to the member from 

Shaunavon, who doesn't know a thing about agriculture it's 

obvious, that he should be letting farmers have their day in 

court, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where is that member?  Why isn't that member pressing his 

Minister of Agriculture to meet with our Agriculture critic to 

talk over these principles?  Why isn't he doing that, Mr. 

Speaker?  Why is that member not standing in his place and 

saying to the people of the Shaunavon constituency or the rest 

of the province, the farm families of this province, that I will 

carry the message to the Minister of Agriculture, I will carry 

the message to that member from Rosetown-Elrose?  Why 

doesn't he do that, Mr. Speaker?  I don't know, Mr. Speaker.  

One can only speculate, I guess.  Maybe he doesn't have the 

intellectual capacity to do it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the member is 

getting very personal in his comments on another member of 

the House, and it does not help in keeping order in this House.  

Also the member should remember he's on the subamendment.  

He must direct his questions to the subamendment only, not to 

the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Absolutely, the 

Minister of Agriculture, I believe, and our critic for Agriculture 

should have been, very definitely should have been involved in 

the discussions right from the very beginning, Mr. Speaker.  

They should have been involved in those discussions.  The 

Minister of Agriculture could have accepted some advice from 

this side, I think, of the House.  He could have accepted that 

advice.  He could have accepted advice from the member from 

Shaunavon as well.  He could have accepted that advice. 

 

He didn't accept it.  He didn't do the honourable thing and ask 

for this . . . ask the member, the Minister of Justice, to take that 

Bill to the Appeal court.  He didn't do that.  The Minister of 

Justice won't do it.  One only has to wonder how that process is 

going to come forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I think what will happen, I think what will happen eventually, 

Mr. Speaker -- and I say eventually because it's a long, 

protracted procedure -- but I think eventually what will happen 

. . . I think eventually what will happen is a lawyer in 

Saskatchewan . . .  And there's lot's of them 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

around.  They're in the newspapers here.  They're all 

speculating about the program and the changes in the program 

and whether it was done constitutionally or not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The process is all mixed up and they know it.  Right from the 

very outset, Mr. Speaker, the process has been mixed up.  And 

I'd like to quote from a Saskatoon lawyer -- a Saskatoon 

lawyer.  This was reported, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post, 

August 7, '92: 

 

 A Saskatoon lawyer believes the bill amending the Gross 

Revenue Insurance Plan is on very shaky constitutional 

ground and thinks it will be challenged in court. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is aware of that.  

The Minister of Agriculture is aware of it and also is our critic 

on this side aware of it, Mr. Speaker.  It's on very, very shaky 

constitutional ground, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you would have thought the farm rallies around this 

province would have demonstrated that to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  You would have thought that the rally in Shaunavon . 

. . you would have thought that the rally in Shaunavon, the rally 

in the Agridome here, the rally on the front steps of this 

legislature would have pointed it out. 

 

And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to see the member for 

Cut Knife-Lloyd.  She spoke out in opposition to the program, 

Mr. Speaker.  She suggested there should be alternatives to it.  I 

would say to her, she should be talking to the Minister of 

Agriculture, who in turn should be talking to our Ag critic, Mr. 

Speaker, about these proposals. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who's the Ag critic? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The Ag critic on this side they're asking, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think they're aware of that, is the hon. member 

for Morse, Mr. Speaker.  They all know that that's the case.  

They all know that that's the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why wouldn't they allow the opportunity for the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose to discuss this program with the member for 

Rosetown . . . or for Morse, pardon me.  Why wouldn't they, 

Mr. Speaker?  Because they knew they had to cut it back.  That 

was their intention right from the very beginning -- cut the 

program back, cut it back to the bone. 

 

Part of their rural revenge, Mr. Speaker, part of the revenge on 

rural Saskatchewan for supporting Conservatives in '82 and '86.  

Part of the revenge that they feel is necessary to try and 

enhance their electoral chances in the next election, which will 

come all too soon, which will come all too soon for a lot of 

members, members like the member for Quill Lakes, all too 

soon for him, I'm afraid.  And the member from Humboldt and 

particularly the member from Shaunavon -- yes the one waving 

his arm there up beside his ear -- particularly when it comes . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Again the member knows he is not to 

refer to members in the House and what they are . . . 

what their activities are or what they are doing.  And the 

member, again I want to remind him he's on the 

subamendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We'll try and confine 

our remarks to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why couldn't the member, why couldn't the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose speak with this side of the House about the 

program?  Why not, Mr. Speaker?  What would have been 

wrong with that?  There were a number of suggestions that 

came forward from not only this side, from the member from 

Morse, but from ag committees, ag people all over the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was suggested earlier on, right from the outset that '91 GRIP 

or '92 GRIP could have been an option.  The member is aware 

of that.  The member from Rosetown-Elrose is aware of that.  

The Minister of Agriculture, he is aware that that option could 

have existed, Mr. Speaker.  We suggested that option.  The 

member from Morse suggested that option in question period a 

number of times earlier on in this session, Mr. Speaker.  It was 

suggested to the member from Rosetown that that could have 

been an option. 

 

The federal government, the federal government, the Minister 

of Agriculture suggested . . . the federal Minister of Agriculture 

suggested that he would take part in that discussion, he'd take 

part in those negotiations, he'd pay part of the administration 

costs, Mr. Speaker.  The federal minister made that offer. 

 

Once again, once again, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture turned down that suggestion.  One can only 

wonder, one can only wonder why he would turn that 

suggestion down as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he was told by his Premier and his Finance 

minister to cut the program back, that's why.  Right from the 

outset that was the motivation for this . . . changes in the 

program, Mr. Speaker.  And the Minister of Agriculture knows 

that. 

 

The option was presented to him by our Ag critic.  It was 

presented and he knows it, '91 or '92.  And the media knows it, 

and the general public knows it, that that option was presented 

on a number of occasions, day after day after day earlier in this 

session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What happened after that, Mr. Speaker, we all recall, we got 

into long debate about this Bill.  The members of the 

opposition said right from the outset that we would fight this 

thing to the very end and that's what we're doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The process has been botched up by the Minister of Agriculture 

right from the very beginning.  His incompetence, I think, is 

becoming clearer and clearer and clearer every day.  I think he 

should only be too willing to accept some advice from the 

member from Morse, our Ag critic.  Only too willing he should 

be.  Maybe we could get this process back on the rails and 

farmers could have some kind of security knowing that the 

program is in place, Mr. Speaker.  And the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose knows that.  He also knows, I 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

suspect, that he won't be around after this session is over and 

another member will be the new Minister of Agriculture.  And 

hopefully they'll have a level of competence higher than this 

man has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What happened then, Mr. Speaker?  The opposition took the 

move of starting the bells ringing in our opposition to this 

program and the program changes, Mr. Speaker.  We said right 

from the outset that it was an illegal process, an illegal action 

taken by the minister.  Notification of changes of the program 

did not take place.  We advised that right from the beginning, 

Mr. Speaker, that that was an illegal action.  Farmers 

recognized it was an illegal action and that's why he's been 

hauled up in court, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My guess before long is he'll be hauled up either in the Appeal 

court in Saskatchewan or the Supreme Court in Ottawa.  That's 

where he'll find himself eventually.  He knows it.  And one 

wonders what he'll say when he's standing there, Mr. Speaker.  

Maybe he could accept some advice from our member from 

Morse at that time, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe he'd be willing to 

accept some advice from our member, Mr. Speaker, at that 

time.  Maybe he would then say to the farm families of 

Saskatchewan, I was wrong, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry, I was 

wrong. 

 

I think if he just made that admission, Mr. Speaker, everyone in 

Saskatchewan would feel a lot more comfortable about this 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that's 

the kind of advice that the member for Morse, our Ag critic, 

would be giving him, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that's the kind of 

advice he'd be getting from him. 

 

Stand up in your place, sir, and straighten this mess out with 

the farm families of Saskatchewan.  Stand up in your place and 

do that.  But no, so far we've seen nothing but reluctance on the 

part of the minister, nothing but accusations, blame throwing.  

He's done that on every occasion.  We've witnessed that in the 

House here day after day after day, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have witnessed that day after day after day.  It's 

the previous government; it's the weather; it's the federal 

government; it's the farmers themselves. 

 

There's moral hazard all over the place with the farmers, Mr. 

Speaker.  And yet, what happens, Mr. Speaker?  They appoint 

one of those moral hazard-type people to their own board of 

Crop Insurance, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that the member from 

Morse would give better advice than that to the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure he'd give them the 

advice that says to him, stand up and do the right thing, sir.  

Stand up and do the right thing and correct this program before 

it's too late. 

 

We'll be into harvest here, Mr. Speaker, in a short time.  In a 

very short time, Mr. Speaker, we'll be into harvest.  Swathing 

operations will be starting in the south-west, and certainly in 

my area before very long and in the Minister of Agriculture's 

area before very long, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . And the member from Quill Lakes says, and we're praying 

for frost.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we certainly are not 

praying for frost.  We're hoping that the farm families of this 

province 

get a good crop so that they can try and hold their farm together 

in spite of -- in spite of -- the kind of program that you 

members opposite have come up with. 

 

The member from Rosetown-Elrose has . . . and should have 

taken advice from the member from Morse about this program.  

He should have taken advice.  He knows he should have taken 

advice.  The member from Quill Lakes unfortunately doesn't 

understand agriculture, I don't think, Mr. Speaker.  That's why I 

don't think he understands it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1015) 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he would accept advice from this side of the 

House, if he would accept advice from this side of the House 

like the member from Morse, the member from Quill Lakes 

would know all too well that this program is wrong.  I think he 

knows it as a lawyer that it's wrong.  I think he knows that. 

 

I think he knows that the advice from this side of the House is 

correct to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  I think he 

knows that.  I think he knows that the lawyers of 

Saskatchewan, the constitutional lawyers . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member again, 

he's on the subamendment, and the member has to stay on the 

subamendment and not on the amendment or the main motion.  

Now this is the second or third time that I've warned him and I 

don't really want to warn him again that he must stay on the 

subamendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, 

the Minister of Agriculture, knows full well that advice from 

the member of Morse, our Agriculture critic, was correct.  The 

member from Shaunavon knows it was correct.  The member 

from Moose Jaw knows it's correct.  The member from 

Humboldt knows its correct.  The member from Quill Lakes 

knows the advice has been correct, Mr. Speaker.  And most 

certainly, the member from Rosetown-Elrose knows the advice 

our member is giving him is correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But yet they don't want to accept the advice.  One can only 

wonder why, Mr. Speaker.  Why don't they want to accept that 

advice?  Mr. Speaker, is it stubbornness?  No, I don't think it's 

only stubbornness.  They want to cut the program back, and 

that's the reason why.  That's the reason why the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose advised the committee right from the outset 

to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it unfortunate that we're in the midst of this 

type of debate.  We're moving later into the summer all the 

time.  Harvest is approaching, Mr. Speaker.  We all know that.  

Before very long, Mr. Speaker, harvesting operations will be 

taking place.  And then what will happen? 

 

We will be giving advice once again to the member.  Our critic 

for Agriculture once again will be giving more advice to the 

Minister of Agriculture, suggesting to him that he'd better get 

on with it, the process.  We made the offer; the member from 

Morse made the offer here in the 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

last few days to the government side and the Minister of 

Agriculture that they take this to the Appeal court and 

eventually to the Supreme Court if necessary, Mr. Speaker.  

That advice was given.  Those talks took place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker?  The Minister of Agriculture 

through his House Leader and others, Mr. Speaker, rejected it 

outright. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, they know right from the very outset 

that this is going to have to happen.  They know that eventually 

it's going to get to the Supreme Court.  It might take a couple of 

years, Mr. Speaker.  It might further bankrupt an already 

troubled economy, farm economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's what is going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The farm families of Saskatchewan can't afford this, but yet my 

guess is there'll be hundred-dollar cheques coming in from all 

over the province, a form of advice to the Minister of 

Agriculture to suggest that he should take this program and this 

Bill and see whether it's constitutional, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our member from Morse right from the outset suggested that 

the farmers should have their day in court.  That's been the 

basis of the argument right from the very beginning, Mr. 

Speaker.  The farmers should have their right to court and it's 

being denied by this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  And the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose in talks with the member from Morse, he 

realizes that that's the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The debate now continues to go on.  We've seen closure put on 

at every opportunity they can, Mr. Speaker.  The Rules 

Committee was struck to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, to 

change the rules, the principles of this process, Mr. Speaker.  

And the process is all mixed up. 

 

Our member from Morse is a member of that Rules Committee, 

Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure he gave the same advice to the 

Minister of Agriculture that he gave to that committee, that 

bell-ringing and changing the bell-ringing was wrong, Mr. 

Speaker.  Changing the bell-ringing was the only way, the only 

way that they knew that they could force this legislation 

through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's what they're trying to do right now: closure at every 

opportunity; forcing it at every opportunity, Mr. Speaker; 

changes in the program that farmers don't want.  And the 

Minister of Agriculture knows that and the member from 

Morse has suggested it to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that the members of the 

opposition . . . of the government side, pardon me, won't accept 

advice from our members, Mr. Speaker.  Not once did the 

Minister of Agriculture ask opposition members what we 

thought of this program -- not once.  Didn't ask.  Didn't ask 

myself.  He didn't ask the member from Morse, our critic for 

Agriculture, didn't ask those concerns, didn't ask about what we 

thought of the program. 

 

The only motivation was cutting it back, and he knows it. 

The only motivation was cutting it back.  He gave that advice 

right from the start.  He gave that essentially, he gave that order 

right from the start, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And they're yelling: you're off the amendment.  Well we know 

very well, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture should 

have -- should have -- been responsible and taken the 

responsible action and talked to our member from Morse, the 

critic for Agriculture. 

 

But he didn't do it.  Not once did the Minister of Agriculture 

offer information to opposition members responsible for 

Agriculture on what the review committee was doing.  Did 

you?  Did you talk to members from opposition about the 

program, Mr. Minister?  No, you didn't, sir.  You know right 

from the start that you've made a mistake in this program, and 

that's why you're trying to cover up your tracks now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not once did the Minister of Agriculture provide 

the opposition member responsible, the critic responsible, the 

member from Morse, a preview of the Bill when the opposition 

member repeatedly asked to see its contents.  Right from the 

start, right from the outset, right from the outset, Mr. Speaker, 

we asked and farm people asked and farm groups asked if they 

could see the contents of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Though there's no particular 

rule in the House that prohibits the kind of action that I'm 

seeing from my right, but every member has an obligation to 

try and improve the decorum in the House and to continue to 

keep order in this House.  That kind of demonstration does 

absolutely nothing to improve the decorum or the order in the 

House, and I ask members to please stop that kind of action.  

Order, order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Not once did the 

Minister of Agriculture provide opposition members 

responsible . . . the critic for Agriculture, the member from 

Morse.  Not once did he offer an opportunity for the critic to 

see the Bill, Mr. Speaker, to see the infamous Bill 87 which 

will go down in history, I'm sure, on the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose's rsum for ever, Mr. Speaker.  Not once did 

our critic have the opportunity to talk to the minister about that 

Bill.  Not once did he have any input into that Bill.  Not once 

did anybody but a few draftspeople and a few lawyers on the 

government side have the opportunity to see that Bill. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, we repeatedly -- repeatedly -- asked for 

it.  We repeatedly asked, Mr. Speaker, if we could speak to the 

Minister of Agriculture about it.  We repeatedly asked the 

Minister of Agriculture to give the farm families of this 

province and the critic for Agriculture and the opposition the 

opportunity to see that Bill.  Mr. Speaker, they're taking Bills 

of other nature all over the province; what would have been 

wrong with the farm families of this province having an 

opportunity to see the Bill, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We asked it.  The member from Morse asked it repeatedly.  

The reason why is clear, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Agriculture realizes that this is one of the most Draconian Bills 

that has ever hit this province, Mr. Speaker.  Absolutely 

irresponsible, Mr. Speaker -- absolutely 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

irresponsible. 

 

He knew it was terrible legislation.  He knew it was breaking 

the law.  We knew it was breaking the law, Mr. Speaker.  Our 

critic for Agriculture knew it was breaking the law.  The 

minister knows it's breaking the law.  He knows he's breaking 

contracts, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we know he's breaking 

contracts.  The opposition members know it.  The critic for 

Agriculture knows it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He's breaking the handshake with rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  He's breaking a trust that's been set down for decades 

in this province from ministers of Agriculture through the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) days, NDP, Liberal, 

Conservative, and every other party throughout the history of 

this province.  He's breaking that trust with rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And we advised him, right from the very outset, that he was 

doing that, Mr. Speaker.  Our critic for Agriculture and all 

opposition members together repeatedly pleaded with the 

minister, Mr. Speaker -- repeatedly pleaded with the minister -- 

to tell farm families what he was going to do to them.  We 

repeatedly said to him, sir, you're breaking contracts with farm 

families, and it's wrong.  And he knows it's wrong.  And one 

wonders if this is the kind of example that this minister wants 

to set continually in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the farm families of this province 

deserve better.  And the opposition deserves better, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the opposition critic for Agriculture deserves 

better.  He deserves the opportunity to speak with the Minister 

of Agriculture about this program.  He deserves the opportunity 

to have input into this program, just as the member from 

Shaunavon should have had the opportunity, just as the 

member from Humboldt or Quill Lakes or North Battleford or 

any of these other government members should have had the 

opportunity to speak with the minister about the program. 

 

But yet, Mr. Speaker, no one has had that opportunity -- no 

one's had it.  Not once did the Minister of Agriculture seriously 

consider any of the suggestions offered by the opposition 

member responsible for the critic position of Agriculture, the 

member from Morse, to resolve the current situation for farm 

families.  Not once did we get that opportunity.  A grave 

situation only made worse by this proposed legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the prelude to the Bill . . . in the preamble to 

the Bill, it talks a lot about the different reasons why, trying to 

justify their actions.  We've said right from the outset, the 

member from Morse has said right from the outset that the 

reason is clear.  The reason is clear, Mr. Speaker, why they had 

to do that -- to try and get around a constitutional challenge.  

Because they know they're going to have a constitutional 

challenge on their hands.  Lawyers from all over the province 

are taking up the case, Mr. Speaker.  They're just waiting for 

the opportunity to jump at this.  This is where lawyers cut their 

teeth on stuff like this, Mr. Speaker.  This is where they make a 

name for themselves. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon, the lawyer, he would 

know that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Idylwyld. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Idylwyld, exactly.  He would know that, although 

he's probably not competent enough to do it, but nevertheless 

he would know that. 

 

We offered the advice right from the outset, Mr. Speaker, that 

the member from Rosetown-Elrose should have accepted.  He 

should have accepted that advice from us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in court actions already proceeding against this 

government, the Bill states that: 

 

  . . a court shall not consider any principle or law or in equity 

that would require adequate, reasonable or any notice with 

respect to . . . amendments or changes to . . . (the) contract . . 

.  

 

"I think that's the most disturbing aspect", is what one 

Saskatoon lawyer is saying, Mr. Speaker.  And that's the same 

advice that we've been giving the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are two challenges that the lawyers of Saskatchewan feel 

that this government is on shaky grounds and will be taken to 

court for, Mr. Speaker.  First she would argue that the GRIP is 

a tripartite program involving the farmer, province and federal 

government. 

 

This Bill affects the federal government and because provincial 

governments can't make legislation binding Ottawa, this Bill is 

unconstitutional, one lawyer suggests, Mr. Speaker.  A 

well-known, a well-known Saskatchewan lawyer, a 

well-known farm lawyer, a lawyer who has taken all kinds of 

court actions against governments, or stood on behalf of 

farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Second, she would argue the Bill contravenes the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Agriculture knows that.  I'm sure his legal advice is telling 

him exactly that.  He has all kinds of lawyers on his side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier himself is a lawyer.  He 

knows that it's unconstitutional, is my guess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1030) 

 

We offered the advice right from the beginning.  The advice 

has been given on time and time and time again, Mr. Speaker, 

from the member from Morse, the opposition critic for 

Agriculture.  It's been given numerous times to the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose and yet he won't change his mind, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The member from Estevan, indeed our entire caucus, offered 

advice that was varied and logically thought out, quite unlike 

the Bill at hand which only serves to save the government 

money, Mr. Speaker.  That's been the motivation right from the 

start. 

 

They thought the program was too rich for farmers, Mr. 

Speaker.  They thought the farm families of 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Saskatchewan were going to get too much -- the farm families 

of Saskatchewan were going to get too much.  And we advised 

that right from the start, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Our member 

from Morse, our opposition critic for Agriculture, has told the 

Minister of Agriculture that, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why we 

think the Minister of Agriculture should start meaningful 

discussions with the opposition critic for Agriculture. 

 

But he hasn't done that, Mr. Speaker.  He refuses to do that.  

Why does he refuse to do that, Mr. Speaker?  Because he 

knows the Finance minister and the Premier have told him to 

cut back on agriculture.  Cut it back to the bone.  Make these 

people bleed for supporting other parties in previous elections, 

Mr. Speaker.  And the minister knows that, we know that, the 

member from Morse knows that, and that's why we're trying to 

give good, solid advice to the Minister of Agriculture now. 

 

We have said right from the outset that farmers should have 

their day in court, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker.  They should 

have their day in court.  That's been the basis of this whole 

argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Why will the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose not allow farmers to have their day in court, 

Mr. Speaker?  Because he knows they're wrong.  He knows the 

government is wrong.  He knows that the contract was valid.  

He knows that the farmers have a legitimate case.  He knows 

that the farm families are deserving. 

 

He knows that the farm families have set out in their court case 

that the difference between '91 and '92 GRIP is $27.20 an acre.  

And we've advised that right from the outset, Mr. Speaker.  

And that's been clearly stated in a court of law, Mr. Speaker -- 

$27.20 an acre is the definable hurt that Saskatchewan farm 

families are feeling as a result of the Minister of Agriculture's 

actions. 

 

And we've advised that.  The member from Morse has advised 

that in question period and in speeches throughout this session, 

Mr. Speaker -- $27.20 an acre is the definable hurt.  And that 

member knows that.  Twenty-seven dollars and twenty cents an 

acre times 31 million seeded acres in this province comes up to 

just short of $900 million.  That could be, that could be the 

liability that this minister and his government is facing and all 

of Saskatchewan is facing. 

 

Now we don't know what way the court case is going to go, 

Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of Agriculture has advice that says 

that they will win the court case against farm families.  And yet 

other lawyers around the province are saying there's a very 

legitimate case, a very legitimate case that the farmers have.  

And we, through the member from Morse, have said time and 

time again to the member from Rosetown-Elrose that that is the 

reason, the clear reason why the courts have to decide.  The 

courts have to decide this, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Agriculture yesterday in question period even said so himself, 

well I guess the courts will have to decide.  That's what he said, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He said, I guess the courts will have to 

decide. 

 

Well why not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why not accept the advice 

of the opposition and the member from Morse, the opposition 

critic for Agriculture; why not accept that advice and move this 

thing forward as quickly as 

possibly, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Why not move this thing 

forward, this legislation forward as quickly as possible, the 

court-hearing of it?  Otherwise the farm families of this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be forced to do it, to 

shoulder the cost themselves at a time when they can ill-afford 

to. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that advice has been offered.  I think the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose should accept that advice and 

try and get this behind his government, try and get this piece of 

legislation behind his government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Even 

his Premier is giving him the same kind of advice, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the member from Morse, the opposition critic for 

Agriculture, is giving him. 

 

Outside the Assembly the Premier deflected reporters' 

questions about whether the rights of farmers to sue the 

government were being legislated away, saying he didn't want 

to express a legal opinion.  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he could 

have expressed a legal opinion.  He knew full well what the 

farmers are saying is correct.  He knew full well what the 

opposition is saying is correct.  He knew full well that the 

member from Morse, the opposition critic for Agriculture, is 

correct.  The Premier knows that. 

 

And he goes on to say, the courts will have to decide that, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker.  The courts will have to decide 

that.  Well why doesn't he take the initiative and tell, instruct, 

command, demand that the member from Rosetown-Elrose do 

this action and take it to the Appeal court in Saskatchewan?  

Why doesn't he do that, Mr. Speaker?  It's the same advice 

we've been giving him right from the outset.  Why doesn't he 

do that, Mr. Speaker?  I don't know. 

 

Why doesn't the Minister of Justice do that?  Why doesn't he at 

least stand in his place and answer some questions about it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker?  The member from Estevan and the member 

from Morse and other members have repeatedly asked the 

Minister of Justice about questions about this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker.  And yet what happens? 

 

The member from Rosetown-Elrose, in his capacity of 

Agriculture minister, quasi-judicial minister, I guess, stands in 

his place and says, no, no, no, can't do that, can't have this 

happening, can't have the farm families in court, taking me to 

court.  I might make a mistake on the stand.  I might say 

something that's wrong.  I might admit that I'm wrong.  I might, 

under questioning from a good lawyer, admit that I'm wrong.  I 

might accidentally tell the truth.  I might accidentally tell the 

truth, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's what the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose is afraid of.  He might accidentally tell the 

truth. 

 

We've got a Bill that's legal fiction before us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we have said that right from the outset.  The 

member from Morse, the opposition critic for Agriculture, has 

said that right from the outset, that this Bill is like legal fiction.  

And the member from Rosetown-Elrose knows it and he should 

accept the advice . . . and he's even suggested himself, even 

suggested himself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the courts might 

have to decide.  The Premier agrees.  The courts will have to 

decide, says the Premier. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

On the issue of retroactivity, changing contracts, the Premier 

said that the larger public interest justified what was being 

done to the GRIP program and to the farmers.  What larger 

public interest in Saskatchewan is there right now than farm 

families?  What larger public interests does the Minister of 

Agriculture have in mind?  What larger public interests does 

the Minister of Finance and the Minister of . . . pardon me, the 

Premier of this province have in mind? 

 

What larger public interest is there right now than saving rural 

Saskatchewan, than saving farm families?  Can any one of the 

government members tell us what larger public interests the 

government has in mind?  Can the member from Humboldt tell 

me what larger public interest the government has in mind?  

Can the member from Shaunavon or the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, what larger public interest do you have 

in mind here? 

 

Saskatchewan's rural revenge, I suggest, is the public interest 

that they have in mind.  Saskatchewan's public interest is 

agriculture in this crisis that we're facing, Mr. Speaker.  What 

larger public interest does the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway have in mind here?  Her farm family has supported 

agriculture for . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member 

that his remarks should be pertinent to the subamendment that's 

before us.  And I find that the member is straying, and 

therefore I encourage him to get back on the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Right from the 

outset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has not 

taken the time, has not taken any time whatsoever, to discuss 

this program or changes in the program with our opposition 

critic for Agriculture, the member from Morse. 

 

And the member from Morse, I'm sure, is wondering as well, 

and the Minister of Agriculture has to wonder, when the 

Premier instructs him that we have a larger public interest in 

mind than farm families.  We wonder.  The member from 

Morse wonders.  I'm sure he'd like to discuss it with the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, what larger public interest 

they have in mind. 

 

Even though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though the member . . 

. the Premier, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale and the 

Premier of this province, says that the government . . . or 

pardon me, that the issue will have to be decided in court, why, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, won't the Minister of Agriculture take that 

advice?  Why won't he, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Why won't the 

member from Saskatoon Broadway or the member from 

Shaunavon or the member from Humboldt, why won't they talk 

to the Minister of Agriculture, see if we can't get this behind 

us? 

 

We have asked through our member, opposition member from 

Morse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why wasn't an agreement reached 

between the Agriculture two representatives, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose and the member from Morse?  Was it pride, 

Mr. Minister?  Is that why you wouldn't initiate contact with 

the opposition critic?  Was it pride, Mr. Minister?  Was it 

stubbornness, Mr. Minister?  Was that the reason why you 

wouldn't initiate contact with the opposition critic for 

Agriculture?  Was it cost cutting, Mr. Minister?  Was that the 

reason why you wouldn't initiate discussions?  Is that the 

reason, Mr. Minister?  The budget gives that impression, gives 

that clear indication that agriculture, in your judgement, had to 

be cut back.  Was that the reason why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

I think Mr. Minister of Agriculture is the scapegoat for this 

government, Mr. Speaker.  I think he's the scapegoat.  And I 

kind of feel sorry for him a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He's 

been told by the Minister of Finance and the Premier to cut this 

program back, in spite of advice that we have been giving him 

and the member from Morse has been giving him right from 

the outset, that this program shouldn't be cut back, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in spite of that advice.  I think he's the scapegoat, 

scapegoat for a government that wants to cut this program 

back. 

 

And we've asked the minister right from the outset, the member 

from Morse has suggested GRIP '91 or '92.  That could have 

been an option.  The federal government was willing to 

participate.  The federal government said they'd pick up part of 

the cost of administering two programs, side-by-side programs, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That was one option. 

 

Another option was taking it to the Appeal court.  Another 

option was just simply letting the court action in Melville 

proceed, and they wouldn't do that.  What did they do?  They 

go to the court, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they try and 

intimidate farmers in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 

slapping a $750,000 bond on them.  That's what they did.  I'm 

sure some of the back-benchers aren't even aware of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  We were aware of it.  The member for 

Morse, our opposition critic for Agriculture, was there, 

witnessed it, saw it for himself, heard it with his own ears. 

 

The government, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- I don't know on whose 

instructions; I presume it was the Minister of Agriculture; he 

wouldn't initiate any discussions with our opposition critic, but 

I assume it was on his instructions -- tried to scare the farmers 

off, tried to scare the farmers off of this court action.  Everyone 

in this province remembers, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Agriculture tried to scare the farm families of this province off 

their court action by putting a $750,000 bond in front of them 

that they'd have to ante up in order to be able to take this 

crooked government to court, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they know they're wrong.  The only way 

to get around it is to change the legislation.  We've advised 

right from the beginning that they shouldn't do that. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, $750,000 bond was placed before farmers 

in this province in order to try and intimidate them into not 

taking action against this minister.  The member from Morse, 

our opposition critic in Agriculture, advised people throughout 

this province that that's the kind of thing that they can expect 

from this government.  That's the kind of intimidation that they 

can expect. 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

He tried to initiate talks with the Minister of Agriculture about 

changes in the program, made numerous suggestions to the 

minister.  But he wouldn't have any part of it, simply wouldn't 

have any part of changes in the program, Mr. Speaker.  And as 

I said, I think he's the scapegoat for the program.  And I feel a 

little bit sorry for him.  He'll be the shortest minister of 

Agriculture in the history of Saskatchewan probably. 

 

What will it be if he's . . . Let's see.  The session winds up, we'll 

say, about the end of September, somewhere in there -- maybe 

middle of October.  That'll be about the date I suspect we'll get 

out of here.  It'll be somewhere in there.  We've said that right 

from the outset.  We've said that right from the outset.  It'll be 

somewhere in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And then he'll be let 

go.  So it'll be 11 months approximately, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

We've tried to initiate talks with this man.  Our opposition 

critic from Agriculture has tried to initiate talks, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  But why won't he listen? 

 

Why wasn't an agreement reached which would've seen 

government offer farmers a choice?  That option was 

explained; that option was put forward. 

 

It would have been a situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that farm 

families I think could have lived with, an agreement which 

would have clearly shown the government which GRIP 

program is more beneficial to farmers -- a program, a 

side-by-side program that would have offered farmers an 

opportunity for farmers to decide.  What would have been 

wrong with that, Mr. Minister of Agriculture?  What would 

have been wrong with that? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Money. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Money.  Ah, my colleague says money.  That's 

right. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The committee rejected it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Oh, the committee rejected it, did they?  Oh, the 

committee rejected it, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The committee 

probably didn't even have the authority to make 

recommendations and changes in this program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, it was 

suggested a number of times the federal government would 

have participated in it.  They said they would.  They'd help; 

they'd shoulder the cost for side-by-side programs. 

 

It would have been an interesting time in Saskatchewan for the 

Minister of Agriculture to see farmer after farmer after farmer 

in this province opting for '91 GRIP.  It would have been an 

interesting and humbling experience, I'm sure, to see about 80 

per cent of the farmers or more, is my guess, probably. 

 

If you accept the results of the survey done by the farmers' 

advocate group -- and I don't know why anybody wouldn't 

accept them, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- is something in the range 

of about -- here it is here, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible) . 

. . Well the Minister of 

Agriculture says it isn't correct. 

 

Well I suggest, Minister of Agriculture, you probably got a 

copy of this as well.  We got a copy of it.  The Minister of 

Agriculture did get a copy of it, I'm sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, our opposition critic for 

Agriculture, got a copy of it.  All of the opposition members 

got a copy of it.  Hopefully all of the farmers of Saskatchewan 

got a copy of it, and it said . . . and we advised it right from the 

beginning.  The opposition member from Morse in questions to 

the minister said to him: the farmers want '91 GRIP in large 

numbers.  And you have the authority to offer that, sir -- the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Here's what the survey said, Mr. Speaker, and I think it's 

pertinent to the discussions because we offered that advice to 

the minister: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan has clearly and adequately 

consulted with farmers before approving changes in the plan. 

 

Two point three per cent of farmers in the province agree -- 2.3 

per cent.  That's gets down right into the hard-core support of 

the NDP, is my guess.  That's rock bottom.  Friends and 

families of members would be about 2.3 per cent.  Friends and 

families of the NDP government would be about the 2.3 per 

cent. 

 

And 97.7 per cent of farmers, 97.7 per cent of farmers said that 

they were not fairly or adequately consulted by the 

government.  That's fairly significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- 

97.7 per cent.  Statistically that . . . and you might as well 

round it off and call it a hundred.  If you exclude the members 

of the families of the government side, it would be 100 per 

cent, I'm sure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's even higher than the . . . 97.7 per 

cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 97.7 is even higher than the number 

of votes that the Minister of Agriculture won with -- 97 votes.  

Oh, he won in the 80s, I think it was somewhere.  What was it, 

Minister of Agriculture, 81? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Again I want to remind the 

member that the question that's before the Assembly is a 

subamendment.  And the subamendment proposed to alter 

some of the terms of an amendment.  And therefore, the 

member should try to explain to the Assembly why it is the 

terms of the amendment should be changed to those of the 

subamendment. 

 

The member is going off onto tangents and is not trying to 

make his remarks pertinent to the subamendment.  I'll give the 

member another chance, but he should make sure that his 

remarks tie in to the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I sincerely apologize for not 

restricting my comments to this, but it's hard.  The farm 

families of Saskatchewan, I'm sure, find it hard to accept this 

kind of thing from a government that said that they were going 

to be so open and honest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We've advised the Minister of Agriculture . . . the member 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

from Morse, the opposition critic for Agriculture has been 

trying to give advice to this member, the Minister of 

Agriculture, right from the outset.  Not one thing has been . . . 

not one little shred of advice has been accepted.  What one 

little shred of advice has been accepted by this minister? 

 

And the Farmer's Advocate, it goes on in their survey . . . and 

we suggested that their survey was correct to the Minister of 

Agriculture, and he knows it.  The second question, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

 The changes to the plan are injurious to farmers participating 

in the plan by significantly reducing the level of protection 

while increasing the cost to the farmer of maintaining his or 

her coverage. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 95.8 per cent of the people, the 

farm folks of this province, believe that this program is not a 

good program. 

 

And it reduces the level of protection enjoyed under the 

previous program, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It reduces that 

protection.  We have advised that right from the outset.  We're 

getting down closer to the member for Rosetown's numbers 

here -- 95.8.  We're getting a little closer all the time, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next question, and it has been put forward by the member 

from Morse on numerous occasions: 

 

 A comprehensive review of the plan through direct and 

meaningful consultation with farmers is required (required) 

before implementation of any present or future changes to the 

plan. 

 

Ninety-seven point six per cent of the people agree with that, 

Mr. Speaker.  Two point four -- the members rallied their 

families around them once again -- two point four per cent of 

the people oppose that, Mr. Speaker; 97.6 agreed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Morse suggested on 

numerous occasions that the Minister of Agriculture should 

accept that advice, but he didn't, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He 

wouldn't even look at the survey is my guess.  Why wouldn't he 

accept the advice of farm families all over this province? 

 

And the fourth question was: 

 

 I'm in favour of restoring the 1991 plan pending a 

comprehensive review of the plan and any changes to it. 

 

Ninety-five point eight per cent of the people agreed . . . of the 

farm families agreed with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And we 

offered that advice up to the Minister of Agriculture and he 

wouldn't accept it -- 95.8 cent of the farm families in this 

province. 

 

And the members over here and the members opposite on the 

government side, they all are aware of this survey; they all got 

copies of it.  The farmers' advocate told us they all got copies 

of it. 

And yet the Minister of Agriculture stands up here day after 

day after day in question period and in speeches, and his 

members, they all rally around him and they all say, farmers 

want '92 GRIP -- they all want '92 GRIP.  And the Minister of 

Agriculture says, they all want '92 GRIP, in spite of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Ninety-five point eight per cent of the people 

disagree with you -- 95.8 per cent of the people disagree with 

you.  Friends and families are the only ones that support you on 

this thing.  Friends and your families are the only ones, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  We offered that advice to the Minister of 

Agriculture and he wouldn't accept it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if '92 GRIP is so good, even in spite of, in 

spite of the illegal nature that it was introduced -- and the 

Minister of Agriculture knows that and it's been advised from 

this side of the House to him numerous times -- in spite of the 

illegal nature that it was introduced, why then, Mr. Minister, is 

95 per cent of the farmers of this province saying to you, I want 

'91 GRIP back?  Why then is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

Minister of Agriculture, that 95 per cent of the farmers of this 

province when surveyed suggest that they would like to have 

'91 GRIP back? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

comments, the process has been botched up right from the very 

beginning, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They missed a deadline, they 

missed a deadline -- they know it -- March 15 deadline was 

missed.  And the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster knows 

it was missed.  My guess is in all her years as a school teacher, 

if your contract would have been retroactively stripped away 

from you, ma'am, you wouldn't have agreed with it. 

 

And we advised that right from the very outset, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  The member from Morse said to the Minister of 

Agriculture, farm families don't like this action.  People 

throughout this entire province don't like contracts being 

stripped away from them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to conclude my remarks, the Minister of 

Agriculture is wrong and he knows it.  He doesn't want to get 

drug into court, so he's had to bring in legislation that says you 

can't take him to court.  You can't take him to court. 

 

And I'm wondering how the member from Nipawin, how the 

member from Nipawin or the member from Weyburn -- a 

couple of honourable men amongst a bunch of unhonourable 

people -- can accept that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  How can he 

accept that in this province?  How can those two members -- 

and there's probably other examples -- but how can those two 

members particularly, accept that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Well the farm families of Saskatchewan can't accept it.  And 

that's why, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, they're going to drag 

you kicking and screaming into the Supreme Court of Canada, 

and they're going to get the truth out of you one way or 

another.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too will speak to the 

amendment that has substituted the words "the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Opposition Member Responsible for 

Agriculture" should have been discussing rather than invoking 

closure, and in the last part of the amendment: 

 

 because closure was used to unilaterally force introduction of 

this Bill in the Assembly. 

 

Now we firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the critics for Agriculture, the minister for 

Crop Insurance, the critics for Crop Insurance, could have 

reached an agreement before this fiasco and this legislative and 

parliamentary and legal boondoggle was initiated by the NDP 

administration. 

 

We could have discussed it, come to a conclusion to put money 

in the farmers' hands in a fair fashion.  We could have picked 

up on the federal offer for a modest amount of money.  We 

could have added another $27-and-some-cents an acre to 

people who were dried out or froze out.  Much simpler than all 

of this hassle and all of this extremely difficult situation. 

 

(1100) 

 

What's happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that because of the 

closure -- and you know this very well, and I'm going to 

summarize my remarks from various editorials across the 

province -- that it's poisoned the atmosphere in the Legislative 

Assembly.  It's poisoned the atmosphere between government 

and opposition.  It's poisoned the relationship between farmers 

and the NDP administration.  It's put fear into the hearts of 

anybody that has a contract in the province of Saskatchewan, 

so all the lawyers are looking at it. 

 

And rather than have the two ministers, the minister and the 

critic sit down and talk about the consequences of all this, they 

just went right ahead and did it anyway and they poisoned the 

atmosphere in the entire province, because people now are 

talking about courts and about suing and about taking the 

minister to court and going to the Supreme Court and the 

Draconian nature of the closure rules used in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

All of that because the minister and the critic couldn't sit down 

and talk about agriculture.  Now that's the Minister of 

Agriculture's record; that's his attitude; that's his modus 

operandi; that's the kind of personality this individual must be.  

He couldn't sit down and talk about Agriculture with the critics 

here.  He had to go and poison all this atmosphere in the 

legislature, outside the legislature, have court cases thrown at 

him, have internal problems in the NDP administration.  All for 

what?  Because you couldn't sit and talk about agriculture? 

 

And we've had a crisis.  Everybody here campaigned on the 

agriculture crisis.  It's serious business out there.  But no, can't 

talk about it.  We'll ramrod our changes through.  As a result, 

Mr. Speaker, you have . . . the NDP have generated bad blood.  

They've poisoned the atmosphere 

in this Legislative Assembly and between farmers and the 

government and between all kinds of people in the government. 

 

There's a bad attitude, a negative, negative, contrary, 

unco-operative attitude has been developed around an NDP 

administration that is very arrogant, very bully-like.  They don't 

care to talk.  They don't care to discuss.  You either do it my 

way or the highway.  That's why this amendment is here.  They 

used closure when they didn't have to.  They've poisoned the 

atmosphere, which means you're into a fighting mood, suing 

mood.  There's no trust.  And as a result, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you get this feeling of shame by the NDP 

administration, a feeling of guilt.  And they admit it and they 

talk about it; they made a serious mistake.  They feel guilty 

because they're caught being unlegal; they're caught being 

unconstitutional; they're caught being unparliamentary; and 

they're caught being undemocratic. 

 

And they feel the guilt with that, and it's weighing them down.  

So the shame and the guilt is the result of the inability of the 

Minister of Agriculture to sit and talk about agriculture without 

hollering and screaming and blaming people.  If he had only 

talked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we wouldn't have the guilt and the 

shame that's pervaded the NDP administration.  Because what 

they've done has been illegal; it's unconstitutional; it's against 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms; it's against this 

parliamentary process; it's undemocratic; and it's against 

everything they said they would never do.  So they feel awful 

about it.  And they got caught with it, so they're just going to 

bully their way right ahead anyway. 

 

And that's the kind of environment we have in the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know that you're aware 

of it.  Going to do it anyway.  It doesn't matter how guilty we 

feel or how much shame or how poisoned the atmosphere, how 

harmful it is to the public, we are going to do it anyway 

because we are NDP. 

 

And just the sheer arrogance of that is unbelievable to the 

public of Saskatchewan.  Because they said, how can they 

stand on one side of the legislature and tell everybody that 

they're going to do something; how can they stand on the 

soap-boxes out there in rural Saskatchewan and say, we'll 

protect you, we'll give you the cost of production, we'll get you 

more money, we'll lower your taxes, we'll do all of that, and 

then come back and do this kind of thing and then not even 

discuss it between critics because they feel so guilty? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason this amendment is even here is 

because of their guilt-complex.  They don't know how to talk 

about it.  They're at a loss to talk about it.  What do they say 

now?  How do they even open up the door to discussion?  

They've caught themselves.  They're skewered on their own 

petard because they dug this hole and they felt guilty; and now 

they kind have a bunker mentality.  They don't know how to 

open up and talk about it.  How do you open the door now?  

How do you kind of reach out to farmers and say, well I would 

help you?  How do you reach out to the critic here and talk? 

 

The whole thing has been poisoned.  It's a terrible atmosphere.  

We've never seen such an ugly atmosphere 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

in Saskatchewan's political history as we do right now in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Suits and lawsuits, constitutional 

lawyers, NDP lawyers, other people saying, they're illegal.  

They're unconstitutional.  It breaks the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  And they don't care because they can't talk to 

people.  They just ram it ahead. 

 

And they're digging themselves such a hole, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they'll write books about the incompetence of the 

NDP administration trying to impose this poisoned pens in this 

poisoned atmosphere on not only the Legislative Assembly but 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So my remarks today on this amendment are that closure was 

not necessary.  And closure was only used because they 

couldn't communicate.  And they dug themselves into a hole 

that even they didn't believe had any opening. 

 

A couple of comments on GRIP itself that were open for 

discussions and a couple of comments with respect to closure 

that are relevant, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I want to start with 

some of the GRIP quotes. 

 

There are many, many people who have suggested ideas for 

compromise between the government and the farmers.  And the 

farmers just want help.  They're going to . . . Some of them will 

have drought problems and some of them will have frost 

problems and some of them -- a lot of them -- have income 

problems.  All they want is the NDP government to help them.  

Just be there.  That's all they ask. 

 

They've come from all corners of the province.  Some from 

Humboldt, some from Maple Creek, some from Prince Albert, 

some from Meadow Lake, some from North Battleford, some 

from Turtleford, Craik.  They just want their new elected 

government to be reasonable. 

 

And they've said over and over again on the FeedGAP (feed 

grain adjustment program) program, for Heaven sakes, please 

defend us against interprovincial competition.  When it comes 

to insuring themselves and their farm, they said, we have lots 

of suggestions.  No government program is perfect, but we've 

got some really good ideas for you if you would initiate them 

and initiate these discussions, and we'll back you up. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here a list of what they did 

do, which means they didn't listen and they had nothing to 

bring to the table.  Newspaper quotes from the Premier to the 

Minister of Economic Development, the Minister of 

Agriculture, farmers, all kinds of people who can't believe the 

NDP administration would be so out of touch and so unable, 

with no capacity, frankly, to communicate. 

 

Here is from the Star-Phoenix, July 31, 1992: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, (the NDP) Premier . . . 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP. 

 

 But just a few kilometres away, farmers remained oblivious 

to the message. 

And I quote the farmer: 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," said Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just south-west of the Battlefords. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, July 31, 1992. 

 

That farmer gave the Premier of Saskatchewan good, positive 

suggestions that the Minister of Agriculture could have 

discussed with the critic here.  Not difficult to do.  Any place 

that the Minister of Agriculture or the Premier go and want to 

talk to farmers, they'll give them good, solid suggestions. 

 

Mr. Mitchell says, "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to 

see the program isn't as good."  Well then, you'd think that the 

NDP administration would say, well what would make it 

reasonable.  Maybe we have some ideas here.  We could work 

it out between the opposition and the government so that in fact 

we could have farmers a little bit happier, a little bit more 

comfortable, a bit of a safety net.  That's what the GRIP 

insurance is all about.  That's why you take fire insurance, 

automobile insurance -- safety net in case you have a problem.  

Farmers have got problems in the international market and with 

weather. 

 

The quote goes on: 

 

 . . . the argument of Premier Romanow that the situations are 

not analogous is as vacant as the NDP's legislative morality.  

He says that because the NDP campaigned to change the 

Gross Revenue Insurance Plan (GRIP) it has the democratic 

right to push through its bill. 

 

 But did the NDP campaign on the promise of making 

changes after the GRIP deadline and using the power of the 

government to (do this), as the Tories say, "tamper with 

evidence" in a case now before the courts? 

 

 However the most offensive aspect to the government's 

behaviour has been the way it's ramming through arbitrary 

changes to the legislature's rules.  Ignoring the parliamentary 

tradition of all-party consensus on such changes, the NDP has 

applied 30-minute time limits to bell-ringing.  And to do it, 

the NDP brought down the heavy fist of closure to silence 

debate after only four days.  This can only be described as a 

tyranny of the majority. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, July 18, 1992. 

 

The editorials in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix call this closure 

and this process "a tyranny of the majority".  A tyranny of the 

majority: Saskatoon editorial board.  A tyranny of the majority.  

We've heard all kinds of pitiful things that they've been called, 

but a tyranny of this massive majority because they are so 

afraid of the Agriculture critic they can't talk to him.  There's 

only 10 of us here, and this large majority is now being called a 

tyranny because it can't communicate.  So when it can't 

communicate, what does it do, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  It 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

says, we're going to bring in closure, we'll just force it through, 

we'll muzzle the opposition, we'll shut them up. 

 

June 23, here's what the NDP Premier said: 

 

 While he said he can see the Tories' point, the premier said 

the government won't withdraw its legislation. 

 

Well how about that?  The NDP Premier says he can see the 

Tories' point.  It's about rights.  It's about the legitimate rights 

of men and women.  It's about contracts.  And then he goes on 

to say, but we won't withdraw the legislation. 

 

I wonder why, and the farmers want to know, and the public 

wants to know, why the NDP administration is so bent on 

jamming this through when they know they're wrong.  They 

admit . . . the Premier admits that we have a good point.  He 

admits there's a legal point.  He admits it's going to be in court.  

He admits contracts are valid.  He admits people have rights 

between the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  He knows a 

great deal about the constitution. 

 

And yet he won't change and he won't advise his Minister of 

Agriculture to communicate with the opposition critic so they 

can get out of this mess.  Why won't they just communicate and 

talk with us and get out of this mess?  Why are they digging the 

hole deeper and deeper and deeper and deeper?  Nobody 

understands that.  What's the political gain?  What's the big 

advantage?  To the farmer there's none.  But to the political 

party of the NDP, why do they do this? 

 

He's got the Star-Phoenix calling it "a tyranny of the majority".  

He's got lawyers ripping at him.  He's got the caucus upset.  

He's got parliamentarians saying, I've never seen anything like 

this.  What's it all . . . What's the game plan?  What's the plan? 

 

Isn't it easier just to have the two men communicate here and 

talk about agriculture and what you can do in GRIP.  Because 

the NDP Premier says, the Tories have a point.  He can see 

their point.  While he said he can see the Tories' point, the 

Premier said the government won't withdraw its legislation. 

 

Well what's that tell you?  That tells you they're just caught and 

being extremely ornery.  Extremely ornery.  Why don't they 

just admit they made a silly mistake; the Minister of 

Agriculture made a silly mistake; they weren't watching him 

close enough; the agriculture caucus or the whole NDP caucus 

just didn't have a hold of it.  As they said and they admit to us, 

they messed up.  They just blew it. 

 

Why do they keep making it worse and worse and worse and 

worse by this lack of communication and pile up all this 

unparliamentary procedure, this undemocratic process, this 

illegal process, this humbling, humiliating exercise where 

every one of them are going to have their speeches read back to 

them because it is exactly opposite to what they campaigned 

on. 

 

And here's the quote, the famous one, the NDP Premier in the 

Star-Phoenix, June 23: 

I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

(1115) 

 

Now there is an NDP Premier standing in his place, being 

interviewed by the Star-Phoenix and said: I'm worried about 

democratic rights, under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

That's the validity of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

argument.  And he goes on to say, and that's why it's going to 

have to be settled by the courts. 

 

But then what he doesn't explain, and people are still asking, 

why then does he bring in legislation that eliminates the 

farmers' right to go to court?  Why does he talk about the courts 

when he knows in this Legislative Assembly he's going to take 

away all rights of access to the courts?  It can only mean one 

thing -- it's going to be referred to the Court of Appeal in 

Saskatchewan and then on to the Supreme Court. 

 

So here we have a Minister of Agriculture, over $23 million, 

forcing the NDP administration to end up in the Supreme Court 

with unparliamentary, unprecedented, illegal, unconstitutional 

violations of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 

unprecedented changes politically and economically and 

legally and morally, because the Minister of Agriculture 

wouldn't communicate.  Pretty fascinating.  Very fascinating. 

 

You would wonder, who's in charge?  Well how do they 

explain this in their caucus?  How did we get into this mess?  

What happened?  Who wasn't minding the store?  What in the 

world is going on?  Why didn't we just saw it off with the 

federal government and make some payments?  It could cost us 

23, $24 million or whatever.  The farmers would be happy.  

But they're into this big, big mess because they wouldn't 

communicate. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture says, we'll get around it somehow.  

And I'm just a little bit smarter than everybody else, and I don't 

have to be a lawyer.  And he just went right on and got the 

constitutional lawyers in the Department of Justice to put every 

"whereas" you can imagine in the Bill to protect them and then 

eliminate the access to the law.  And it's against the 

constitution, it's against the charter of rights.  And all of this 

mess because the Minister of Agriculture wouldn't 

communicate.  What a mistake. 

 

And then what happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it forces not only 

this on the whole party and on the province, but then every 

member over there has to stand and vote for this mess -- vote 

for the closure, vote for the limited of speaking, vote for the 

unparliamentary nature of this, vote for the illegality of this.  

And they have to eat those words, and it's a humbling, 

humbling experience.  Because they're doing exactly what they 

thought they never would do and they know they don't believe 

in. 

 

And if there was a free vote in here and the only judge was the 

good Lord Himself, they'd vote and say, on my conscience, I'm 

not supporting this.  And they know it.  If there was a free vote 

in here and said, on the basis of principle -- there, they wouldn't 

vote for this.  They 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

wouldn't support the Minister of Agriculture.  He's an NDP 

colleague, so regardless of what I'm going to do, I guess is the 

old union hall tactic, I'm going to do it anyway even though it's 

bad, it's illegal, it's unparliamentary, it's disgusting.  I'm going 

to do it anyway because the union boss says I've got to do it.  

Well isn't that a great tradition?  Isn't that just the fanciest, 

fairest tradition we can imagine here in this Legislative 

Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The NDP leader in the Star-Phoenix goes on to say this: 

 

 The substance of what we did is right.  And if it's the 

substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal picture and 

the like, process becomes a little less important. 

 

The end justifies the means.  Well, well, well.  Have we ever 

heard that before?  The end justifies the means.  We heard it 

from their member from Regina Albert South.  He says, we 

don't care about the law; it's just the process they got.  Guilty or 

innocent doesn't matter; it's just the process.  The end justifies 

the means. 

 

Here is the Premier of Saskatchewan, the NDP Premier saying 

process becomes a little less important.  We'll change the rules.  

We'll take away your right in court and we'll do all this because 

there's a higher calling here -- which they haven't explained -- 

but we'll go to the process . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member from Prince Albert obviously is interested in this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The process is a rotten process.  It is absolutely a rotten process 

and they should be ashamed of this process.  And when they 

say that they can do anything as long as the objective is a high 

ideal of theirs, then the process doesn't matter.  Then the end 

justifies the means.  The end justifies the means. 

 

If that's the attitude that is pumped into the NDP Agriculture 

minister, no wonder he can't communicate.  Because the end 

justifies the means.  If we have to break the law, fair enough.  

If we have to break all constitutional tradition, fair enough; 

parliamentary tradition, fair enough; the process won't matter 

because we have some higher goal. 

 

Can you believe that?  The NDP Premier says that in the Star-

Phoenix, June 23: 

 

 . . . if it's the substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal 

picture and the like, process becomes a little less important. 

 

So rights of people, morality, dignity, respect, the law, 

parliamentary tradition -- all of those things become less 

important when the NDP's in power.  What a hypocritical 

position to be in.  And they're digging it deeper and deeper and 

deeper, and they're ashamed of it and they should be.  And they 

want us not to talk about it?  Unbelievable. 

 

And on top of that, perhaps part of the guilt is they knew all 

along, they knew all along that if they won power on the basis 

of their hollow and false promises, that they 

were going to stab people in the back like this, sure as we're 

sitting here. 

 

And why they feel so guilty today and why they chirp from 

their seats is they knew they were going to do that.  And that 

legacy will sit with the NDP for the rest of their life because all 

the hypocrisy and all that immorality is going to be recorded.  

And it's in Hansard and it's in this Legislative Assembly and 

it's going to be in court and it's going to be locked in lawsuits. 

 

On the issue . . . again, and this is a quote from the Leader-

Post, June 17 on GRIP: 

 

 Romanow was mum on the issue Tuesday for the second day 

in a row and didn't stop to answer questions from the media. 

 

 "I have nothing to say," he said, walking past reporters on his 

way to his office. 

 

 Asked again about the walk-out, he jokingly commented 

instead on the continuing constitutional negotiations. 

 

The second day in a row -- wouldn't comment.  No comment 

from the NDP Premier on GRIP.  We've had the second day in 

a row, the Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan, 

an NDP lawyer, won't comment on the GRIP legislation.  

We've asked him in question period; we may ask him again 

today: will you refer this Bill that was unnegotiated to the 

Court of Appeal?  Won't answer, no communication.  

Symbolic, it's very symbolic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We asked the Minister of Justice, an NDP lawyer in charge of 

drafting this Bill: will you comment on this Bill; will you refer 

it; will you take it to the Court of Appeal?  And you know 

what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  No communication.  Nothing back 

and forth.  The legal critic has no communication with that 

critic over there, the minister in charge. 

 

That's typical.  That's why this amendment is here.  They won't 

talk to people.  They won't listen to people.  And when we ask 

questions in here, they won't even stand in their place and 

answer.  The belligerent Agriculture minister who is 

responsible for the whole bloody problem, he gets to stand up 

and talk about the legality of the situation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to caution the 

member in the use of language.  Some of the adjectives that he 

uses are perhaps not appropriate for this Chamber.  And in 

doing so, also want to remind him that the discussion is on a 

subamendment, the terms of which are narrow, and I encourage 

him to restrict his remarks to the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . or Deputy Speaker.  

The subamendment, obviously we're concerned about the 

Minister of Agriculture and the opposition member responsible 

for Agriculture not communicating.  That's the whole basis.  

And that has led to closure. 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

Those three things are in there: the Minister of Agriculture, the 

opposition critic, and the resulting closure, a part of the 

subamendment. 

 

When the NDP Premier is asked about that, asked about the 

communication, asked about the closure, he's mum.  Quote is: 

 

 Romanow was mum on the issue Tuesday for the second day 

in a row and didn't stop to answer questions from the media. 

 

 "I have nothing to say," (the NDP Premier says) . . . 

 

So not only did the Minister of Agriculture not communicate 

and fail to communicate, the Premier fails to communicate.  

You have nothing to say.  Nothing to say.  He's just taken away 

the farmers' rights.  He's broken their contract.  He's taken 

away their rights to go to court.  And he's asked by the media 

and the NDP Premier says, nothing to say. 

 

That isn't how he campaigned.  He had lots to say when he was 

campaigning:  there's a rural crisis; I'll give you the cost of 

production; we'll get more money from Ottawa; we'll help 

these farmers. 

 

When asked after the election and when he's got them right by 

the back of the neck and he's pushing them down into the 

ground and not helping them, what does he say?  "I have 

nothing to say" . . . Imagine! 

 

Now if that's the attitude that has encouraged the Minister of 

Agriculture not to co-operate and not to consult and not to 

communicate with the opposition critic, then of course you're 

going to end up in this awful mess. 

 

And the newspapers and the editorials are filled with these 

stories of non-communication, of guilt, of shame, of disgrace, 

of unconstitutional procedures.  June 17, GRIP headline, Star-

Phoenix, 1992: "Romanow still refuses to comment on the 

standoff."  No communication.  Won't communicate.  Won't 

talk to us. 

 

 For the second day since returning from Eastern Canada, (the 

NDP Premier) . . . refused to comment on the standoff over 

his government's proposed legislation on the GRIP farm 

safety net. 

 

June 17, 1992. 

 

Then it's interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they do start to 

communicate with the media and with the public, they give the 

wrong information.  So if they do kind of break out of their 

shell and their siege mentality all of a sudden, then out comes 

some haywire information.  They give the wrong information. 

 

 Leader-Post, June 18, 1992, and here's the Minister of 

Economic Development, and the quote is -- this is Leader-Post, 

June 18: 

 

 . . . Lingenfelter said the bell-ringing is costing taxpayers an 

extra $27,000 a day. 

 

While the NDP House Leader says it's 27,000 a day, 

Legislative Assembly officials say the true figure -- the true 

figure -- is actually closer to $1,000 a day. 

 

So when they do communicate, they mislead the public.  They 

don't tell the truth.  They think they're campaigning again.  

They think they're campaigning again.  Say anything they want 

during the campaign, make up figures, put it all out there, and 

then when we start to have communication in here -- No.  No 

communication.  Not a word said.  Would you comment on the 

GRIP?  No, won't comment.  Would you talk with us about 

GRIP before you begin closure?  No, we won't do that. 

 

So when they do comment, here's the NDP House Leader says, 

bell-ringing costs the taxpayers an extra 27,000 a day.  And the 

Legislative Assembly officials say the true -- the true figure, 

according to legislative officials -- is closer to $1,000 a day. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the stories of the lack of 

communication and the misleading information of the NDP 

pile up and pile up and pile up in editorials and comments and 

quotes, not in the legislative . . . not only here, but all across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It goes on to say that the House Leader . . . And this is the 

Leader-Post, June 19: 

 

 (NDP House Leader) . . . wouldn't commit to the ultimate 

removal of a clause that retroactively determines farmers 

received proper notice of the (GRIP) changes. 

 

No communication where they would talk about co-operation.  

He wouldn't commit to that discussion.  Instead goes out and 

talks to the media:  I won't do that; I won't commit to that; I 

know that it's wrong; I know the farmers are in trouble; I know 

there's a rural crisis; but I won't admit to making changes; 

won't even commit to talk about changes. 

 

(1130) 

 

Now here's a dandy.  This is June 13, 1992.  This is the 

communication going back and forth between the government, 

the NDP administration, and the opposition.  Now I say 

communication -- the lack of communication.  How's this for 

communication, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Quote, Leader-Post, June 13, 1992: 

 

 NDP House leader Dwain Lingenfelter admitted Friday the 

bill covers up for the fact the government missed a March 15 

deadline to notify farmers about changes to the GRIP 

program. 

 

They admitted it.  That's why they're ashamed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  They will admit that they actually broke the law.  

They admit that they broke contracts.  They admit that they're 

hurting farmers.  They missed the March 15 deadline.  And 

because they made that big mistake, they said, well I will not 

communicate to try to fix it; I'll find some compromise for the 

farmers with the federal government.  There's a good federal 

offer coming out for lots of money. 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

They won't communicate.  So what we'll do is that we'll just 

admit we broke the law, but to cover ourselves and protect 

ourselves we'll bring in this Bill that prevents anybody from 

suing us.  We'll get into closure so they can't talk about it.  And 

we end up . . . here we are, discussing this amendment which 

says there has been no communication -- inadequate 

communication between the Minister of Agriculture and the 

critic position here.  And as a result we have closure. 

 

And the NDP House Leader admits they made a mistake.  He 

admits that they missed the deadline.  He admits they broke the 

law.  He admits all of that.  And so they just have to find a way 

to get their hand-picked Minister of Agriculture out of trouble. 

 

 Star-Phoenix, April 29, 1992.  This is the Minister of 

Agriculture.  This is what he says.  April 1992, the NDP 

Agriculture minister, quote: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens has threatened to bring in 

retroactive legislation changing the (GRIP) contracts, but he 

refused to comment on that on Tuesday. 

 

He threatened the farmers.  April 29 he was threatening them.  

Talk about the lack of communication.  We go right back to 

April, May, June, July, and we're into August.  He's been 

threatening them for four or five months. 

 

Here's the quote: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens has threatened to bring in 

retroactive legislation changing (GRIP) . . . 

 

So he's out there threatening the farmers.  You get into line.  

Threatened the crop insurance agents.  Threatening the 

members of the opposition, and maybe threatened his caucus.  I 

don't know how they let him away with this.  But he says, I will 

bring in legislation to cover this up.  We'll fix it somehow.  

And he's threatening back in April.  So that's five months. 

 

No communication, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Five months of 

threats, five months of bullying people, five months of absolute 

shameful activity, hypocrisy.  April, May, June, July, and 

August and then they take away rights; they take away the 

access to courts -- unconstitutional. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has threatened 

farmers, threatened us in the legislature and now he's being 

backed up by this Draconian piece of legislation which invokes 

closure. 

 

Another quote.  This is June 17, after his threats in April and . . 

. This is out of the Leader-Post June 17. 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 15 

deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

Oh, he was repeatedly asked by the members of the 

advisory committee if this would cause problems. 

 

 . . . Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow". 

 

June 17, 1992. 

 

Now can you imagine, can you imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what the Minister of Agriculture has told his caucus and told 

his NDP colleagues.  He says, we have to do this; we've got to 

get around this somehow.  Because if we don't get around it 

somehow, guess what's going to happen?  We're going to go to 

court, the farmers are going to sue us, and the Minister of 

Agriculture is going to have to admit that he knew he broke the 

law. 

 

And he doesn't want to go on the stand.  The NDP Agriculture 

minister doesn't want to go into court, under oath, and have to 

talk about what he knew was breaking the law.  He didn't want 

to do that.  So he says to his caucus members, you have to give 

me this Bill so I won't get called to court. 

 

Secondly, he doesn't want the Crop Insurance minister to end 

up going to court because then he might have to tell the truth.  

And under oath he'll have to tell him that he knew it was 

breaking the law and he had officials that knew that it was 

breaking the law.  And under oath they'd have to tell that 

because the penalty for perjury is pretty serious. 

 

He's got the advisory board members, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He 

doesn't want the advisory board members to go to court and 

have a lawyer ask them: is this what you really said; are these 

the concerns you talked about; did you advise the minister that 

it would be illegal.  And they'd have to say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, yes we did raise these concerns.  We advised the 

minister that it would be illegal.  And they would have to say 

that on the stand. 

 

Now what does that do for the government's case?  It makes the 

government case very, very weak.  All the people that used to 

work in Crop Insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could be called 

to the stand in a court case.  And the NDP Agriculture minister 

does not want those people that he fired to be called before a 

judge and a jury or a court to tell what really happened in Crop 

Insurance when the NDP won -- who was fired and why they 

fired them. 

 

And they all knew that this was an illegal act and they knew the 

consequences to the farmers and they advised the minister and 

they would say:  we advised the minister. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The Leader of the Opposition 

has spoken to the question that's before us.  He now has an 

opportunity to put forward his comments on the 

subamendment, why it is that certain clauses of the amendment 

should be changed.  The discussion therefore is quite narrow as 

to the points that are contained in the subamendment.  I 

encourage him to make sure that his remarks are pertinent to 

the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  To help make 

that connection, the Minister of Agriculture has not 

communicated here because he knows that if he started 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

to negotiate seriously, changing this legislation, he could end 

up in court, and all of these awful things would happen.  That's 

what's keeping him from communicating. 

 

He doesn't want the Crop Insurance officials that he fired and 

the Crop Insurance minister fired to end up in court.  Well 

they're going to end up in court anyway, and they're going to be 

called.  But that's what he's afraid of.  He doesn't want the fired 

agents to end up in court.  Therefore he has to bring in this Bill; 

therefore there's nothing to communicate. 

 

There's no give and take.  There's no talk here.  Because he's 

made up his mind he is not going to have himself, the officials, 

the agents, the fired people, the advisory members go to court 

and tell the truth.  Therefore he is unable to communicate 

because he has nothing to give because he's locked into a 

legislative nightmare. 

 

That's the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He cannot communicate 

because he has nothing with give and take.  There's no 

communication here because he has made up his mind he is not 

going to give.  And he cannot afford to give because if he does 

he ends up in court with all of the people that advised him 

otherwise.  And they can call in all kinds of people.  That's the 

reason there's no communication. 

 

Officials would testify.  Farmers would testify.  Agents would 

testify.  Fired agents would testify.  Fired Crop Insurance 

agents would testify.  Advisory members would testify.  And 

then they'd have to put the minister on the stand under oath.  

And guess what that would mean?  He'd have to tell it as it 

really is.  And he doesn't want that.  And you can bet your 

boots, nobody in the NDP caucus wants that.  That's serious 

business.  Because he couldn't hide in here. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the connection is very clear.  That 

man would not communicate with our critic because he 

couldn't afford to end up letting the farmer have his day in 

court.  Because any good lawyer would bring in all those 

people that know the truth and they would tell the truth.  And 

the minister would have to tell the truth.  And he wouldn't be 

exempt from the little procedures that are out there in the real 

world by hiding in here.  He'd have to tell it as it is. 

 

On June 17, the minister went on to say . . . or the editorial 

does: 

 

 "Essentially, he (which is the NDP Agriculture minister) . . . 

didn't seem concerned," said the committee member who 

asked not to be identified. (Not to be identified.)  "He thought 

we could get around that (legal question). . . He said he 

would get around it somehow." 

 

Now here's a committee member, an advisory committee 

member not wanting to be identified, telling a few stories out 

of school on the Ag minister.  He said, he seemed like he had a 

plan to get around this even though it's illegal.  Don't tell him 

my name.  But he was a little arrogant.  He had a little plan.  He 

was going to do something a little irregular here.  But don't 

quote me.  I won't let you have my name. 

Well how would you like to put that fellow on the stand and 

say, what exactly went on in that meeting?  Did you advise the 

minister that he was in trouble?  Did you advise him that it was 

illegal?  And then bring the agents and bring the Crop 

Insurance people and others in.  Do you know what, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker?  They'd all say that the Minister of 

Agriculture is in a lot of trouble.  And he doesn't know how to 

get out of it. 

 

And I'm sure they told him, if you actually pursued this further, 

they'd say, Mr. Minister, why don't you just come clean?  Save 

yourself a lot of headaches, a lot of constitutional battles, a lot 

of legal battles.  Just negotiate a settlement with the farmers.  

Get on with '93 GRIP, which we all could be involved with in 

designing, and quit trying to bring in the law and change the 

rules and change democratic process to cover your . . . tracks. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Tracks? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Your tracks, on GRIP.  It was close. 

 

Well he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he's going to get around it.  

Now we find out how he got around it.  June 17, Star-Phoenix, 

quote: 

 

 . . . some members of the GRIP advisory committee warned 

the government about the deadline, but were told it wasn't a 

problem. 

 

Boy, what a mistake that was.  They were told by the NDP 

cabinet minister that GRIP wasn't a problem and the deadline 

wasn't a problem.  They've never had such a headache in their 

political life.  And he says, it's not a problem. 

 

Boy, oh boy, don't they wish it was just a dream and they could 

wake up and say, oh gosh, I'm glad that's over.  But now it's on 

the record.  Now the dream lives and breathes day after day 

after day for the rest of your political life, as short as it's going 

to be. 

 

You're going to have to live with this and experience it and it'll 

be fed back to you over and over and over and over again.  

Because this brand-new, novice NDP politician out of 

Rosetown says: oops, deadlines aren't a problem, the law isn't a 

problem; we'll get around it somehow.  And he snookered the 

whole bunch of you into this. 

 

The members know better.  Anybody with any seasoned 

political experience over there says, holy smokes, how did we 

let this happen?  My goodness.  Well it isn't very entertaining 

for the farmers when they have to take the NDP administration 

to court. 

 

Now here's a little bit of some of the funny stuff that goes on.  

Quote by the Star-Phoenix, June 17.  First you get to talk to the 

committee members and they said, they advised the minister 

the GRIP deadline was a problem.  But then you go ask the 

minister, and what does he say? 

 

 Asked by reporters Tuesday if the members of his (GRIP) 

committee had raised concerns about whether changes to 

GRIP after March 15 . . . had 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

been raised, Wiens said that was not the case. 

 

Well who's telling the truth?  The committee members said to 

the Star-Phoenix, we warned him and we told him that it was a 

problem.  Then you go ask Mr. Wiens or ask the Minister of 

Agriculture if this was raised, and he says no, wasn't raised.  

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no wonder he has a problem in 

communicating.  He says . . . he doesn't tell it as it is.  He 

doesn't tell it as it is. 

 

 . . . members of the GRIP advisory committee warned the 

government about the deadline, but were told it wasn't a 

problem. 

 

The NDP member says, we'll get around it somehow. 

 

(1145) 

 

Then when the reporters go to the NDP Minister of Agriculture 

and said, was it raised, he says no, wasn't raised.  Well he's 

wrong on both accounts.  It was raised and he knew it.  He was 

warned.  And his arrogance said, it doesn't matter, we'll get 

around it.  And then when he's asked about it and he got caught 

about it, he had to kind of weasel out of it by saying, they didn't 

talk to me about it, when in fact is they did talk to him about it. 

 

He deemed the conversation to have disappeared.  He couldn't 

say that on a witness stand, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  If he was 

hauled into court and that advisory member were sitting right 

beside him and the advisory member said, I warned the 

minister, the minister then couldn't get up and say:  well no, 

you didn't.  He'd have to say: well yes, he did tell me.  Then the 

truth would come out. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I've listened again to the 

member and the member is not attempting in any way to relate 

his remarks to the amendment and the subamendment that are 

before us.  The amendment proposes certain things.  The 

subamendment proposes to make some amendments to that, to 

make some variations.  It proposes to, for example, replace the 

words House leaders with that of the Minister of Agriculture 

and the opposition member responsible for Agriculture.  You 

should be speaking to why those people as opposed to the 

House leaders.  It proposes to drop some other words about a 

process, and says that the reason should be changed because 

closure was used unilaterally to force something in the 

Assembly.  The member should be speaking to why the terms 

of the amendment are proposed, or should be changed, in 

accordance with the words in the subamendment.  And 

therefore his remarks should be pertinent to that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Again, the 

Minister of Agriculture is incapable of communicating with the 

officials over here and our critics because of the hole he's dug 

himself into.  And my whole argument here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is this man has dug himself into such a vicious, deep 

hole that he can no longer effectively communicate.  Not only 

has he poisoned the relationship here, which is this 

amendment's about, but he has poisoned the relationship 

between himself and the media, and himself and the farmers, so 

that in fact he has nothing to negotiate. 

And secondly, he does not want to be put on the witness stand 

to be forced to tell the truth, therefore he cannot communicate 

and negotiate any kind of an arrangement here which would 

free up the farmers to take him to court.  That's the whole basis 

for the argument. 

 

And farmers say about this attitude, and it's an attitudinal 

problem.  Boyd Charles, spokesman for producers action 

committee, in the Leader-Post in April says: It's a sad state of 

affairs when farmers have to sue the government for breach of 

contract. 

 

That's why we're into this closure.  Because no communication.  

We had a contract.  Just honour the contract, get on with it, or 

negotiate something better. 

 

Now one of the reasons that there's no serious communication 

here, Mr. Speaker, is that the lawyers on the government side, 

the judges, and legal opinion is starting to mount that say that 

the NDP minister cannot negotiate any kind of a settlement.  

He is boxed in. 

 

Quote here, May 13, Judge Darla Hunter, the Leader-Post.  

Leader-Post, Darla Hunter, Judge Hunter, May 13: 

 

 It would appear that (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance) has put 

the cart before the horse. 

 

 If the Crown and agents of the Crown undertake costly 

system changes before effecting the necessary . . . changes, 

they cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown, or its agents, 

have voluntarily incurred. 

 

So the judge starts to talk about the impropriety of what the 

NDP Agriculture minister has done.  And lawyers have talked 

about it.  So it becomes more and more and more difficult for 

that man to communicate with the critic over here.  He's got no 

place to go.  He has no flexibility.  It's impossible for him to 

open up discussions because he's boxed himself into a legal 

black hole. 

 

June 15, and here's part of the whole, Mr. Speaker.  Star-

Phoenix: 

 

 The issue is compounded by the fact the government intends 

to use its (GRIP) legislation as a defence in court.  (There's 

the rub.)  It will argue it did not break its contract, because 

the bill says it didn't.  In effect, the government is changing 

the facts in the case. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's the basis for the whole amendment.  

There's the basis.  Because in fact they broke the law, 

retroactively tampered with evidence, tried to rewrite history.  

They have no choice but to bring in law that protects them, 

then bring in closure that passes it so we can't remind 

everybody about it, therefore there's no room to negotiate 

between that minister and any critic over here. 

 

That's the fact.  That's the truth.  Those are the circumstances.  

In effect the government is changing the facts in the case -- 

NDP tactics.  Change the evidence, 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard August 12, 1992 

change the facts, tamper with the evidence. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do you come over and negotiate and 

talk to people reasonably when you say, I'm going to change 

the facts?  I'm going to tamper with the evidence.  You didn't 

exist since January.  And what's more, if you think you did, I'm 

going to take away all your rights and then you can't sue me. 

 

How in the world do you communicate?  Well no wonder the 

place has a poisoned atmosphere.  I mean, you can win the 

election.  You can go make changes.  You can do it.  But at 

least you could defend people's rights, whether they're union 

contracts, teachers' contracts, seniors, pensioners, farmers.  

You don't have to get into this. 

 

The editorial says, "In effect, the government is changing the 

facts in the case."  Well who can defend that?  You can't 

campaign on that.  You can't defend it.  And what's the higher 

cause -- $23 million?  Put you above the law.  Rewrite history. 

 

I mean some of the worst dictators in the world, in Europe and 

the Pacific Rim, said, we'll just rewrite history.  It wasn't that 

way.  It wasn't that way.  The holocaust didn't happen.  We'll 

rewrite it. 

 

Come on!  You can't rewrite history.  People of Saskatchewan 

are sophisticated.  People in Canada and in the British 

parliamentary system have known democratic rights since the 

Magna Carta.  You can't just say, you didn't exist. 

 

So if the editorial gives you a good reason, Mr. Speaker, why 

the NDP Agriculture critic and the House Leader had no room 

to negotiate, that's why this amendment's here.  They knew 

there was no point even coming to the conversation. 

 

It's just like the committee rules -- no place to negotiate.  We'll 

just do it anyway.  Just unilaterally do it.  They knew from the 

outset that was going to be the case. 

 

And here's one where he's even implicated his deputy minister.  

This is a quote, Leader-Post, April 30, 1992, and it just digs . . . 

he brings in his officials.  He brings in the agents.  He 

implicates people he's fired, his advisory committee.  They're 

all implicated. 

 

So when he gets to negotiating, he's got himself a serious 

problem.  Quote:  A court affidavit filed earlier in the day from 

the deputy Agriculture minister Stuart Kramer suggested the 

NDP is about to introduce legislation to retroactively force 

farmers to accept changes to GRIP. 

 

Kramer's affidavit, a response to a lawsuit filed against the 

government in a Melville court room, stated Wiens intends to 

introduce legislative amendments in which notice of the 1992 

changes will be deemed to have been given to producers by 

March 15, 1992 as required in their individual contracts.  End 

of quote. 

 

So he brings in and implicates the deputy minister of 

Agriculture who on the stand has to tell the truth, and he says, 

I'll tell you what the minister's up to.  The minister is going to 

bring in legislation that is going to tamper with 

the evidence and either deemed that your contract didn't exist, 

or that we've sent it out on time, or something else that really 

rewrites history in the face of all of this. 

 

And no matter you've got tens of thousands of people signing 

the contracts, my minister, says the deputy, my minister is 

going to do this.  He is going to do this dirty, ugly deed.  And 

you make the deputy go take the heat and put him on the stand. 

 

That's why this minister doesn't want to get on the stand.  

That's why he can't communicate and talk to the critics over 

here.  He doesn't want his minister, the officials, the agents, the 

advisory committee, or farmers, or anybody else being forced 

to be on the stand and tell it as it really was and is. 

 

Because it would change his tune.  He'd have to come clean.  

He'd have to say: we did it wrong; we broke the law; we didn't 

honour contracts; that a good old Saskatchewan-Canadian 

tradition, where you shake hands with your neighbour and you 

say a deal's a deal, means nothing to this minister.  We'll get 

around it. 

 

How do you get around it with your neighbours when you 

shake hands with them and say, well a deal's a deal?  I'll give 

you so much for this truck and you give me so much for these 

pigs.  What do you do?  Do you run out and break the 

contracts?  Do you go and hide in the legislature and say, we'll 

get around it somehow? 

 

What an attitude.  This hand-picked Minister of Agriculture by 

the NDP Premier is the person that has got his deputy minister 

within months saying, well actually they're going to tamper 

with the evidence and bring in legislation to say they did it 

right anyway.  Unbelievable.  And we've got tens of thousands 

of families and communities at stake because we're looking at 

millions of dollars in communities.  And that's what it's about. 

 

For what?  For what?  Why are you into this?  What do you 

stick up for them for?  Why don't you say, hey, young fella, 

you made a mistake; now just let's go negotiate something 

better and cleaner. 

 

What a mess you got us into.  You're a rookie, I understand 

that, but rookies can be pulled back; they can be reined in.  You 

don't let them dig you into this.  You end up in the 

constitutional battle of your life, political battle of your life.  

Unparliamentary, undemocratic, illegal, immoral, and you're 

ashamed of it.  Nobody can defend it.  The Attorney General in 

your own party won't even stand and talk about it.  NDP 

Premier ducks the question.  Great bunch.  Then he brings in 

the deputy minister to take the heat. 

 

Here's a quote . . . well there's a lot of them, but the Leader-

Post, June 13: 

 

 The facts be known, the Tories are right on.  The NDP 

government is dead wrong. 

 

Tories are right and the NDP government is dead wrong.  

Everybody knows that but the NDP.  They know it.  In fact, 

they do know it.  And if you look how they designed the Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, there are no reason that no wonder 



August 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

there was no negotiations.  They've got that front of it full of 

whereas's, you'd think it was a constitutional negotiation going 

on.  Whereas, whereas, whereas, whereas, whereas, down 

through.  And they set that up because they think they're going 

to be sued 15 days from Friday. 

 

And then it gets in and says, but everything after January didn't 

happen.  And then it goes on and really rips them and says, but 

you can't sue us because we're above the law. 

 

And then the editorials come out: 

 

 The facts be known, the Tories are right on.  The NDP 

government is dead wrong. 

 

Well here is the NDP's hand-picked Agriculture minister who's 

dead wrong and he's too ornery to figure it out.  And for 

whatever reason is in the back of all of your minds, you're 

going to ride right with them into this hole, this black hole of 

all these unconstitutional, illegal, undemocratic changes.  For 

what?  Because you're so arrogant, so much pride that you can't 

admit that you've made a mistake. 

 

Just admit you've made a mistake.  Just go out and negotiate.  

Here we have this amendment.  We have closure in this 

legislature because you can't sit and talk with the Ag critic and 

discuss, well what would the farmers like?  Well they'd like a 

little more coverage in the event of a crop failure. 

 

They bought some on the contract.  You want to change the 

contract.  So negotiate something that's reasonable.  Be 

reasonable.  It's so simple, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, all the changes that were made here, all of these 

historic, historic changes because we couldn't have 

communication between that rookie minister and an 

Agriculture critic with a very, very small opposition, and 

you've got yourself into this huge political problem.  

Absolutely unbelievable.  How in the world did it happen?  

How could it get so we couldn't communicate, couldn't talk 

about a compromise? 

 

And the quote goes on.  This is Leader-Post, June 12: 

 

 And right now, the Tories' reasons for blocking the 

government's legislative agenda and effectively holding the 

province hostage is far more justifiable than the reasons for 

the NDP's 1989 walkout ever hoped of being. 

 

Now that's interesting, isn't it, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP walked 

out because they didn't want people to buy bonds and shares in 

SaskEnergy.  It was a sinful thing, right?  Better not let them 

invest in SaskEnergy.  Wasn't that evil, sinful? 

 

We just did, I think, a Saskatchewan savings bond in 

Saskatchewan, for $500 million -- copied, the NDP copied our 

bonds.  Great program, I congratulate them.  They did it. 

 

Well you could do SaskEnergy bonds, convert them to 

shares, and you have equity and less debt.  And they walked 

out of the legislature on this philosophical argument.  Imagine, 

this really big thing, just tremendous -- people could actually 

invest in their own natural gas company.  Wouldn't that be 

unprecedented? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I was just going to get up anyway.  

And I want to tell the member that I think the clock has spared 

him intervention by the Speaker.  It now being 12 o'clock, this 

House stands recessed until 2 p.m. this afternoon. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 

 


