




















































Hansard: July 17, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1533 

 July 17, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Clerk: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 

not be present to open today's sitting. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you.  I would like to present a 

petition to the House.  It reads: 

 

To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan in Legislature Assembled: 

The petition of the undersigned farmers and citizens of the 

Province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan entered into legally 

binding contracts with them to provide a Gross Revenue 

Insurance Program explicitly guaranteeing that the 

provisions of the contract would not be changed without 

notice being given to farmers by March 15, 1992, and that 

the Government has announced it's intentions before the 

Courts in Melville that it proposes to pass a law saying 

farmers received such notice when in actual fact they did 

not and concerned that the crisis on the farm is being made 

much worse by these actions. 

 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be please to cause the 

government to 

 

1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year: 

 

2.) start working with the federal government and 

farmers to design a program that will be a true 

"REVENUE INSURANCE" program by the end of this 

calendar year, and 

 

3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be 

set up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio 

instead of risk area formula. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these petitions come from the Frontier 

area.  I'd like to present this to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I too have a petition to present this morning.  

Because the intent of the petition is the same as the one that's 

been presented by my colleague, I won't read the entire petition 

to the Assembly, but I will read the three important points, the 

first one being: 

 

That it allows the 1991 GRIP program to extend for this 

year.  (2) Start working with the federal government and 

farmers to design a program that will be true revenue 

insurance program by the end 

of the calendar year. (3) To ensure that the new revenue 

insurance program be set up on an individual 

cost-of-production and return ratio instead of a risk 

formula. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The petition I 

have is a similar petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

1.) Allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 

 

2.) (To) start working with the federal government and 

farmers to design a program that will be a true "revenue 

insurance" program by the end of this calendar year . . .  

 

3 ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio 

instead of a risk area formula. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition comes from primarily the 

south-west part of the province, but from other areas as well.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I too have a 

couple of petitions here I would like to table. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 

 

2.) start working with the federal government and 

farmers to design a program that will be a true "revenue 

insurance" program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be 

set up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio 

instead of risk area formula. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from Climax, 

Eastend, Shaunavon and area. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners (humbly) . . . pray. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to introduce some petitions.  And it reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

  1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

2.) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio 

instead of risk area formula. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions come from Eastend, Shaunavon, and Frontier. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

colleagues in reading the petition have read the last three 

remarks.  I'll read the one paragraph just above that, so I won't 

be too repetitious, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan entered into legally 

binding contracts with them to provide a Gross Revenue 

Insurance Program explicitly guaranteeing that the provisions 

of the contract would not be changed without notice being 

given to farmers by March 5, 1992 and that the Government 

has announced its intentions before the Courts in Melville 

that it proposes to pass a law saying farmers received such 

notice when in actual fact they did not and concerned that the 

crisis on the farm is being made much worse by these actions. 

 

I have two of the same, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I . . . And 

these people, Mr. Speaker, are from Frontier and Climax and 

surrounding towns in that area. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Thompson as chair of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members' Bills presents the second report of the said 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 

has agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 

Bill No. 01--An Act to Provide for the incorporation of 

Ukrainian Catholic Parishes within 

Saskatchewan 

 

Bill No. 02--An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial 

Exhibition Association, Limited 

 

Bill No. 03--An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Credit Society Limited and 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial 

Services Limited 

Your committee recommends, under the provisions of rule 

60(1) that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with 

respect to Bill No. 01. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

move: 

 

 That the second report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give 

notice that on Tuesday next I will move the following: 

 

 That this Assembly, in view of the unprecedented action of 

Mr. Speaker in his direct refusal to abide by the rules of this 

Assembly and his subordination of the rights of the House to 

the will of the NDP government, resolves that it no longer 

has any confidence in its presiding officer. 

 

So moved. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my real pleasure this morning to have the 

opportunity to introduce 13 students from the occupational 

English class being offered through SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) at the Alexandra 

campus in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are learning English as a second 

language, which I am sure any one of us would admit is a very 

difficult undertaking, and I'm sure all members of this House 

want to wish each of these students every good wish in their 

course of learning English as a second language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students today in the class are accompanied 

by Jan McArter, Jean Lajeunesse, and Chris Benson.  I look 

forward to meeting with the class and sharing some drinks and 

conversation in a few moments.  Mr. Speaker, would all 

members please join me in welcoming these students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Yesterday I had the opportunity to be with 

people in Regina and Saskatoon in rural communities, and I 

want to say today marks day 1 since the overthrow and the 

demise of democracy in the Saskatchewan legislature.  July 17 

marks the death of over 85 years of tradition in this Assembly.  

It marks the first day that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government began their oppressive reign over the people of 

Saskatchewan.  The very fabric that knits this country and this 

province together, the very rights and freedoms that each man, 

woman, and child possess have been cast aside by NDP 

members. 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

The NDP members do not believe that all people are created 

equal in the province of Saskatchewan, nor do these members 

believe that each and every person in this province has a voice 

and should be allowed to be heard.  I'm sorry to say that NDP 

members will stop at nothing, nothing, to accomplish their 

ideological goals, even if it means forsaking hundreds of 

thousands of defenceless men and women and children in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The official opposition in Saskatchewan no longer has the right 

to oppose NDP members with any tangible means, and any 

member . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed.  The 

member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Speaker, we all know how important it is 

to have clean water.  I don't know how many people realize it, 

but Saskatchewan is leading the way in developing the 

technology to ensure just that.  Saskatchewan has recently 

developed a new water quality data management system called 

ESQUADAT.  This data base is the finest water quality 

monitoring system in Canada.  And we can all be proud that it 

was designed right here in our province. 

 

The Department of Environment and Public Safety manages 

ESQUADAT.  The system gives staff comprehensive 

information at their fingertips.  This information helps them 

monitor the quality of all Saskatchewan surface water, ground 

water, drinking water, and industrial and mining waste water. 

 

The environmental protection fund was used to design and 

implement the system during this past year, and this coming 

year, more hardware and software will be acquired, providing 

staff with even greater capabilities.  We are also planning to 

increase our service by expanding access to the system to 

outside agencies and the public. 

 

Through ESQUADAT, our province is contributing to a new 

model for collecting and maintaining environmental 

information.  Saskatchewan people should be proud that we 

have the best computerized data system in Canada to help us 

protect the vital water resources of this province.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, tomorrow the Saskatoon & District Labour Council is 

sponsoring the second annual pancake breakfast at the 

Saskatoon food bank. 

 

Last year residents were very kind and generous.  We all know 

that food banks are not the solution to poverty and 

unemployment.  The recent budget increases to low income 

programs will begin to address unemployment, training, and 

poverty in some small way. 

 

The government is working very hard on economic 

development and employment support and income 

strategies, and I know that all members will support these 

important initiatives when they are announced soon.  Given the 

magnitude of unemployment, poverty, and the financial 

bankruptcy of this province, this is a huge collective challenge.  

But this desperate situation must, and will be turned around, 

Mr. Speaker, on all fronts. 

 

In the mean time, hungry people must be fed and special thanks 

to the Saskatoon & District Labour Council, sisters and 

brothers who care about their neighbours, and to the food bank 

board staff and volunteers not only in Saskatoon, but all food 

banks across the province for their humanitarian efforts. 

 

I know that this pancake breakfast tomorrow will be a success.  

And I invite anyone listening to please feel free to drop down 

and to contribute as they have in the past, in a very generous 

way.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just imagine 2,800 

people gathering in a farmer's barn, and outside neighbours 

have set up food booths to cater to the crowd.  Curious people 

driving by wondered what could possibly be happening at this 

neat, well-kept farm. 

 

Well the answer, Mr. Speaker, is a unique venture -- a blending 

of the arts and agricultural initiative.  For these are the '90s.  A 

new era is upon us, an era that restores old values of ingenuity, 

creativity, and co-operation. 

 

Twenty-eight hundred people came to see Jake and the Kid, a 

production of the Barn Playhouse north of Martensville.  Last 

year Vicky Dyck and her family moved the cows out of her 

barn and invited everyone to an evening of prairie 

entertainment and hospitality. 

 

Because of last year's success, the Dycks built a 300-seat 

addition to the playhouse.   To break even, they hoped to attract 

1,800 people; instead, almost 3,000 turned out.  The Dyck's 

neighbours set up food booths in the farm yard and offered 

home-cooked meals to the theatre-goers, at old-fashioned 

prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of how in 

Saskatchewan we can prosper by using ingenuity, creativity, 

and co-operation.  I congratulate all the people involved in this 

artistic initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

commend the minister and the people in the Tourism branch 

for the excellent job they have done in promoting 

Saskatchewan as a great place to visit. 

 

Coming from the constituency of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, 

with what I think has one of the finest provincial parks in the 

province, I can attest to the fact that we have wonderful parks, 

historic sites, and recreational areas.  We do not fabricate, Mr. 

Speaker, glossy or sensational gimmicks to get people's 

attention.  All we have to do is make sure the people find out 

all about the interesting things we offer.  In that respect, 

Tourism people have done an excellent job. 
 

I myself have learned about the many areas of the 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

province that I would like to visit.  The Plains Cree 

encampment at Fort Carlton and the Wanuskewin Heritage 

Park are but two examples.  Hats off to Tourism and the people 

involved for their great work. 

 

The business people that I know are more than willing to be 

competitive in their prices.  But before we go elsewhere, let's 

make sure that Saskatchewan people have been given a fair 

opportunity to serve our needs.  I encourage all members and 

residents of Saskatchewan to do their part to ensure that local 

small businesses stay viable.  Travel Saskatchewan.  And while 

travelling through Saskatchewan please stop in Meadow Lake.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

congratulate the farmers' union district local No. 1 for housing 

the regional sixth annual convention at Kenosee Lake this past 

Tuesday and Wednesday.  In particular, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

congratulate Betty Gordon, district director for district 1, and 

her committee for the time and energy spent in organizing this 

two-day event. 

 

I spent Wednesday afternoon at the meetings listening to over 

100 delegates and visitors talking about and debating issues 

pertaining not only to agriculture, but also issues that affect 

Saskatchewan in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farm organizations in this province have always 

played an important role in developing and highlighting 

agricultural issues.  The National Farmers Union has always 

been one of the most consistent and forward-thinking of many 

of the farm organizations we are so fortunate to have in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They, along with many of their counterparts, make agriculture 

industry a force to be reckoned with now and for the future. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when I think of the future, I see in terms 

of how it will be shaped by such organizations as the NFU 

(National Farmers Union). 

 

The future also reminds me of a quote of George Burns:  I look 

to the future because that's where I'm going to spend the rest of 

my life.  I believe there's some truth from that observation, for 

the future of agriculture is indeed the future of this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I pose 

my first question to the Leader of the NDP.  Yesterday you 

completed a process that drew all power from the Assembly 

unto yourself and your staff.  Indeed the examples you used 

yesterday to show the institution could survive your tyrant's 

hand are proof of your own contradictions and lack of respect. 

There was no closure used in the great medicare debate; no 

closure used in potash nationalization; no closure used in 

almost every one of the debates you speak so highly about.  But 

you have not only eliminated the opposition's ability to stop 

your abuse of the courts, you have signalled a willingness to 

close all debates in a mere five days. 

 

Are you prepared to direct your representatives to seek in the 

Rules Committee an immediate remedy to the imbalance that 

you have created in this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for his question.  I would say however, Mr. Speaker, that as 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the position that this 

government takes is that this Legislative Assembly's rules are 

as generous -- in fact more generous -- than most of the 

Legislative Assembly rules with respect to debate and to 

procedure. 

 

The members opposite have a whole range of options open to 

them with respect to length of debate and petitions and all of 

that which is accepted in every jurisdiction.  And from our 

point of view the . . . we would like to discuss with the 

members of the opposition any rules which can improve the 

proceedings of the House further, but I don't accept the basic 

proposition or assumption behind the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  A further 

question to the NDP leader.  As much as the people dislike 

bell-ringing, they demand public input into this Assembly, not 

to some hand-picked committee of the NDP, but to a 

committee of this Assembly. 

 

We have a Standing Committee on Agriculture that has 

representation from both sides of this House.  And given that 

we have two weeks to save the situation, will you refer the 

retroactive, law-breaking parts of your GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) Bill to the Standing Committee on 

Agriculture and allow it to hold public hearings?  Will you do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, as NDP leader, on this 

particular point I have no particular observation to make.  As 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, however, and 

responsible therefore to answer questions of the government, I 

do have an observation to make. 

 

The observation is that in due course the Bill will be tabled and 

debated, and the members of the opposition, if they're doing 

their job, will of course bring to the attention of the 

government, as they have been endeavouring to do, their 

various suggestions for improvement of the Bill, corrections of 

the Bill.  This is the most public forum that there can be with 

television proceedings and debate, and it is a forum which 

permits a good exchange of ideas.  And we're prepared to look 

at the suggestions that the opposition makes for us.  I would 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

hope however that the opposition would make sure that the 

suggestions that they make reflect the best interest of the 

farming community and limit their political objectives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, another question along 

the same line to the same member.  And I say to you, sir, that 

the opposition did not call for unlimited bell-ringing, and it 

does not call for that now.  While we demand that public access 

be increased and that the government be forced to allow public 

hearings into Bills of high controversy, will you tell us what is 

the basis, what is the basis, sir, of your opposition to a process 

that would trigger public hearings on a Bill of high 

controversy?  Why are you so opposed to the public debate that 

you pretend to admire? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the question of 

public hearings is something which the government will have 

to make a decision on with respect to each and every Bill.  In 

the case of the particular GRIP legislation which we had been 

intending to introduce and debate, but for all of these weeks 

has been blocked by probably one of the highest acts of 

irresponsibility of any opposition in the Commonwealth, we've 

been denied the chance to get the kind of public input from you 

and your members.  We see there are some petitions being 

tabled, and we think that's a very adequate and appropriate 

response to take to this Assembly. 

 

I say to the member what I said earlier: in the course of the 

second reading of the Bill and the Committee of the Whole 

there will be time for protracted observations and, no doubt, 

debate about this, and we welcome the members' positions in 

this regard.  That's about as far as I can go at this stage in the 

game, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I say to the 

member that you are so full of contradictions, and quite 

frankly, phoney sincerity, that you have no position of 

substance to offer this morning.  I ask you simple questions and 

you're totally unwilling to give a reasonable response. 

 

You have stolen this Assembly from the people of 

Saskatchewan and Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, and we 

have very little left that we can do to win that back.  But I 

caution you, sir, that we will try. 

 

We are actively considering -- and your responses are going to 

be important -- we're actively considering that until there is a 

public-hearing mechanism in place, every second reading will 

receive a three-day hoist and every vote will be a recorded 

vote. 

 

Yesterday's ruling may have given you everything that you 

want, but I ask you once more, I ask you once more, will you 

agree, will you agree, sir, to immediately refer the GRIP Bill to 

the Standing Committee on Agriculture for public hearings? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question.  I will tell the hon. member and the former 

premier that the threats that he has issued to a duly elected 

government of a Saskatchewan province, the threat of 

obstructionism, the irresponsible threat to bring the 

proceedings of this legislature yet to a further halt, I find to be, 

if I may say so, very irresponsible.  And I'm hoping that the 

hon. member had a slip of the tongue in doing so.  But if he 

chooses that course, that is for him and for his leader to decide 

and to pay the price for doing so. 

 

But I can tell you this, sir: you may not like it, but the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan elected us eight months ago.  

And we are going to govern until the people decide otherwise 

in the normal and democratic fashion.  And the last thing that 

we will do is succumb to threats by a dispirited, revengeful 

band of dissidents who simply refused to accept the will of the 

people in October of 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is to the NDP leader. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member should be 

aware by now that you can put questions to ministers or to the 

Premier but not to any one other person or to the leader of any 

political party.  You must address your question to a minister 

or to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is to the NDP member from 

Riversdale.  Mr. Member, you just talked about the fact that 

you were elected in October.  I want to raise with you the 

simple question.  You didn't campaign on retroactivity in 

October.  In fact, from my recollection in this Legislative 

Assembly you've always talked against that.  And as a member 

who will stand up there and say that you were against 

retroactivity, I ask the question my hon. colleague had. 

 

On something as controversial as retroactively changing the 

lives of tens of thousands of families in rural Saskatchewan, 

why won't you allow them to voice their opinion in an 

agriculture committee, a standing committee, so that we can 

talk about the retroactive consequences on tens of thousands of 

families in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly when 

you never campaigned on retroactively changing their life? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question put forward 

by the member from Estevan is a question based on 

retroactivity and he is correct, we did not campaign on 

retroactivity. 

 

He fails to mention that we did campaign on change for GRIP.  

Why we did not campaign on retroactivity is because we did 

not anticipate that his friend and colleague, the Minister of 

Agriculture of Canada, in the negotiations of the GRIP matter 

. . . 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like the members to 

give the Premier the courtesy of listening to his response, and I 

don't want any more interruptions from the member for Wilkie. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member for 

Wilkie to observe some courtesy in this House and not to 

interrupt members while they're speaking.  If the member has a 

question, he should put his questions.  In the meantime, the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was about 

to say, I will simply close off by saying that the former 

administration didn't campaign on retroactivity either, and 

enacted many Bills on retroactivity -- many. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- A final question to the same member.  With 

your experience in this Legislative Assembly and in politics in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister and Mr. Premier, you know, you 

know, you know that tens of thousands of people have signed a 

contract that affects their finances and their life -- affects their 

life.  And how can you callously say that you can just wipe 

them aside without giving them a hearing?  Honestly let them 

tell you and explain to you how they can't change their 

contracts retroactively with their bankers, their credit unions, 

their implement dealers, their neighbours. 

 

What do they do retroactively when you go in and change their 

life like this? 

 

That's what we're asking.  Why can't you let the Standing 

Committee on Agriculture, with members from both sides, go 

out and talk to people about this retroactive piece of damaging 

legislation?  Why are you afraid to let that committee go to the 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader 

of the Official Opposition, my answer to him is the same as I 

gave to the member from Rosthern. 

 

There can't be a more public hearing forum than the Legislative 

Assembly for a debate of the legislation which is involved.  

And this forum permits debate -- as much debate as is 

necessary.  This debate forum is a debate which is in public 

view.  This debate forum requires questions and answers as 

we're seeing today in question period. 

 

And with respect to the GRIP Bill, I have no doubt that all the 

members opposite will want to say as much as they want to say 

about it and other issues, which we have not heard very much 

from them this session.  But none the less, they have every 

opportunity and forum to do so.  And we welcome their 

suggestions and comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Question to the same member.  You say, sir, 

that this is the most public forum, and yet you have 

over a dozen committees of this legislature travelling around 

talking about all kinds of things from municipal law, the 

environment, and others.  Why don't you think this retroactive 

piece of legislation is as important as all of the other 

committees that you have travelling all over? 

 

And if you think this is a very good forum for all of these other 

things -- something as potent and powerful as retroactively 

changing people's lives -- why doesn't it qualify to give people 

access to the members of this legislature?  Why doesn't it rank 

with the others that you have agreed and decided to go out and 

talk to people all across the province? 

 

It's the oldest standing committee in Saskatchewan's 

legislature, the Agriculture Committee.  Why won't you let it 

rank like other committees and let people have access to all 

members of the House on this controversial Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, when the member was 

the premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the Agriculture 

Committee, standing committee of this legislature, was never 

convened once.  Never. 

 

And during that period of nine years when the member from 

Estevan was the premier, he introduced GRIP, as flawed as it 

was . . . Mr. Speaker, will the member . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I must ask the member from Estevan, 

the Leader of the Opposition . . . he's had an opportunity to put 

his question.  He should now listen to the answer, and then he'll 

have another opportunity to ask further questions.  In the mean 

time, let's listen to the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll just simply 

very quickly say that the history of the deeds of the former 

premier belie the words of the premier this morning.  That 

committee was never convened, notwithstanding the fact that 

there were requests, numerous, on major agricultural programs.  

That was his judgement, his government's judgement.  I can 

only assume that his judgement was based on the same 

reasoning that I advanced to him this morning.  The Legislative 

Assembly is the forum; we have an adequate forum.  We 

welcome the suggestions of the members and others during the 

course of the period of the debate of GRIP and other 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Let me make the point that when we were 

dealing with designing GRIP legislation, we had seven 

ministers travelling across Saskatchewan and met with in the 

neighbourhood of 40 to 50,000 farmers.  That's on the record. 

 

Secondly, I remind the House that we did not retroactively 

change contracts for farmers.  We have a precedent here where 

the House rules have been changed so that it makes it more 

difficult to get public access and the opposition to have the 

capacity to debate it. 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

And we're asking, we're asking all members of this Legislative 

Assembly, why couldn't we take this controversial retroactive 

legislation that affects tens of thousands of families and take it 

out to the public, take it out to the public so they can participate 

in this?  Why are you hiding in this Legislative Assembly, that 

you've now changed the rules to muffle the opposition?  Don't 

you see that people want to know that there is democracy alive 

and well in the province of Saskatchewan and this would give 

them a chance to believe in it once more. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member's 

statements about democracy in Saskatchewan being alive and 

well ring hollow and are so exaggerated as to be frankly 

ludicrous. 

 

I repeat again to the hon. member in his plea today about 

retroactive legislation, what he did in the 1982-1983 session.  

Mr. Speaker, when that member was the premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, he brought in a Bill to repeal the 

land bank and to make certain temporary provisions for lessees.  

There was a contractual situation with actual leases that his 

government broke retroactively, without a hearing -- without a 

hearing. 

 

And they say today that what we should do is not what they did 

but what they say they should have done.  I say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the hon. member has to be consistent.  That's why he's 

seated over there with such a small band of opposition people 

because his argument is riddled with total inconsistencies and 

inaccuracies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we welcome the opposition's suggested changes 

to GRIP.  We'll see what the amendments may or may not be.  

This forum is the area for public discussion and until further 

notice that's exactly how we intend to proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I want to tell you, 

first of all, that I was here when that legislation was put in 

place; you were not.  If you read the whole thing it protected 

the individuals who were on that lease land, precisely.  And 

that is a fact, Mr. Premier, and read it before you start talking 

about it. 

 

The point I want to make -- yesterday your House Leader, your 

Deputy House Leader, made a statement in this House that he 

was going to give an opportunity in the next week for 

compromise in this Assembly, compromise on the GRIP Bill in 

this Assembly.  What, Mr. Premier, are your observations 

about the changes that you're going to make to this GRIP Bill 

that are going to allow this House to deal with the compromise 

you're proposing to make? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me the 

land bank repeal Act.  I have section 13 which says: 

 

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or in any 

agreement or lease that exists on the 

day this section comes into force respecting Crown lands, the 

rent or amount payable pursuant to such agreements or leases 

is determined in accordance with the regulations. 

 

And the regulations cancel the contracts by changing the terms 

of reference of those rents.  And I know that because I was 

engaged at that time, being out of politics, on behalf of farmers 

who saw this Bill retroactively affect real contracts.  That's 

what you did, sir.  And that's what this Bill did. 

 

So I say to the hon. members opposite they ought to be very 

consistent with respect to GRIP.  My position remains and the 

government's position remains.  This Bill is occasioned as a 

result of the necessary changes to GRIP.  This Bill is 

occasioned by the financial implications where you and your 

government off-loaded hundreds of millions of dollars onto us, 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan on GRIP.  It is occasioned by 

that.  And I say the province of Saskatchewan, we'll listen to 

your suggestions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, why don't you go to the next Act 

that enhances the opportunity to protect those people to their 

rights.  That's what was there.  It had to be done.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ask the Premier of this province this 

question.  When are you going to provide to this Assembly the 

documents that are going to show that the compromise is there 

in the retroactive parts of your legislation on GRIP?  When are 

you going to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don't 

understand what the hon. member is talking about.  Perhaps he 

can clarify some of the questions for the . . . 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, yesterday your Deputy House 

Leader said that there was an opportunity for compromise in 

the next two weeks and, Mr. Premier, that is what we're asking 

about.  What is that compromise going to consist of on the 

retroactivity and breaking the contract of the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan?  That's what we're asking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the 

official opposition is, judging by their so-called compromises 

on the bell-ringing, which amounted to zero, there is absolutely 

no, no dealing with this opposition on this issue -- none.  So 

don't talk to us about compromises because you offered none 

and you will offer none throughout the whole piece. 

 

So all I'm saying to the members opposite is this.  The Bill will 

be there; debate it.  Don't get your shirts in a knot-tail.  Take 

your time, advance your arguments, and do it in the proper 

way.  The people of the province of Saskatchewan want you to 

get down to work. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I'm having difficulty 

hearing the member's answer.  And the members may not like 

the answers, and other members may not like questions -- that's 

not the point.  The point is, in this House that we observe 

courtesy and we allow members to ask questions and we allow 

members to provide the answers and we allow them the 

courtesy of 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

doing so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just simply 

want to close off the answer by saying, I say to the official 

opposition over there, look let's get down to work.  That's what 

the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan want.  The rules 

have been changed.  They're welcomed by the people of the 

province, even welcomed by you people as you say.  Let's get 

down to work.  Let's deal with the Bill.  Let's hear what 

suggestions you've got to make and we'll consider any honest 

legitimate suggestion at that time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, you promised in the election that 

you were going to provide access to this government.  You 

walked into this Assembly as the Premier of the NDP Party in 

the province of Saskatchewan and said you would provide 

access in this building to people coming in and yet you have 

frozen access by your ministers all over the province.  Will you 

at this time allow the committee on agriculture to travel 

through the province and see what they say? 

 

You know what, Mr. Premier, you're afraid to do it.  You're 

afraid to do it because you know that the same reaction that the 

minister from Crop Insurance got in Shaunavon would be the 

reaction you would get across this province and you haven't the 

courage to do it.  When will you call the committee of 

agriculture together and allow them to travel through this 

province to deliver the message that they want to have to 

deliver to you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I tell you, we're just 

shaking in our boots as a result of this official opposition's stiff 

opposition, just shaking in our boots.  The hon. member's 

questions are absolutely so contradictory.  On the one hand, he 

says that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Again I'm having 

difficulty hearing the member.  I think the members have had 

an opportunity to ask the question.  They should now wait for 

the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  

My answer is to the hon. member that the changes to GRIP that 

we introduced were occasioned as a result of an advisory 

committee of the farmers and farm organizations.  In fact it was 

basically the same advisory group that advised the former 

premier, the former minister of Agriculture, of the few 

changes.  And they made these changes, and the changes were 

implemented.  The retroactivity aspects of this will be debated 

or discussed once the Bill is tabled in the House and the debate 

takes place on it. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture and members of the agriculture 

caucus of the government side have travelled with the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan on this over the last several 

weeks.  They have not been frozen.  They're going out and 

meeting the people.  They'll continue to do so.  I invite you to 

leave the Legislative Chamber and listen to the people as well, 

and then you'll 

be better occasioned in order to come here to present your 

points of views to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

As it relates to questions put by members, question 43, I'm 

pleased to provide the Assembly with what is a relatively 

extensive answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 51 -- An Act 

to repeal The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act, to provide 

for the Winding-up of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the 

Farm Purchase Program Fund and to enact Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from 

the repeal of that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

implications of this Act were discussed briefly the other day.  

And I think it's important that the people of Saskatchewan have 

an opportunity, through a little bit more debate, to discover 

exactly what this Act is going to do to them. 

 

Most of the older folks in our province, I'm quite sure, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, aren't aware that there is a sunset clause 

associated with this Bill.  And that sunset clause, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, means, quite frankly, exactly what the term implies, 

and that is that the fund will be ended.  That occurrence will 

take place at the end of this year which means, of course, that 

another excellent social program brought into the province 

during the past administration is being axed by this 

administration. 

 

And axing an old approach to assistance is not necessarily in 

itself bad if there is something to take its place.  Unfortunately 

for those people on fixed incomes and especially our seniors, 

there is a need for some assistance at times.  And this particular 

Bill taking away those dollars that people have become used to 

getting does not provide for any replacement of those funds.  It 

will be extremely difficult, in my opinion, for a lot of people to 

now start to balance their budgets in order to come up with the 

extra cash that they need to replace these funds that are being 

taken away from them. 

 

I don't know what the answers are to our social programs and 

how we're going to solve all of the problems that we have with 

poverty.  But certainly if you take income away  



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

from people that they are used to getting, it creates a 

tremendous amount of problem for them to try to find ways to 

replace that income, especially in a recession.  It is my opinion 

that if you're going to correct these kind of things, we must in 

fact do that. 

 

My colleagues have pointed out that the Heritage Fund, 

consolidation fund . . . is going to a Consolidated Fund.  And in 

fact I'm one Bill ahead of myself, which I think probably one or 

two members opposite might even have noticed if they'd have 

been awake this morning. 

 

And so, I'm going to allow my colleague to make a few 

comments on this, I think, and I'll get on to the right one in a 

minute. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm just 

going to make a couple of observations about the Act in this 

case and deal with it, and then we'll allow it to go to committee. 
 

However I want to point out that the observations that we have 

made in dealing with the Heritage Fund have some 

significance, I believe, in the fact . . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order!  I'm 

having some difficulty in hearing the member.  If other 

members wish to converse, they should do so quietly or leave 

the Chamber. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 

Heritage Fund was set up in the middle '70s, it was set up as a 

political tool for the government at that time to be something 

what they would call similar to Alberta.  Only in the case of the 

Heritage Fund, it was a negative asset; in the case of Alberta, it 

was a positive asset. 
 

In the case of Saskatchewan what they did is they put items 

like the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill, or the PAPCO (Prince Albert 

Pulp Company) at the time, they put that into there.  They put 

all of these funds into that . . . or took all these funds out of the 

Heritage Fund and said we have a significant Heritage Fund 

here.  It's built in assets.  And what in fact it was, it was a 

liability to the province of Saskatchewan.  And how the 

Minister of Finance has taken and changed the role of the 

Consolidated Fund is a significant change and we'll be asking 

some very significant questions. 
 

Yesterday, Mr. Minister, we asked questions on Sask Water on 

how the change and your view of the structuring of the debt 

load in Sask Water was related to this.  We asked questions; the 

auditor has some significant questions that he raised in relation 

to the kinds of things that you have done in transferring debt 

and transferring other items to the Consolidated Fund and other 

funds. 
 

And, Mr. Minister of Finance, those are the kinds of questions 

we're going to be asking in Committee of the Whole.  And 

therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm going to allow this to move 

on.  But that's what we're going to be talking about very 

significantly. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred 

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 52 -- An Act 

to amend The Senior Citizens' Heritage Program Act  be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Now that 

we're on the Bill that I thought we should have been on before, 

I will endeavour to give the government heck for not doing 

what should be done here.  Because in fact what they're saying 

here is that they're going to amend an Act and it has a sunset 

clause in it that in fact ends the money to people.  And that is, 

in my opinion, unfair to the seniors of our province who are on 

fixed incomes and who don't have the ability to go out and find 

a way to replace funds that suddenly come out of their budgets. 

 

It seems to me that a new government will probably cancel old 

programs and put new names on some other kind of a form of 

assistance in order to take the credit for helping folks.  And 

that's sort of a given in our democratic system with the party 

system that we live under. 

 

But unfortunately, we don't see any place where this 

government is attempting to replace these dollars to those 

people.  If in fact what they're doing with this sunset clause is 

ending this program in order to bring one in with a new name 

or a new formula for getting these dollars there, just to make 

sure that they have their day in the sun, to be getting the credit 

for running the province and doing good things, fine and 

dandy, but let's see what they're going to do. 

 

I say to them, show us that you're going to give this money 

back to those old folks, not to appease me, not to make me 

happy, but to alleviate the fears that old folks have got out there 

that suddenly they're going to find themselves short of dollars 

in their budget -- dollars that they need to have in order to have 

a decent and respectable living and life-style. 

 

It's not for me; it's for them.  And older folks have a tendency 

to worry about money -- more than they should, I believe.  But 

that's the way it is.  When you get older, you worry a little bit 

about how you're going to pay your bills, how you're going to 

provide for yourself, and it's a natural worry.  It's a natural 

concern, because as you grow older you can't just jump up and 

go out and get another job or pick up something on the side in 

order to earn a few extra dollars. 

 

So I want the government to take into consideration very 

seriously those fears that they are imposing on older people in 

our province.  It's not fair to create undue stress for the people 

who have worked their entire lives to build the province and 

the country.  It's not fair to them.  And I suggest to the 

government that if you treat other people that way, remember, 

you're going to get old too.  How would you like it when 

somebody treats you this way when you get older?  How will 

you like it if you're the one on the receiving end rather than the 

giving end? 

 

So I want to appeal to the government that if you have 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

plans to provide some assistance to these folks, let them know 

so they don't have to spend the rest of this year worrying about 

the sunset clause ending for next year this amount of funds. 

 

I know that there are ministers over on the other side that 

would stand up in this House and say, well it's not a whole 

bunch of money; it doesn't seem to matter because it's just a 

little bit.  But what's a little bit to these folks on the other side 

in government is a lot of money to some of our senior citizens.  

It's very important money. 

 

Any amount of dollars that you're short in your budget of being 

able to pay your way is a serious matter, especially to people 

who are older, because they have a sense of responsibility, they 

have a sense of dedication to paying their bills.  Older folks 

live with a very high moral standard and they don't want to 

have to say to the grocery store owner, I can't pay my bill this 

month.  That hurts them more than anything else.  And it 

embarrasses them and it gives them stress.  And quite frankly, I 

think it's unnecessary for us to do that. 

 

I think it's important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government 

inform the people that there is some kind of a program to 

replace the one that they are taking away from them now.  That 

concludes my remarks. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I 

move this Bill to committee, I would like to as well . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I must remind the member that I'm 

informed that the member has already spoken in debate and 

therefore is precluded from speaking again. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers 

Act, 1987 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister to first of all to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me today Brent Prenevost, Department of Justice; Mary Ellen 

Wellsch who is the Public Trustee; and Madeleine Robertson 

of the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, as I 

peruse the number of Bills that we have before the Assembly 

this morning I can only compliment the minister, as I know just 

from some of the experience, having been on the Regulations 

Committee, a number of these Bills are more housekeeping, 

and therefore we will not be taking a lot of time.  And in light 

of the debate that has taken place in this Assembly over the 

past number of days, I guess the government can be 

commended for bringing Bills of such nature forward, allowing 

this House to work, although it would have been appropriate to 

have 

tackled them even two or three weeks ago.  And we would 

have been more willing to do that. 

 

But in saying that, I just want to bring out a couple of points 

and ask a couple of questions -- I don't have a lot of demanding 

questions.  Certainly the minister has a lot more expertise in the 

area when it comes to some of the legal arguments that may be 

made here. 

 

But I think on the Bill regarding The Real Estate Brokers 

Amendment Act, and as we discussed the other day, it's 

something that the real estate brokers, I believe, have been 

asking for.  I understand the Act is being introduced at the 

request of the real estate brokers, and maybe the minister could 

just fill us in on that portion of the Act and if indeed the real 

estate brokers have contacted his office and what they have 

required of the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for the introductory 

remarks and I certainly know what he is saying to me.  And it's 

nice to get back down to business. 

 

The member is correct: the need for these amendments to The 

Real Estate Brokers Act, that's come from the industry, comes 

from the commission.  In the main it is as a result of a court 

decision which made it clear that we were going to have to be 

more specific about what was meant by a trade in real estate 

because so much of the protection of the Act depends upon the 

definition of the term "trade".  So that we have expanded the 

definition in the way that appears in the Bill so that it now 

includes "'. . . an offer to purchase, lease, exchange, option or 

rent real estate'". 

 

The second aspect of the Bill is the limitation which the 

member will know is not a new provision, but it was contained 

in the regulations and this moves it into the Act, which is where 

it belongs. 

 

So the member is quite right, Mr. Chairman, it is as a result of a 

request from the industry that these amendments are before the 

House. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So I understand then, Mr. Minister, that indeed 

the industry did approach government and I'm just interested in 

knowing what consultation process was taken prior to the final 

drafting of the Bill, and if indeed the industry is satisfied with 

the final drafting we have here today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 

request as I indicated, came from the commission. The real 

estate industry is now a self-regulating industry through the 

agency of their commission which is made up of industry 

representatives. 

 

This problem was brought to our attention by the commission 

and our consultations have been with them.  They have not 

been wider.  But we regard the commission as being 

representative of the industry, particularly as regards the 

operation of this Act and the responsibilities of the commission 

under the Act.  And we are responding to their concerns with 

this Bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Contributory 

Negligence Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Under this Bill, a couple of questions, Mr. 

Minister.  Number one, does this Bill restrict an individual 

from claiming damages for more than one lawsuit, even if all 

cases are claims against the same injury? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, this . . . I 

think I'll be able to answer your question, but I have to go into 

some background first.  This covers a situation where a person 

has been injured, or in the typical case, will have been injured 

in probably some kind of an accident, as a result of which that 

person has a claim against two or more people -- let's say two 

people.  That can often happen in a car accident.  And the 

member can easily imagine circumstances where such a claim 

may arise where there are two defendants, two people are 

alleged to have been responsible for the accident. 

 

And the difficulty that the law is having is that in those 

circumstances if you settle your claim with one of those 

persons, then your action is deemed to have been settled 

totally.  You can't settle with one and proceed against the other.  

When you've settled with one, then your action is over.  And 

this is as a result of old, common-law rules that have been in 

existence for generations -- I really . . . I may be exaggerating a 

bit, but centuries.  It is an old, old part of the common law. 

 

And what we seek to do in this Bill is to allow such a plaintiff, 

such a person in this situation to settle with one defendant and 

continue the action as against the other. 

 

Let me give you a simple illustration of that where a plaintiff is 

alleging that two defendants are equally responsible for the 

injury that the plaintiff has suffered -- 50 per cent responsibility 

to each.  And one of the two defendants says, I acknowledge 

that I'm 50 per cent responsible and I'd like to pay up -- 

typically that would be the insurance company speaking -- but 

we'd like to pay up and we'd like to talk about the measure of 

damages.  And they do that and they come to an agreement as 

to what that 50 per cent share would consist of.  And that's 

very, very common to be able to make those calculations and 

do those negotiations and arrive at that settlement. 

 

What we're proposing is that that plaintiff would be able to do 

that in spite of the fact that the other defendant may be hanging 

tough and saying, I'm not responsible at all, or I won't agree to 

discuss damages; take me to court;  you're going to have to take 

me to the Supreme Court of Canada before I'm going to pay 

this thing.  Then that would permit that second part of the 

action to take its normal course, but allow the plaintiff to 

recover from the defendant who is prepared to pay up. 

 

Now this is a reform of the law.  It has already been 

implemented in Alberta, Manitoba, British Columbia, 

and Ontario and we're following their lead in this respect. 

 

Now that's the circumstance that this Bill is intended to apply 

to, and I think that covers the case that you put in your 

question, and the Bill has no wider scope than the kind of 

situation that I have just referred you to. 

 

I draw to your attention subsection (1) of the proposed new 

section.  It says: 

 

 Where two or more persons are jointly and severally liable 

with respect to the same loss or (the same) damage, a 

judgement, discontinuance, settlement or release with respect 

to one of them does not preclude judgment against any other 

in the same (action) or a separate action. 

 

And that's the intent behind this section, and I trust that 

answers the member's inquiry. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So then what you're saying, Mr. Minister, a victim 

such as the scenario you laid out being involved in an accident, 

would if they're able to arrive . . . or one of the parties -- if 

there's two parties involved -- is willing to offer a settlement, 

the victim isn't then restricted, that they can indeed follow 

through with a lawsuit or whatever measures are needed to 

state claim against the second party. 

 

I guess in light of that, Mr. Minister, I think you . . . from your 

comments you acknowledge the fact that sometimes these 

lawsuits can extend over a fair period of time which can 

become very . . . and be somewhat costly to the victim, the time 

process, have an emotional effect on an individual.  I'm 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if there is any form of maybe setting 

some restrictions whereby some of these circumstances could 

be restricted, maybe the process speeded up. 

 

And I know in many cases the process in courts, it's maybe just 

trying to get the time before the court because of the backlog 

that may be faced and I think it would be appropriate to at least 

have, maybe a bit of a restriction, if you will, of at least a 

period of time that you feel would be reasonable that would 

cause the process to work so that a victim wouldn't be say, 

maybe waiting two, three years before final . . . or even five 

years before a final decision is reached.  Would that be, that be 

possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, that is a useful, a very 

useful and pertinent comment from the member. 

 

This certainly clears up one small aspect of personal injury law 

and will have the effect of relieving the pressure on plaintiffs, 

injured plaintiffs, in the sense that they will be able to take a 

settlement which is offered to them against one defendant 

without having to compromise their claims against other 

defendants. 

 

But the interesting part of the member's intervention was the 

more general comment with respect to the progress of these 

cases through the courts.  And I think that all of us know, and 

certainly all lawyers and judges would agree, that the system 

has been notoriously slow.  And there have 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

been a number of reasons for this. 

 

I might say first of all in defence of the system that its slowness 

is often an asset.  Its slowness often turns out to be a good idea 

because it allows emotions to cool, allows passions to cool, and 

allows a more calm and tranquil setting for these questions to 

be sorted out.  Because by the time they get to trial the accident 

has happened perhaps two, perhaps three, perhaps five -- as the 

member suggested -- years previous.  And the outrage that 

follows from the accident, from the traumatic experience, have 

often calmed a bit and people can present their evidence in a 

less emotional setting and stick to the facts more than to their 

feelings. 

 

But that aside, I agree with the member that these cases have 

historically taken too long.  And there have been a number of 

attempts over the years to shorten that time, and some of those 

attempts have made a real contribution. 

 

In this province we have, for example, in the Court of Queen's 

Bench established a pre-trial hearing so that all actions that are 

headed for the court room, headed for trial, have to go through 

a pre-trial proceeding before a judge who will discuss the case 

with lawyers for each of the parties, and the parties themselves 

are there -- the plaintiff's there, the defendant's there -- and it 

fulfils a number of functions like sorting out which facts are in 

dispute and which facts are agreed upon, and the agreed-upon 

facts are then signed off on, if you know what I mean. 

 

So that when you get to trial you've got the issues limited to the 

bare essentials and therefore the trial doesn't take so long.  So 

instead of it taking weeks, it may only take days or even hours. 

 

But also an important part of that mechanism has been that so 

many cases are being settled at that level.  And some of the 

judges have developed a real expertise in mediating the dispute 

at that level, saying, come on you guys; let's be reasonable 

here.  Obviously the accident happened because, Mr. 

Defendant, you were not watching the road.  And what we 

should be talking about here is the amount of damages. 

 

And that's been a remarkable improvement to the law because 

some very high percentage -- and I could get the number for 

the member if the member's interested -- some very high 

percentage of these cases are being settled at these pre-trial 

conferences with the judge.  Now the judge at the pre-trial 

conference is not the same judge as is going to hear the trial in 

the event that the matter has to go to trial.  And some of the 

judges have become very expert at achieving settlements at 

these pre-trial hearings. 

 

That's one example of an improvement to the system which is 

making a positive contribution.  Actually it is working and it is 

solving some of the problems the member has referred to. 

 

But that doesn't solve all the problem.  And we are alert, as is 

the chief justices of the courts, to ways in which the system 

could be made more efficient.  And we watch particularly 

developments in other provinces and in the 

United States and Australia and England where they have 

similar court systems, similar to ours, for improvements to the 

system that will result in these cases being determined in less 

time, so that justice is quicker, is less delayed. 

 

And I think that's desirable in spite of what I said earlier when I 

defended the system by saying a certain amount of delay is 

often a good thing.  But the system generally could use some 

speeding up, as probably can the answer that I'm now giving to 

the member. 

 

But I thought that you should hear the full load because it was a 

very good question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm just going to 

make a comment or two here in light of the response given by 

the minister.  And I appreciate the fact, and I would think and 

would specifically request, Mr. Minister, that if you have some 

of the numbers regarding the number of cases that have 

proceeded to court, and at earlier pre-trial that have been 

solved, that would be just nice for my own information to have 

it. 

 

And I'm glad to hear that there are cases where the judicial 

system, where the judge, has taken a very serious look and 

negotiated and worked through the process with the parties.  

Maybe it's much to the chagrin of the legal community, as 

maybe a little longer  . . . as the case drags out a little longer, it 

might be a little more lucrative but I think it is more 

appropriate that we try to solve our differences as quickly as 

possible. 

 

Because we all know that, regardless of what individual, it 

seems that most individuals, in a situation where they come 

before the legal system where they feel they have a legal 

argument, may feel themselves that if they've been wrongfully 

abused or misused or whatever, that there should be some 

monetary settlement.  And I think a lot of times people seem to 

get a high expectation. 

 

So I think the more we can bring things down to reality so a 

victim realizes that, yes, they have certain rights and the system 

. . . the accused has certain rights but responsibilities, I think 

our system would work a lot easier. 

 

Just one more question, Mr. Minister.  Was there any specific 

group or reasons for the request coming forward?  If there 

were, could you just make them known to the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 

matter has been on the agenda of the Department of Justice for 

some time.  There were a couple of cases in the mid-'80s which 

were classic examples of the problem that I related to the 

member earlier, and the lawyers involved in those cases had 

made representations to the government to reform the law in 

this respect. 

 

The Law Reform Commission looked at this problem in the 

context of contract claims.  The project involved was limited to 

contracts but the logic behind the reform is equally applicable 

to the kind of damage claims that I was talking about earlier, 

where the claim would typically arise from a car accident. 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

In addition, as I told the member, the law has, in this respect, 

has already been reformed in all of the other western provinces 

including Ontario, if you call Ontario -- I should never call 

Ontario a western province . . . but west of Quebec.  Quebec 

has a different situation because they have a civil law system 

that applies there that is much different than the common-law 

system in effect in the other provinces. 

 

So this is one of those things where we haven't exactly had the 

door being beaten down by people who've got this problem, but 

it arises periodically and it has been drawn to our attention in 

the past and I think it is quite a logical reform to the law. 

 

I might also mention before I sit down, Mr. Chairman, that the 

previous point that the member made with respect to the 

pre-trial conferences, and I'll be glad to get the information for 

the member from the Chief Justice of the court, Chief Justice 

MacPherson. 

 

It has not been a disappointment to the lawyers, to the bar.  The 

bar is happy with it because it . . . One of the important 

functions it fulfils was the one that the member mentioned 

where you have litigants with big expectations, huge 

expectations from a claim.  And the lawyer knows that the 

expectations are too high but is not able to scale them down 

because the client just thinks that the litigant . . . the person 

feels that it must be worth more than that, and their cousin 

mentioned that they knew somebody in Ontario that got a lot 

more. 

 

And they sort of get expectations in their minds -- very often 

they do -- on the basis of gossip and anecdotes that they hear 

along the way.  And the lawyer isn't able to manage it.  Now 

I've had that experience personally many, many times where 

the client just isn't accepting of my assessment of the value of 

the claim. 

 

You get into one of these pre-trial conferences and have a 

judge with all of the prestige of that office look the litigant in 

the eye and say, sir, your claim is not worth more than $25,000; 

I don't know why you're in here trying to get half a million.  

There has never been a case in Canada where anyone has 

received more than $25,000 for that type of injury. 

 

Now that works.  I mean that has an impact.  And it reduces 

expectations just like that and often leads to settlements where 

settlements would not be possible without that kind of an 

intervention. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I just thought I'd make one more comment in light 

of the fact that . . . and I appreciate the Minister of Justice's 

comments, but it sounds to me that there's a lot of people with 

the Eric Lindros syndrome out in the world.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1130) 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

just having perused this Bill somewhat and not being a legal 

individual or having a lot of legal knowledge, there's a number 

of things in the Bill that I find personally, as a lay person, 

somewhat hard to understand. And I think maybe many people 

themselves would find it hard to understand.  I understand, and 

just going back a little bit to review over the last couple of 

years, there's basic elements regarding the fine options program 

and increases in fines to individuals. 

 

And I'm just wondering if for the record of the House of the 

Assembly, if you can please provide us with the summary of 

the changes being made to the Bill, the reason for the changes, 

and at whose request the changes would have been made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I can 

certainly appreciate the puzzlement with some of the 

provisions, because they are technical.  They are in many 

respects quite technical, and I will take the member through it 

sort of point by point here. 

 

The first item is addressed in section 3 of the Bill, and it has to 

do with your plain, ordinary, garden-variety parking ticket.  I'm 

talking about section 3 of the Bill having to do with parking 

tickets.  All it says is that the information that is . . . the 

document that is left on your windshield doesn't have to be 

sworn under oath.  And of course that's the case with tickets 

that you may get when you speed on the highway -- not that the 

member would speed, but when a citizen speeds on the 

highway.  This is a similar provision, and it's just technical in 

that sense.  It's not anything very substantial. 

 

The second point in the Bill is found in section 5.  And this is 

also . . . it's a procedural change.  I was going to call it 

technical; it's more than that, but it is certainly difficult to 

understand on a quick reading of it. 

 

Since January 1990 a person who has received a ticket or has 

been charged with an offence, a traffic type offence -- that 

would be the typical situation -- has had an option to pay the 

fine voluntarily without going to court, simply by sending a 

cheque in, or indicating that he or she wished to plead not 

guilty in which case the trial date is set in the ticket, the date in 

which the person has to appear in court; or thirdly, to plead 

guilty to the charge and elect to enter the fine option program. 

 

Now this has resulted in a . . . It was put in there because the 

law is often seen to be unfair in the way that it fines people, 

imposes a monetary penalty for an offence.  And the impact of 

that penalty is different for different people.  If the offender has 

a lot of money, then the fine is not any big deal.  But if the 

offender is someone who doesn't have money, then that fine is 

maybe a big, big problem.  So that there are two citizens who 

are being treated equally in the eyes of the law but for whom 

the impact of the penalty is much, much different. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

And that was why the reform was made in 1990.  And it was a 

good idea.  It was intended to give an option to people who 

didn't feel able to pay the fine to work it off under the fine 

option program. 

 

But it hasn't worked.  It hasn't worked at all like the 

government and the department thought it should, or hoped it 

would, I should say.  First of all, we just can't handle the 

number of people who are electing the fine option program.  

We don't have enough things for them to do. 

 

Another problem that has arisen is that some of them have been 

assigned the option, and then they may show up at the 

appointed place once, and then they don't show up any more.  

And there are so many of them, and the amounts involved are 

so small and the option period is so small that we don't have 

any way of following up on it.  So they're just putting in a 

token appearance and then never to be seen again. 

 

But it's something that is so trivial we don't follow up on it 

because our resources have more important things to do; our 

policing resources have more important things to do. 

 

So we want to . . . In addition to that I might mention, it costs 

the state . . . it costs the government $20 for each of these 

circumstances in which an option is selected. 

 

The final point I may note for the member is that the people 

who are electing the fine option program are not the people that 

we expected would be electing it.  It's being elected to by all 

sorts of people who we thought would continue to pay the 

fines, and who are well able to pay the fines indeed, but who 

elect the fine option program because it is an inexpensive route 

and it doesn't have a lot of implications for them.  And as I said 

earlier, many of them just don't show up after an initial 

appearance. 

 

And looking at that whole situation, we are proposing here that 

the option of the fine option program be removed.  And that is 

the thrust of the second point in the Bill. 

 

I should clarify for the member that the fine option program is 

still available.  If the court has levied the fine, then the access 

to the fine option program would be available at that point as it 

is in all the other programs to which the fine option program 

applies.  So that's the second thing. 

 

The third is section 7 of the Bill.  And when we come to that 

we will be introducing a House amendment, and I think the 

member had some notice of that.  This has to do with the issue 

of a warrant.  And I think the section is clear there. 

 

If the certificate of offence referred to in section 20 is complete 

and regular on its face . . . and this is for defendants that don't 

show up, as the member will know, and that the judge believes 

that if the defendant was there in the court room the defendant 

could raise a possible defence, may not be guilty of this crime, 

then the court can issue a warrant to require the defendant to 

come to court and in effect arrest the defendant and bring them 

there. 

 

It's a serious business, you know, to be charged with an offence 

and summoned before the court and then not show up.  That in 

itself is an offence under the Criminal Code, and that's how 

these people are dealt with now. 

 

This would enable us to not have to proceed under the code but 

to proceed in a less formal way to haul the defendant into court 

without charging them with a separate offence under the 

Criminal Code and opening up the possibility of them being 

found guilty of a Criminal Code offence and have to carry that 

record from then on.  Now that code procedure would still be 

available, but this would enable our courts to proceed less 

formally and simply issue a warrant for the arrest of the 

defendant. 

 

And I remind the member before I leave that point that this is 

where the defendant has been charged, has not shown up, the 

court hears the circumstances and thinks, I can't convict, thinks 

the judge or says the judge, I shouldn't convict because it seems 

to me that that defendant may have a defence, may not be 

guilty of this offence, and in those circumstances, can issue a 

warrant rather than see the person charged under the Criminal 

Code for failing to appear.  So I think that that is an 

improvement to the law, and at least allows some flexibility at 

the level of the court room to handle the situation in an 

appropriate way. 

 

Now the section 9 of the Bill, which is an amendment to 

section 24, is directly connected to the information that I've just 

given to the member which provides a fine for non-appearing 

defendants or where they have been arrested under the previous 

provision or where they have been brought in under the 

Criminal Code provision where it is an offence to fail to appear 

in those circumstances. 

 

And finally, on the third page of the Bill, section 11 . . . 

actually section 10, I guess, is the one that I should mention 

next, which provides for an extension of time to pay.  And I 

think the provision of that will be clear to the member. 

 

And then finally the section 11, as I said earlier, where a 

decision has been made in the provincial court and the 

unsuccessful party appeals, files a notice of appeal but then 

doesn't do anything further, just leaves it there, doesn't take any 

steps to have the matter put on the agenda, as it were, of the 

Court of Appeal, doesn't do anything to perfect the appeal. 

 

And that gives the Court of Appeal, or the appellate court, I 

should say -- in some cases that's the Court of Appeal, in some 

cases it's the Court of Queen's Bench -- the power to deal with 

these appeals, the ones I've just mentioned, and to dismiss the 

appeal if it has not been proceeded with. 

 

So those are all the things that are included in this Bill.  Some 

of them are substantial and some of them are what I would 

classify as technical. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, coming 

back to clause no. 7, you made a reference to the 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

issuance of a warrant.  When a person has been charged with 

an offence and, as you indicated, I would assume that if the 

court would feel -- the defendant hasn't shown up in court -- if 

the judge, the judicial system, would feel that there is reason to 

believe that the defendant has a defence here and yet hasn't 

shown up, it's probably the same thing the defendant has 

thought, that it's such a trivial matter that they really can defend 

it. 

 

Is there a process or notice given to indicate to any person, 

should they be handed a summons, or not a summons but 

issued a ticket or fine, whatever, that they must appear -- even 

if they feel that they have the defence, they must appear -- so 

that you don't run into this situation where the person hasn't 

appeared in court, or at least giving notice to the court if the 

time isn't appropriate for the court to address the question, so 

that they indeed can be well informed, will take the time to be 

there, will contact the court if unavailable, so that the court 

then isn't left with the process then of issuing the warrant? 

 

Because then that becomes another cost to the court and is 

something that I think most people, if they were well aware of 

the circumstances, would take the time to follow through with. 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, these 

questions arise where a person who has been charged with an 

offence is not prepared to plead guilty, is pleading not guilty, 

and is therefore electing to appear in court on the date that is 

set out in the ticket.  And in those cases the court system then 

sends to the defendant a confirmation as to where the trial is 

going to be held and when it will be held, and also it gives a lot 

of information there as to what will happen if you don't appear.  

And I just would go through that with the member. 

 

If this Bill is passed there will be four things that can happen.  

There are four things now that can happen.  If the defendant 

does not show up, one thing is that the judge may elect to 

adjourn the trial and further notify the defendant of the 

adjourned date. 

 

The second thing is that the court has the power to proceed 

with the trial, even in the absence of the defendant, and allow 

the Crown to prove the offence and to dispose of the case on 

the basis of that evidence. 

 

The third possibility is that the court may dismiss the charge -- 

say if the documents are not in order, there's some defect in the 

charge. 

 

And the fourth alternative is the one that we've talking about 

today where the non-appearing defendant has committed an 

offence under the criminal code by not appearing and now, if 

this amendment is made to the law, that it can stop short of that 

by arresting the defendant. 

 

And those options are made clear to the defendant before the 

defendant encounters the date for the appearance.  So the 

defendant will know what the options are.  I say defendant -- I 

should say the accused or the alleged offender, knows what the 

options are before he or she 

decides whether or not to actually go to court on that day or 

whether to do something else. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that's 

appropriate and it's . . . regardless of how we look at it, 

certainly one of the privileges we have in this country is the 

fact that we are innocent until proven guilty.  And I think we 

strive to or should strive to take every precaution necessary.  

And sometimes a person begins to wonder whether you should 

in light the circumstances you may face.  But I think it's 

appropriate and I appreciate that. 

 

Coming back just to the fine options program for a minute.  If I 

understand correctly, Mr. Minister, you indicated that the fine 

options, or option, is not available when you're directly handed 

a ticket, but it may be available by the court.  And in light of 

the comments that were made . . . and I believe the fine options 

program gives a defendant or an accused the ability to work off 

their fine if they don't have the ability to pay. 

 

Does it have, if the person . . . like I think was also indicated in 

a number of cases because some of the requirements have been 

so minimal, people have refused or just haven't taken time to 

follow through with the fine options program.  Is there another 

aspect available that gives a person the ability to pay within 

reasons of their ability versus just say, a fine is -- well I'll throw 

it out -- a $500 fine is normal for a certain circumstance.  And 

yet a person on a lower, fixed income would not be able to pay 

that whereas a person with a very high income, $500 is 

basically a slap on the wrist.  Is there another way a judge can 

address this requirement out there to help or give the person the 

ability to respond to the fine that's been levied against them, 

either by giving them a lesser amount that would fit into their 

abilities versus asking them to do a very minimal amount of 

community work?  Is that option available, Mr. Minister, or can 

we address the fine options program in that aspect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This question is important, Mr. 

Chairman, and member, because of the point that we were 

discussing earlier about the ability to pay depending, you 

know, having so much to do with the impact of a fine.  And the 

provision in 1990 was intended to deal with that and was a 

sensible provision.  I recall it, and I voted for it and support it.  

And I still do in a theoretical way.  It's just practically, it hasn't 

worked. 

 

There are several aspects to the situation that the member puts 

forward.  First of all, you have usually about 30 days to pay the 

fine just with the ticket.  The ticket says send such and such an 

amount to this address by such and such a date, and that's 

usually about a month down the road.  So that gives the 

defendant a month to get the money together to pay the fine, 

and that's the start of it. 

 

If that still turns out to be the problem, a problem for the 

offender, alleged offender, then the courts are very responsive 

to this kind of situation.  They will . . . if an alleged offender 

appears in front of a judge and says I can't pay the fine -- I 

intend to, I want to, but I need a month to do it -- then our 

courts have consistently and for years been quite prepared to 

extend the time for payment. 

 

Similarly if an accused wants to pay the fine in 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

instalments, there've been many situations in which that's been 

permitted. 

 

And of course there is, as I've mentioned to the member, the 

fine option program available after a fine has been assessed by 

the courts.  That is still available. 

 

The only circumstance that we're proposing it not be available 

in is with respect to voluntary payment, where the voluntary 

not-guilty plea . . . That has simply overloaded our system and 

it just is not working at all in the way in which we intended. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Actually my 

first question was very much like the member from 

Moosomin's.  I do have some interest in understanding clause 5 

a little more.  I heard you earlier say that what the changes will 

actually result in in clause 5 is that individuals will go through 

a longer and more difficult process which is destined primarily 

to discourage people from entering the program when they 

indeed have the ability to pay.  Do I have the correct 

understanding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, there 

were three entry points to the fine option program.  There are 

today three entry points.  At the time that the ticket is in the 

hands of the individual, and at the present that person can elect 

to go into the program right away.  Secondly, after the 

individual has been fined in court, that's the second entry point.  

And there's even a third entry point, and that is where the 

individual has elected to plead not guilty and doesn't show up 

and is convicted by default, then the individual can go back to 

the court and go into the fine option program.  And the one that 

we're proposing to take away is the first one. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You outlined 

some of the potential abuses of the program -- really abuses 

that regarding those who could pay their tickets unnecessarily 

using the fine option program to the point where, I think one 

could use the term, abusing the system.  How many abuses 

were really taking place?  Do you know the kind of number 

that we were dealing with on an annual basis, and did this 

warrant the kind of change that you're proposing today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, that's 

a very interesting question.  We have some statistics that are 

broad statistics.  And like a lot of statistics, they don't pretend 

to answer all the questions.  But since this provision, the 

numbers of people wanting to get into the fine option program 

has doubled.  And of the, I think about 22,000, nearly 22,000 

tickets where people entered, I plead guilty, either paying the 

fine or electing to go into option, about a third of them opted 

for the fine option program.  The exact numbers are 21,906 

fines registered in the last fiscal year, and 6,697 opted for the 

fine option program, and frankly we don't have anything to do 

with them.  I mean, we can't respond to this idea or to this 

demand for the service. 

 

And particularly in Regina and Saskatoon, a slice of the public 

have obviously caught on to how this works and they frankly 

are abusing the system.   And we just have to find other ways 

of addressing the real problem that is there that I've mentioned 

a couple of times, where fines 

fall disproportionately on people, depending upon their means.  

We have to find other ways of addressing that.  And I remind 

the House again that ultimately the fine option program is 

available, and that option is explained to people who really 

have a problem paying a fine. 

 

(1200) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The type of change that you are wanting to 

bring through on clause 5, is that going to result in any burdens 

on the justice system, be that financial or otherwise?  What I'm 

really hearing you say is that in a way -- and correct me if I'm 

wrong -- that it's not just a question perhaps of people being 

unable to be placed, of those 6,000 or whatever, because that 

really brings to me the question of perhaps we should start 

redefining what fine options can mean, broadening the base 

and becoming more creative in ways in which these individuals 

can in fact be involved in an options program. 

 

But financially are we actually having less monies coming to 

the coffer -- and that's one consideration -- as well in 

conjunction with not having enough for people to do?  And on 

the other hand my question then addresses, is there some way 

that there could be more burden placed on the system because 

of not having a fine option program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It probably will mean more fines are 

paid, obviously.  That's not the driving factor but it's there, and 

no question about that.  We don't see it as more of a burden to 

the system.  Accessing people to the fine options program 

requires a paper flow, and not inconsiderable, so that if fewer 

people are entering that program there's a lightening of the 

administrative burden there, while at the same time the 

handling of the money and dealing with the fines has probably 

a corresponding burden.  So that probably, that balances out. 

 

But I want to thank the member for the remarks with respect to 

the fine options program and assure her, Mr. Chairman, that we 

are very interested in the subject of the fine options program 

and being creative about that program.  Because it is 

theoretically and practically a very, very good idea.  And in 

proper cases it can have wonderful results.  And it gets away 

from the old idea of you pay your money or you get locked up.  

And if you don't have the money, who cares; the law is blind. 

 

The law doesn't care whether you're a millionaire or a pauper, 

you're going to be treated the same way.  Equality before the 

law, and it's not equality.  It's a different law for rich people 

than it is for poor people.  And I see the fine options program, 

and I think the member does, as being a creative alternative to 

that old, blind system, and a good idea. And we are thinking 

hard in the department about ways to enrich the program, 

enrich the possibilities. 

 

And there have been some very, very almost dramatic cases of 

opportunities under the fine options program which has 

rendered an enormous service to the place in which the service 

is being carried out, while dealing with an offender in a way 

that's appropriate for that offender, not just the old lock-up 

system -- pay up or get locked up.  So I wanted to pick up on 

that part of the member's question and respond to it because I 

thought it was such a 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

good remark. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, as I recollect, when the fine option was introduced 

one of the reasons was because of the disproportionate number 

of native people that were being implicated with the old 

process, and the want by native leaders, particularly with some 

of our larger reserves, to have people dealt with in a different 

way than the traditional justice system.  And could you tell me 

if the problems that were occurring with the system were 

verifying that fact, and that this is still a significant problem?  

Or if in fact that the native leaders were able, by using the fine 

option system, to work for community betterment?  How is that 

shaping out after this two-year period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 

question is difficult to answer except in very general terms, and 

I'll do it.  The situation in reserve communities and in northern 

Saskatchewan is just not different under the program than it 

was before.  Where the difference has occurred is in Regina 

and Saskatoon for the most part. 

 

In reserve communities and in northern Saskatchewan the 

interest in the fine option program or the cases in which that 

option was selected has remained the same. Only the procedure 

changed.  So instead of going to court with the ticket in order 

to get access to the program, the accused person just had to 

mark the form in the right . . . or mark the ticket in the right 

way and send it in and got access to the program. 

 

And with this amendment, they would just simply go back to 

the former way.  It can be handled in a similar way, really quite 

informally.  And the documentation that passes between the 

department and the accused makes clear how you get into the 

fine option program, and that will continue to be the case.  

Where the abuse has occurred has been in the cities and in the 

non-aboriginal population, to the best that you can tell these 

things.  I mean, how can you?  But that is, in a sort of a general 

sense, the way that we see the situation as having developed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I know this may be off the Bill specifically, 

Mr. Minister, but in your other duties as the minister of Indian 

and Native Affairs -- obviously as we move into native 

self-government, native policing, changes that may occur in the 

Criminal Code of Canada to allow certain things to take place 

-- is it your view that this option, in regards to particularly the 

enhanced reserve status that may occur because of TLE (treaty 

land entitlements) and some other things, is this option viewed 

by the native leaders, at least in discussion with your 

department, as being one that is positive, that it has removed 

people sort of out of the justice system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is definitely 

yes, definitely yes. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

The Chair: -- There is a House amendment which the minister 

has moved and has been provided to the members of the 

opposition.  Will the House take it as read? 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 8 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Printer Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Okay, Mr. Deputy Chairman, this Act deals 

specifically with charging for publishing notices, 

disbursements, and documents in the . . . or advertisements and 

documents in the Gazette.  I'm wondering what the rationale is 

behind the Act.  Well maybe I'll just ask that first.  What is the 

rationale for the changing of the fee structure, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There are notices that are required by 

law to be published in the Gazette, and there is of course a cost 

to doing that.  These notices are typically printed on behalf of 

persons, of corporations, depending upon the circumstances.  

And it is, in this day and age of limited revenues, an attempt to 

control costs.  It is considered appropriate that these notices 

which, as I say, are on behalf of individuals or corporations, be 

paid for by those individuals or corporation. 

 

So that if you were incorporating a business corporation for 

your own purposes -- whether it's a farm or what it is -- and 

notice of that is required as part of your incorporation to be 

published in the Saskatchewan Gazette, that you be charged 

with the cost of inserting that notice rather than all the 

taxpayers in the province having to pay for notice of the fact 

that you have incorporated a company.  That's the rationale.  

It's an attempt to place the burden of the costs where it more 

appropriately belongs. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, prior to 

the Bill before this Assembly, the taxpayers, if you will, were 

paying for all the notices that were laid in the Gazette: new 

businesses, new corporations.  And now you're going to be 

charging those corporations for those notices. 

 

And I can appreciate the fact that it must add up to a few 

dollars with the number of gazettes a person gets.  And 

certainly the changes that appear in the Gazette, it must take 

some time to print that material. 

 

What is the fee structure that you've arrived at and will this fee 

structure . . . is the fee structure intended to cover the costs or 

to make some money in printing the Gazette?  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you could give the Assembly a run-down on the fee 

structure and whether the costs are 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

going to be recovered or if indeed there will be some money 

made on the side as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, there will not be any 

money made on the side.  It will not be a revenue-generating 

exercise. 

 

The charges that we have in mind range from 5 to $10 per 

insertion, depending upon the size of the notice and the amount 

of information in the notice.  We expect that the total amount 

of money that will be raised will be approximately $70,000 per 

year.  Raised is not the right term, but the amount of money 

involved. 

 

This is the approximate amount that we have been experiencing 

in paying for printing costs for these notices and that is about 

the amount that we seek to recover.  So ideally we'd be able to 

balance it out so that the net effect would be no cost to the 

government but no increase in revenue either in the sense that 

we're not going to be making any money on it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, is that 

at the end of the day the intended purpose is to at least cover 

the cost of printing the Gazette so that there isn't a reflection of 

the added burden placed on the taxpayer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, just a couple questions.  First of 

all, what is the purpose of the Bill and was there any specific 

request for the changes that are being brought forward in the 

Bill from any group or organization or . . . who would have 

requested the changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The way in which the system has 

operated and in fact today does operate is that an estate requires 

a certificate that there are no infants interested in the estate for 

purposes of dealing with the land titles system.  And under the 

present law that certificate is obtained from the Public Trustee.  

It is a . . . well frankly it's a waste of money. 

 

It's an obvious thing whether there are infants involved or not.  

I mean everybody involved knows -- the executor making the 

application for letters of probate knows, the family knows.  The 

application for letters probate is made to the Court of Queen's 

Bench -- actually the Surrogate Court, but those functions are 

performed by judges of the Court of Queen's Bench -- and they 

know from the sworn material before them whether there are 

infants involved or not. 

 

Under the present system they don't deal with that question 

though.  A separate application then has to be made by the 

estate to the Public Trustee, satisfying the 

Public Trustee that there are no infants involved.  So it's been 

proven twice in different places.  And the certificate now 

comes from the Public Trustee.  It's an expense for the estates, 

and it's an administration expense for executors and for 

solicitors handling the estate.  And it's an unnecessary 

duplication. 

 

It is our view that those certificates could be issued by the court 

at the time that the application for letters probate is being dealt 

with, so that the grant of letters probate by the court could be 

accompanied by a certificate that there are no infants interested 

in the estate.  And then that certificate is used for the various 

purposes that it serves under the Land Titles Office system. 

 

So it is a saving for the administration by the government.  It's 

a saving for the government.  It's also a saving for the estates, 

for the surviving people who are attempting to wind up the 

estate of the deceased person.  That is the extent of the 

amendment that's before the House today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you started 

speaking a minute ago, I had difficulty hearing you.  And I was 

just wondering if that's because of the nature you and I share.  

We're not really the dogmatic, boisterous, loud-speaking 

individuals, and can speak diplomatically to each other. 

 

But in light of that, from what I'm understanding you're saying, 

what you're doing is simplifying the process, and just doing 

away with one form of contacting the courts regarding an 

estate.  So it makes it simpler and no doubt any estate or any 

person dealing with an estate, even family members, would 

find the process at that stage in their lives probably traumatic.  

And to simplify it, probably would indeed, I think, make it 

much simpler.  And I commend you for that. 

 

One other question I would ask.  Would it be possible for the 

minister to give the House a status report on the Land Titles 

Office in Humboldt?  Would that be appropriate at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's probably not, but I'll do it anyway.  I 

met earlier this week with representatives from the town of 

Humboldt and the district.  And they made a presentation to 

me, suggested a couple of alternatives to their situation, and I 

promised them that I would review those alternatives and 

review the entire situation and get back to them. 

 

We have not yet made a decision with respect to the 

presentation, but we have remained in touch with them to tell 

them of our progress and assuring them that we're going to deal 

with their representations quickly. 

 

So in short, Mr. Chairman, we have it under active 

consideration, and we're going to be giving them a decision 

very quickly. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I certainly 

appreciate the fact that you have been taking the time to meet 

with the representatives.  I'm sure that any rural community 

that has any government agency . . . And certainly we 

discussed . . . The question arose yesterday regarding education 

and health as well.  Any community 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

that would lose a service really would feel the loss. 

 

And so I would just thank you for taking the time and 

hopefully . . . We will understand as you are simplifying the 

process here that we certainly take a very serious look at 

offering the services and making them as available to people 

and that indeed the Humboldt argument -- I'm sure they have a 

very strong argument -- will be listened to and adhered to.  And 

I thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, in your deliberations concerning the changes to The 

Land Titles Act, did you give any consideration or were there 

any representations made to you concerning any changes to the 

caveats as they affect land titles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, there will be another . . . 

It is our plan to introduce a second amendment to The Land 

Titles Act in this session.  And my memory is that there are 

provisions respecting caveats, but I can't remember as I stand 

here what they are or the effect of them.  But it is our plan to 

introduce a Bill that covers a number of matters with respect to 

land titles later in this session. 

 

If the member wants to pursue that with me privately, Mr. 

Chairman, I'll be glad to talk to him about it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate the 

opportunity to discuss caveats with the minister. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would that 

include some points that would deal with those caveats that are 

placed on land titles, that are not against individuals who have 

assets that the caveat should be placed against? 

 

And I can think of people who have had caveats placed on their 

land that had the same name as the individual that should have 

had it placed on.  And then when it comes to withdrawing 

them, they have to pay the fee.  Somewhere else the 

responsibility should be placed of having to free those titles 

from all of those caveats, and significant problems have arisen 

in many locations where people have the same name.  And I 

can think of instances, many instances in the Swift Current 

area, where people have the same name, and it consistently 

happens.  Would that be included in some of the options 

available in your changes that you're looking at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't recall that it is, Mr. Chairman, 

but I can't remember the details of that part of the other Bill.  

And I'll renew my offer that I made to the other member, and 

I'll be glad to discuss that with the member.  And certainly 

we'll have an opportunity of getting into that with the other 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd appreciate that.  

I just wanted to raise it as a point to consider.  And I think it's a 

necessary one to deal with.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

(1230) 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the Assembly and a 

number of people would be more than interested in knowing 

why the Bill is necessary and the reasons why the Bill was 

brought before the Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I apologize for the delay, Mr. Chairman, 

but I had a particular point that I wanted to raise with my 

officials.  Some of these certificates of incompetence have been 

on hand with the Public Trustee for as much as 30 years.  

That's about as long as these certificates have existed.  Some of 

them go right back to the beginning of the idea of a certificate 

of incompetence. 

 

And they are issued by the chief psychiatrist of a mental health 

facility following the examination of a patient by a physician, 

and they specify that the person is not competent to manage his 

or her own affairs.  And they're not determinant of competence 

for all purposes but they may be persuasive, for example, 

during court proceedings where the application may be made to 

appoint a property guardian.  And that's not fair, you know, it is 

just not a workable approach to this question of a person's 

ability to manage his or her own affairs. 

 

The fact that a doctor pronounces a person incompetent at a 

particular point in time does not mean that that person remains 

incompetent for ever as it were.  That was the state of that 

person's competence at that time but the system just . . . the 

certificates continue to exist with the Public Trustee, continue 

to lie there, and continue to be a huge cloud over the heads of 

people who respond to treatment and who become competent. 

 

Incompetence can be a very temporary thing and it is just not 

fair that these examinations or these certificates sit there 

without any re-examination, without any treatment for years 

and years and years.  And the department has been considering 

for years how to deal with them.  They only empower the 

Public Trustee.  They have no other use to anybody else.  We're 

just not satisfied that that's a fair, reasonable way of 

approaching the question of incompetence or allegations of . . . 

or suggestions of incompetence. 

 

We are now in possession, the Public Trustee is in possession 

of hundreds of certificates for people who are not active clients 

of the Public Trustee, who are not connected to the system in 

any way, shape, or form.  So the amendment that we propose 

will dramatically shorten . . . will put some life on these 

certificates. 

 

All of the things that can be done and should be done with 

respect to the property of a person who has been determined to 

be incompetent, will be done within that period of a year, and 

it's not necessary to keep the certificates hanging out there, as it 

were, hanging like a cloud over the head of people. 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard July 17, 1992 

It's also important, from the administration's point of view, 

because they are a cost . . . it's a costly procedure to keep them 

up.  It will reduce our record-keeping responsibilities and our 

storage requirements and eliminate our Public Trustee's activity 

in locating people as they get to be 65 years old, for example, 

and eligible for pension.  And we get involved in those 

questions because the certificates are there, even though we 

have had no contact with these people over many years. 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Chairman, it removes the stigma of 

incompetency from a person who has never required a property 

guardian, who's never had any involvement with the system.  

It's just that at one time a physician has pronounced that that 

person is incompetent and then that record lives on in the files 

of the Public Trustee for the rest of that person's life.  And we 

don't think that that stigma should exist.  It's just not fair.  So 

we're trying to remedy it and save some money at the same 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So I 

gather that I would take it that there are a number of certificates 

still on file, and no doubt many people may have even 

forgotten the fact that even a certificate was written on on their 

behalf at some time in their life. 

 

I'm not sure if I caught in your statement, Mr. Minister, is there 

going to be a contact?  Or in some cases are you just going to 

automatically revoke these certificates?  Or what is the process 

right now in dealing with the certificates that are on file?  

Because I think it's, in some ways, it probably could be a 

touchy situation especially if people have forgotten or are just 

not even aware that there was such a certificate.  To have been 

notified, someone may become very indignant. 

 

And I think it would be . . . it's going to be an area where your 

officials are going to have to deal very delicately with people to 

let them know, no, you're not trying to tramp on them.  But also 

. . . Well, maybe I'll let you respond to that first and then I've 

got one other question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, we 

don't intend to contact the individuals.  We are however going 

to contact the agencies and departments in order to clarify the 

impact of these amendments if they're passed by the House.  

We have over a thousand of these certificates on our files and 

many of them have never been acted on and this gets rid of the 

old ones right away and then it will become only current 

certificates that will be dealt with.  And, as I said to the 

member, all that has to happen, happens within a short time 

anyway and certainly within a year. 

 

But we don't want to contact the individuals to confirm that 

your certificate of incompetence no longer has effect because 

many people just don't ever . . . don't know there ever was such 

a certificate issued and it's a time of their life where they don't 

care to be reminded that they were incompetent.  And certainly 

they don't want the government contacting them to tell them 

that, yes that they are no longer considered to be incompetent 

at law.  I mean it's not a legal question, it's a medical and 

personal question, and we'll try and administer this in a 

sensitive way if it's accepted by the legislature. 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  A 

couple of other questions regarding the situation of 

incompetency, and I'm just wondering roughly how many cases 

may come up in a year and if, at the end of any given year, as 

you talk about in the legislation of revoking that certificate, is 

there a form that will be followed? 

 

I'm not sure you want to just look at revoking a certificate 

without . . . especially in a very short time period, without at 

least just doing some background or in double-checking to 

know that in revoking the certificate certainly the person or 

individuals involved have overcome their difficulties, rather 

than just revoking a certificate to find that person is still having 

problems.  Do you have a stopgap to make sure we 

double-check on recent ones, and as I indicated, roughly how 

many cases would the province be dealing with in a year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's another good question, Mr. 

Chairman.  We have usually a hundred to a hundred and twenty 

certificates a year.  And the first thing that the Public Trustee 

does is to investigate whether there are any assets involved or 

not. 

 

If there are assets involved, it is quite likely that a property 

guardian will be required.  And the property guardian can be 

appointed under The Dependent Adults Act or the Public 

Trustee may become the property guardian for that person if 

there is no individual ready to take on the task.  But in either 

event, if the individual owns assets, then that will be moved on 

in a very, very timely way and certainly well within this period 

of a year that I've been talking about. 

 

If there are no assets, then the certificate just goes into the 

record system of the Public Trustee.  Having regard to that, 

that's been the system for years, from the beginning.  Having 

regard to that, we see no need to investigate the circumstances 

of the others, the people who had no assets.  We don't want to 

embarrass them or be less than sensitive to their situations.  So 

our plan is simply to regard these old certificates as being 

inactive, and they will just go into an inactive file.  And then 

the same thing happens to them as happens to other inactive 

files, they go through an archival process of some sort or 

another that I don't understand.  But we have no intention of 

conducting investigations with respect to any of them. 

 

There are situations where a property guardian has been 

appointed or where the Public Trustee is the property guardian.  

And those files, of course, will remain open.  And you'll notice 

in the Bill, those certificates do not lapse as a result of this Bill.  

They do not lapse as a result of the amendment that we're 

proposing.  Similarly, if there is an application pending on the 

question of a property guardian, the certificates will not lapse. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I have a short 

preamble and then two very short questions.  I am pleased to 

see that you're providing relief to the Public Trustee in clause 4 

by making it possible to clear this backlog of files.  And from a 

common sense perspective, any effort to remove unnecessary 

paperwork is something that should be applauded. 



July 17, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Despite this, I want to make certain about proper process and 

wish some reassurances to make sure that every certificate of 

incompetence issued is actually active.  And this of course will 

have to deal with how promptly a property guardian is going to 

be appointed.  So I have two questions.  The first is: what 

process is in place to ensure that the property guardian is 

promptly appointed so that the certificates are active?  And 

secondly, if such a process is in place, what's the nature of that 

process? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

process is as follows.  When the Public Trustee receives a 

certificate, we move on it immediately.  There is an 

investigation carried out by trust officers.  And there are 

investigators who travel the province and who interview 

anyone who may have knowledge of the assets and property of 

the individual concerned.  This is done within one month of the 

certificate being received by the Public Trustee. 

 

I might also add that it is the policy of the office to encourage 

individuals to apply to be property guardians.  It is the policy of 

the office to encourage relatives or what have you to apply, and 

if that is the route chosen, if there is someone who is prepared 

to take on that responsibility, then we try and push it along so 

that their application is made in a timely way and the matter is 

dealt with within a period of one year. 

 

If it is not, if that's not happening because of some delay with 

the lawyers or what have you, then the Public Trustee will 

move herself to become appointed on an interim basis pending 

the completion of the other application.  So this process is 

followed in all cases. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, that having completed 

the committee's work with respect to the Bills for which I am 

responsible, I would like to thank my officials for coming 

today and helping me, and through me the Assembly, with 

respect to the consideration of these Bills. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I join the minister first of all, 

thanking the minister for his responses and also thanking his 

officials for their help.  I certainly enjoyed working with them 

on Regulations Review Committee and thank them for their 

responses and aiding the minister at this time, as we all know 

he needs a little bit of help once in a while, but we really 

appreciate his forthrightness.  Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers 

Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Contributory 

Negligence Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move these amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Printer Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that the Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that the Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 

 

 


