




















































Hansard: August 03, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1917 

 August 3, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

another of the many petitions which have come to this 

Assembly.  This one pertains to the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) issue and the preamble is the same as in the 

rest of them, Mr. Speaker.  I'll only read the meat and potatoes, 

if you will, of this particular petition: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to: 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 

 2.) start working with the federal government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

 3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set up 

on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio instead of 

a risk area formula. 

 

The people signing these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Craik, Keeler, Brownlee, Marquis, Caron, Central 

Butte.  The whole entire Moose Jaw trading area, Mr. Speaker, 

is represented on these petitions that I present this morning. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

lay on the Table some petitions, and a different topic than from 

my colleague.  To read part of the prayer, Mr. Speaker, that is 

included in this petition, states that: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from a variety of 

areas within the province, from Lampman, from Estevan, from 

Oxbow, Midale, Gainsborough, Regina, Carnduff, areas such 

Air Ronge, Leoville, Meath Park, Shellbrook, Prince Albert, 

and in Melfort.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to present 

several names on a petition today, with respect to chiropractic 

services, and just the last couple of sentences in the same light 

as my colleague from Saskatoon: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the names on here, Mr. Speaker, are people like Mr. Ken 

Funk from Kingsmere Boulevard, Saskatoon; Mr. Dale Fehr 

from Assiniboine Drive, Saskatoon.  We have Mr. Erdman 

from Perreault Crescent in Saskatoon; Mr. Cole from Shea 

Crescent in Saskatoon.  We have Mr. Wiebe from Hardisty.  

We have Leo LaClaire from Saskatoon; and several others 

from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present.  And I'll just . . . one of the most important 

paragraphs of the petition, I will read.  I feel this should be 

repeated and repeated, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

to discriminate against chiropractic (treatments of) patients 

by charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions that I'm petitioning, I have two 

here with pages full.  The first page is from Prince Albert, 

Shellbrook -- looks like pretty well all that page is all 

Shellbrook and Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next one is from Swift Current and some surrounding 

towns -- Gladstone, around Swift Current.  And some from 

Saskatoon and some from Regina, and as of course there's 

always some on here from Churchill Downs. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

some petitions here, pretty much the same.  I'll just read the 

final chapter. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from the government 

. . . from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed for 

any other medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the south-west: Swift 

Current, and Central Butte, Elrose, Gull Lake -- quite a few 

from Swift Current, quite a few from Gull Lake -- Herbert, 

Vanguard, Ponteix, Mankota, Webb, various addresses in Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker, a couple of colonies, Kyle, Pennant, and 

several other towns down in that area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to 

present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and 

it has to do with chiropractic care.  And these petitioners are 

from Stoughton, Heward, Weyburn, Swift Current, Ponteix, 

Waldeck, Cabri, Rush Lake, and throughout the south-west.  I 

just present them to the Assembly here today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

with respect to chiropractic care and the treatment that the 

government is providing them with.  Mr. Speaker, this first 

petition is primarily from Saskatoon and region -- Verbeke 

Crescent, Confederation Drive, Frobisher drive.  Some here 

from Biggar; Stone Crescent; Colonsay; a number of signatures 

from Rosetown, Mr. Speaker.  And on this petition, the second 

one here is primarily from Prince Albert and area. 

 

I present those now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 

like to present a petition to the Assembly dealing with 

chiropractic care.  I think the last paragraph of the prayer is the 

most important part: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the people of 

Saskatoon -- all over the city, I'm guessing, because I'm not 

totally familiar with the city -- but Edinburgh Place, 

subdivision 32, Ottawa Avenue, Stewart Avenue; from the 

town of Hafford.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to present this 

petition to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my honour 

today as well to present petitions on behalf of the people out in 

our province who are very much concerned about the 

perception that they have that this government is discriminating 

against them. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows he may not 

comment.  You can read the last paragraph of it, but you may 

not comment on the petition. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will take this opportunity 

to read the last paragraph so that the people will understand 

what the problem is. 

 

 Wherefore, your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to (current) chiropractic treatment and 

that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

These petitions come from people in various towns, beginning 

with Herbert, Hodgeville, Hazenmore, Stewart Valley, Swift 

Current, Gull Lake, Bracken, Shaunavon, Cree Lake, and many 

others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm fortunate that I've been 

joined here today by two constituents who are seated in the east 

gallery.  And I'd like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members, Linda Walsh and her son Darren, and ask all 

members to join with me to welcome them here today. 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you and other members of the House, a person by the 

name of Phillipe Baviére.  Phillipe is from Noisz-le-Roi just 

east of Paris in France.  He's here as an exchange student with 

other 13 students right across Saskatchewan, and he'll be with 

us for a whole month.  I'll be asking the member from Kinistino 

to say a few welcome words in French. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, please welcome Phillipe Baviére. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Merci, M. le Président.  Je voudrais prendre cette 

opportunité pour dire du part de mes collègues dans le 

gouvernement et aussi les collègues de l'opposition, c'est un 

plaisir d'avoir Phillipe ici dans la Saskatchewan et parmi nous 

dans la législature.  Je voudrais lui souhaiter une bonnes 

vacances et voudrais demander à tous mes collègues de 

l'accueillir chaleureusement.  Merci. 

 

(Translation:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of my 

colleagues on both the government and opposition sides, I 

would like to take this opportunity to say that it is a pleasure to 

have Phillipe here in Saskatchewan and with us in the 

legislature.  I would like to wish him a good holiday.  I ask all 

my colleagues to give him a warm welcome.  Thank you.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Potential Merger of Canada's Airlines 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for converting highways to cart paths.  

The minister will know that discussions about the potential 

merger of Canada's two national airlines have now 

commenced.  Because of Saskatchewan's location, our province 

has always had to fight to maintain adequate service and our 

share of the air traffic employment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: would the minister outline his 

government's position on this possible merger, and will he table 

the communications he has had with the federal government, 

outlining his government's concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I have both 

met with senior representatives of both airlines in the earlier 

stages of discussing the merger of Canadian Airlines with the 

American firm and have remained in communications.  And 

our department is actively engaging in discussions with the 

federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Transportation 

seems to be treating this issue with about 

as much candour as he has used in his dealings with 60,000 

farmers over the GRIP contracts.  Surely the minister has to 

acknowledge that the merger would cost thousands of people 

their jobs in our province and would have the potential of 

driving prices of travelling by air through the roof in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the minister: will the minister not acknowledge 

these inevitable results and what he is prepared to do to help 

save these people their jobs and help make airline travel 

affordable for ordinary persons?  Will you do something, Mr. 

Minister, to save the jobs for the people in Saskatchewan and 

to keep the costs of air travel at somewhat of a reasonable rate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the airline industry across 

the world has been suffering extremely under the conditions of 

the last number of years with the deregulation that's been going 

on, and it has left both Canadian companies at some risk.  And 

we continue to be involved in the discussions with the federal 

government with respect to both the service to Saskatchewan 

and the security of Canadian carriers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not good enough to blame 

somebody else all of the time for everything that goes wrong.  

Deregulation is not the culprit, Mr. Minister.  The world 

economy has made air travel a luxury instead of the norm.  

Unionized workers are worried that they will lose their jobs, 

and all you can do is blame everyone else far and wide and take 

no responsibility for yourself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question: what are you prepared to do, Mr. 

Speaker, to help ensure that Saskatchewan continues to receive 

the same level of service we currently receive and that the good 

people that work for those two airlines continue to have 

employment?  Will you do anything other than blame 

somebody else to try to help these people to maintain their 

livelihoods, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I suspect other listeners are 

having as much difficulty as I am putting together my answers 

with the subsequent questions, supposedly based on my 

answers.  The answer I gave continues to be the answer -- that 

we have met with senior representatives of both airlines and 

heard their concerns.  And our department continues to be in 

dialogue with the federal ministry with respect to service to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, are these the same kind of negotiations 

that you've had with the farm people of this province over the 

last months, the non-existent types of conferences? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister's colleague, the federal member for 

Regina-Lumsden, is already on record as favouring a merger of 

Canada's two airlines, thus 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

favouring higher rates, less service for Saskatchewan, and the 

potential loss of hundreds of jobs for people in our province. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this:  has the 

provincial government already consulted with their federal 

NDP (New Democratic Party) counterparts, and is the 

minister's view the same as the MP (Member of Parliament) 

from Regina Lumsden?  Or does the minister have some other 

position which he is prepared to share with us by tabling his 

communications with the federal government here in this 

Assembly?  Or have you talked to anybody at all about this at 

any time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, clearly our -- as I've already 

said twice -- our department continues to be in contact with the 

federal minister on this question.  I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, 

what the members opposite are doing with respect to directing 

their federal government with respect to what's happening on 

this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We, Mr. Speaker, will support absolutely any 

proposition that saves jobs for our people in this province and 

maintains some credible standard of air flights to and from our 

province to other places in the world. 

 

I have here in my hand the member from Regina's statement.  

Mr. Minister, he states quite clearly . . . And I quote from Pat 

Grandy.  She says here that "layoffs appear inevitable." 

 

Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that union people are so 

worried, in view of the fact that the federal critic from your 

party has said that he favours that we merge these two airlines, 

how do you square this in the province where you are the 

Minister of Transportation and responsible to try to save jobs 

and save transportation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the government of the same 

party of the members opposite is in Ottawa directing these 

kinds of events and facilitating these kinds of actions that the 

member opposite is expressing concern about.  I would suggest 

that the member opposite might in fact straighten out the 

policies of his own government if he's concerned about the 

impact on jobs, of this move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you.  My question is just a follow-up to 

the Minister of Transportation. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you just tell us . . . in your last response 

you said, well we should should talk to the feds and find out 

what the outcome may be. Would you tell us how you feel 

about the potential of a merger of these two national airlines?  

Or in other words, would you tell the public in Saskatchewan 

the message that you want to give to the federal government, or 

you want to give to these airlines before you just blame 

everybody else.  Wow do you feel about this merger? 

 

Your federal counterpart says he likes the merger.  Do you 

like the concept of these two national airlines merging in 

Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

aware that the crisis in international air travel is very much . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I will ask the member from 

Arm River to please, if he has a question, to simply get up and 

the Speaker will recognize him; otherwise, not to interrupt.  

Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

aware that the crisis in international air travel has not left 

Canadian carriers unaffected.  They are also aware that the 

policies of the federal government have not left Canadian 

carriers unaffected, both in terms of privatization and 

deregulation. And we are as a ministry in contact with the 

federal government with respect to the ongoing negotiations in 

these matters which are under the authority of the federal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the question to the same minister.  

I just asked his opinion.  Are you too . . . Why are you so 

reluctant or why are you afraid to give us your opinion?  Do 

you like the merger concept or not?  Can't you tell us?  It's not 

a difficult question.  Do you think the merger is a good idea or 

not for Canada and for Saskatchewan people and the general 

public?  Your federal counterpart . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. order.  The noise level is much, much 

too high.  And now it's coming from this side.  Before when the 

minister was answering, it was coming from the other side.  

Now will the members please just cut down the noise level so 

we can hear the questions and hear the answers. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's very simple.  

Mr. Benjamin says he supports the merger.  He's a federal NDP 

Member of Parliament.  We're asking the Saskatchewan 

Minister of Transportation: do you support the merger of the 

two national airlines or not?  Could you just simply address 

that question? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Is the member from Quill Lakes going 

to be answering the question?  If he is, then he should rise and 

I'll recognize him.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I understand the member 

opposite's frustration, whether to follow his Prime Minister or 

his member from Regina on this matter, who also disagree on 

this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question of airline transport in Canada is a 

question of some complexity and some difficulty and the 

member opposite knows that.  And possibly he has an interest 

in telling the people what his opinion is on this matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

Liquor Consumption Regulations 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Premier or whoever might like to answer.  Mr. 

Premier, your government's actions continue to amaze people 

in this province.  You've clearly demonstrated once again that 

one arm of government  doesn't know what the other's doing. 

 

Why is it that the government feels it is right to impose its 

morals on Saskatchewan people through the NDP-appointed 

vice squad at the Liquor Board, when your Minister of 

Agriculture, when your Minister of Agriculture has no problem 

morally in breaking the contracts of 60,000 farm families? 

 

Which is it?  Which part of the double standard, Mr. Premier, 

which part of the double standard does your government 

subscribe to?  Please tell Saskatchewan people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

point out to the members opposite that the rule which is giving 

us a little bit of difficulty enforcing, was a rule that was made 

by the commission that was appointed by the previous 

government and not by the new commission which we 

appointed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think if it's a question of leading in moral 

values, I think the members opposite should be more concerned 

about the free booze that was given away by the previous 

administration, and the people who are working for the Liquor 

Board and being paid by the Liquor Board and not working for 

them.  I think if there is a concern . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to warn the members if 

the interruptions don't cease, I'll cut off question period and go 

to the orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's very 

evident today, Mr. Speaker, that double standards do exist in 

this government.  We have very lame excuses from the minister 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice that they felt no compulsion about using the former 

government's GRIP program, or using the former government's 

budget.  But now we can use the former government's liquor 

standard to the defence for what the minister and his vice squad 

are doing over at the Liquor Board. 

 

You can be sanctimonious, Mr. Minister, when it comes down 

to Big Brothers raising money or people going to the Regina 

Exhibition and enjoying themselves, but when it comes down 

to money, the morals stop.  Because this government has no 

problem in breaking the contracts of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now which is it, Mr. Minister?  If you can live by the Liquor 

Board requirements of the previous administration, maybe your 

government should live by the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

requirements also.  Which is it going to be, Mr. Minister? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a little bit of 

problem making the connection between these two issues.  I 

think maybe the members opposite should try to get a grip on 

the spandex issue here. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is not a case of breaking contracts.  This is a 

case of attempting to enforce regulations in an even-handed 

manner and creating some . . . realizing that there are some 

problems possibly with the rules.  And we will be looking at 

changing the rules, if that's necessary.  If we have a problem 

with enforcement, we'll be looking at changing that. 

 

But I think they were the rules that were there from the old 

commission and we are trying to enforce them in an 

even-handed manner.  And if that's creating a problem, we're 

going to look at it.  But I fail to see where the connection 

comes to crop insurance.  It's a far leap for me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Well the connection comes, Mr. Minister, 

because of all the hypocrisy that we see coming out of your 

government.  You always have someone to hide behind.  It's 

either the federal government, or the former provincial 

government, or in this case you'll blame third parties like Big 

Brothers or the Regina Exhibition company.  You've always 

got somebody to hide behind, Mr. Minister, for your 

incompetence and the incompetence of the people underneath 

you. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you going to tell the Assembly today whether 

you have given direction to the people at the Saskatchewan 

Liquor Board to back off people like Big Brothers, and to back 

off associations like the Regina Exhibition Association, who 

are doing things to provide support to their community in 

various ways? 

 

Mr. Minister, everyone in this province believes that you need 

to show some leadership instead of hypocrisy.  Will you do that 

today, Mr. Minister, and inform this Assembly that you have 

given those orders to the Saskatchewan Liquor Board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will give that 

confirmation to the House.  I've been . . . The new Liquor 

Commission is meeting his week and I've instructed them to 

look at the regulation and see if there needs to be changes to it.  

I've instructed my officials to look at the way we're enforcing 

regulations to see if there's a problem in that.  If there's 

over-zealous enforcement and a lack of common sense, we'll 

correct it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government is hiding behind nothing.  

We will write new policy and we will enforce it as best we can, 

and we will take responsibility for it.  But we do not like to 

take responsibility for rules and regulations that were made by 

the past government, or GRIP contracts that were made in a 

very unprofessional manner and without proper documentation 

and all the 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

rest of it.  And I can assure you that there is no connection 

between the crop insurance program and the Liquor Board 

regulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I'm sure that your new people on the Liquor Board will do as 

you say.  I mean, they bought and paid for the positions, so I 

expect that they will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you made the statement on 

Friday that Saskatchewan's moral standards were higher than 

those of our neighbours in Manitoba and Alberta, therefore we 

had to be different. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Minister, before you make those kind 

of comments about our neighbours on either side, I'm sure as 

they read their newspapers and see the various things that your 

government has done with breaking contracts with farmers, 

diabetics, ranchers, all sorts of people in our society, Mr. 

Minister, they must be wondering about who has the moral 

standards in western Canada. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that you should apologize today to the 

people of Manitoba and Alberta for making those kind of 

remarks, unless you are prepared to clean up your own act, Mr. 

Minister.  Are you prepared to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe the 

members opposite should be giving me a lecture in morality.  I 

think somebody that would attack individuals who are 

appointed to a board who are, in my opinion, very competent 

individuals and very worthy of the position, and to be attacked 

by the members opposite because of their alleged political 

leanings, I think that's immoral.  And thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Return of Leased Land 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister in charge of the land bank.  As a follow-up to last 

week's conversations, minister, I think everyone in the 

south-west perceives that a Mr. Oster got much more than his 

improvements are worth as a pay-off for running for an NDP 

candidacy in Maple Creek. 

 

In an attempt to help my former constituent to clear up this 

matter, I have a question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  Is there 

anything that you can tell this House that would prove proper 

procedure was followed and that Mr. Oster was not paid much 

more or much less than market value for his improvements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, to begin with, I think 

the members opposite should know that there's no longer a land 

bank. It was done away with by the previous 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As to Mr. Oster, I think this is 

again, the member opposite, as Mr. Oster being a constituent of 

his, he should be in this House defending his constituents and 

being sure that they get a fair deal, not in here slandering their 

name. 
 

And I have given assurances to this House that it was done in a 

perfectly normal, standard manner and there was nothing 

untoward in that contract that he would . . . done in a standard 

procedure.  And Mr. Oster got paid no more and no less than 

any other lessee in the same position. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I can assure this Assembly that 

there's no slander involved here.  These are simply an attempt 

to achieve the role of finding out facts. 
 

Mr. Minister, the law firm that handled the original owner's 

transactions in the early 1970s was Walker Romanow and 

Stevenson.  I also know, Mr. Minister, that the house Mr. Oster 

lives in was built brand-new by the previous owners in the 

early '70s and so was the Quonset you mentioned last week. 
 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister:  Mr. Minister, can 

you confirm today that the original owner was offered about 

700 per cent less for their new house and Quonset than Mr. 

Oster was for the same piece of property?  And do you still 

claim this isn't a sweetheart deal? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think . . . Mr. 

Speaker, this is . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this definitely is a 

case of sloppy arithmetic and slander, and I think there is no 

question about that.  The improvements were purchased from 

the former owner by a standard policy.  The improvements that 

Mr. Oster made were valued, and the total package was valued 

according to standard procedure and was not paid too much for 

it. 
 

And I think the member opposite, in attempting to slander his 

own constituent, is in breach of his job and his trust as an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, Mr. 

Minister, my constituency does not run to Medicine Hat.  

Secondly, I do have a calculator that you can borrow, if you'd 

care to have it. 
 

Mr. Minister, the previous owner doesn't want to be put in the 

middle of this whole mess, and I can respect that.  In fact the 

retired school teacher believes that you are, as she put it, just 

taking care of one of your own -- just taking care of one of 

your own.  That's her words. 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

 

 

That is in fact what you are doing, isn't it, Mr. Minister, taking 

care of one of your NDP faithful members?  How else can you 

explain this, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I've explained this 

about six times.  I don't know why the member opposite doesn't 

seem to catch on to it.  Mr. Speaker, this was land that . . . 

improvements that were sold, bought, purchased back from a 

lessee who is . . . standard procedure.  Any lessee in 

Saskatchewan has that right to sell back when they give up 

their lease, to be paid for their improvements on it.  And this 

was done in a standard procedure, and it was no pay-off to 

anybody.  I did not even know that Mr. Oster was turning his 

lease back. 
 

And I think that again the member opposite is trying to use this 

to slander one of his own constituents, and I think it's shameful. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not particularly 

concerned with your opinion of me, Mr. Minister, but I will 

remind you of the figures that you yourself have put into the 

public's knowledge bin last week: $10,000 was paid 

approximately, you said last week, at the original purchasing of 

these buildings by land bank.  You now paid 71,000-plus for 

that same set of buildings.  You figure it out. 
 

Can you please explain to this Assembly how a house and a 

Quonset can appreciate by a whopping 700 per cent over about 

a 20-year period of time, especially at a time when we were in 

a recession, Mr. Minister? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Minister, the member opposite 

is using his privileges in the House to give false information; I 

wish he'd make those charges outside the House and see where 

they come with that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: -- Order. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the Minister of Rural Development 

confirm that he said outside of this House that there was 

$10,000 paid by land bank to the original owner and that 

70,000 was paid by lands branch to the now resident of 

Medicine Hat, Mr. Bryan Oster. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again there were 

improvements to the buildings; they're not the same set of 

buildings.  There's a difference in time frame of some 20 years.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they were valued according to the standard 

procedure for value, and I think that we had an independent 

appraiser again who valued them at a higher level than what 

our department valued them at.  They were standard, fair value 

for what he got for his improvements, and that is the facts, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister confirm that the 

appraiser that they used as an independent appraiser is not a 

qualified appraiser as requirements under lands branch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, on lease 

improvement values, he was a qualified appraiser. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, is it true that he would not have 

qualified if the land would have been purchased or sold to 

another individual?  Would he have been qualified to provide 

that appraisal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- He would be qualified to appraise 

the improvements of buildings, not land, which is a different 

situation.  But under our regulations he was qualified as an 

appraiser. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the appraisal was done by a 

non-approved appraiser as a requirement under lands branch.  

Will you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No it wasn't, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you tell this Assembly 

whether the appraisal done by the lands branch in 1973 was 

$10,000 and that the appraisal done by your lands branch now 

was $71,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, in approximate 

numbers those are correct.  But considering they were different 

set of buildings and different . . . had improvements on them, I 

don't know what the relevance of that is.  And considering the 

20-year difference in time frame, it certainly is not relevant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that 

pursuant to rule 34, that at the next sitting of the Assembly, 

immediately before orders of the day is called for resuming 

debate on the motion to proceed with the vote on first reading 

of a Bill respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income 

Insurance Legislation, I will move that the said debate be not 

further adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  If some of the members want to 

have an early recess, I will accommodate them under rule 28.  I 

said order. 

 

(1445) 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, before orders of the 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

day is called for resuming consideration of the resolution for 

interim supply, I move: 

 

 That consideration of the resolutions in Committee of 

Finance required for interim supply be not further postponed. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:46 p.m. until 2:56 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Hagel 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet Kujawa 

Atkinson Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Jess 

--32 

Nays 

--Nil 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since 

we are beginning a new day I thought it might be appropriate to 

introduce my officials.  On my right is the associate deputy 

minister of Finance, Mr. Craig Dotson; and immediately 

behind him is Roy Hynd, the manager of the treasury board 

branch. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don't know 

why the minister was introducing his officials because he can't 

answer any questions anyway with the rules of the Assembly.  

There'll be no questions answered.  This has got to be the most 

ridiculous day I've ever heard of in the Assembly of 

Saskatchewan.  Closures.  Closures.  We had an interim supply 

Bill.  We talked about it, didn't even get one day finished, and 

we go to closure. 

 

Well I never seen . . . Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance 

says it shouldn't take more than 20 minutes.  Well I'll tell you, 

that's got to be the most insulting, arrogant man I've ever heard 

of in my life, coming from what I thought was a decent 

individual -- 20 minutes, shouldn't take more than 20 minutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, and also the House Leader, 

we didn't even speak one day on GRIP, on the GRIP motion.  

Closure.  Talk about a heavy-handed bunch of people.  I never 

seen such individuals in my life. 

Fifty-five days they said this House should be ended.  I've 

never seen anything like it.  We have sat here . . . I came in 

here under the NDP once, when they were in opposition we sat 

129 days.  We sat 129 days. 

 

And they say that we're not getting any work done.  We've 

passed many, many Bills.  We would get work done in this 

House, Mr. Chairman.  We would get work done if the people 

across there would answer their questions, without bringing 

ridiculous . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  Why is the 

Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- A point of order on a sitting during 

the time we were in opposition when we sat 129 days.  I'm sure 

if the member checks, there's no such . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  That's not a point of order, that's a 

question of debate. 

 

Before I recognize the member from Arm River, I want to 

point out to the member that each member has 20 minutes to be 

able to speak to the motion.  The Chair will not look kindly 

upon interruptions while the member is speaking. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.  

I hope that the House Leader's interference is deducted from 

my time. 

 

I had some questions that I wanted to ask the other day when 

interim supply was here.  So I'm still going to ask these 

questions, Mr. Chairman.  And maybe in his 20-minute 

response, maybe he can answer some of them. 

 

We've had quite a discussion the other night here about this 

one-twelfth.  And they asked . . . and several departments asked 

for more than one-twelfth.  And I was going to ask questions 

about how many departments of these have a surplus.  And we 

know that some of them did have a surplus.  And how many 

departments are there all together -- departments and agencies?  

And how many . . . We've only had three interim supply Bills 

that's come forth in this session, so that means that there's some 

departments that have money in their funds.  And questions I 

was going to ask, Mr. Chairman, where's this money gone?  

Where's this money at?  Is it sitting in the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Is it . . . you're going to never . . . going to get this man to agree 

with you that you spent . . . that Crop Insurance has spent 

one-twelfth of its funds.  There's just no way because they don't 

spend money out now.  So are you taking that money and 

spending it some place else? 

 

How many have a surplus?  And I want that question answered 

in this 20 minutes, but I have no way . . . if he doesn't answer it, 

I have no way under the new rules here, there's no way to come 

back. 

 

Any time . . . did you ever get a house foreclosed upon . . . 

have closure, and we've only been speaking one day, or part of 

a day on an interim supply Bill, has to be the most arrogant 

thing I've ever heard happen in this province and this 

government's going to suffer for that, Mr. Chairman. 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

We'll never, on this side of this House, we will never, ever let 

the people of Saskatchewan forget this day and these days. 

 

We are blamed by you people, Mr. Chairman, we're blamed by 

them for stalling and filibuster in this House.  What I call the 

words filibustering, is the people that don't answer questions.  

If you don't answer questions, and you bring in stupid Bills like 

this here retroactive GRIP Bill -- there's the people that's 

filibustering and causing all this problem. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Oh, order nothing. 

 

When the minister, Mr. Chairman, gets on his feet, he can just 

maybe answer some of those questions.  But one of the things 

that I sure want to remind him of, that every time you get up to 

speak, almost every time when you're speaking, the other night 

on interim supply Bill, you kept going after the member from 

Estevan.  Oh, this problem we're in is always because of the 

prior government and the debt they left. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when we sat in this 

same building in the end of May, the first day of June -- in fact, 

I got a Hansard here from June 1, an interim supply Bill -- it 

took me two and a half hours to finally get you to agree what 

the deficit was in 1982 when we took over government.  You 

finally admitted it.  You got backed into a corner, and under 

oath I asked you to give what the exact figures what the deficit 

was, and you finally did it after two and a half hours. 

 

And I think it's very important that everybody viewing 

television here today and anybody that's going to read 

Hansard, that hear this again, because I must read this into the 

record.  This is a question, just the latter part of my question 

after questioning you for a long time, Mr. Minister.  I'm asking 

you direct questions, and you as Minister of Finance shouldn't 

have to ask anybody, because if you were the minister of 

Finance back in 1982 and the government falls on it, I would 

have dreamt those figures for at least four years.  I would never 

have forgotten them.  You'd remember them till you die.  And 

you should know right to the penny. 

 

So you'd get up . . . And this is what I quote.  I quote from you, 

Mr. Minister: 

 

 I can give it to you right now.  Mr. Chairman, for the 

information of the member opposite:  1982, the total Crown 

corporations' debt, self-liquidating, not in any way a burden 

on the Saskatchewan taxpayer because the Crown 

corporations' earned income . . . They charge power rates and 

telephone rates and they paid the loans that were provided for 

them.  But the Crown corporation debt was $3.397 billion. 

 

  Now, Mr. Chairman, on the Consolidated Fund, which is the 

government side, taxpayer supported debt, do you know what 

it was, Mr. Chairman?  A hundred and ninety million dollars 

-- $190 

million.  Do you know what it is today, Mr. Chairman?  It's 

almost $9 billion after 10 years of the good and wise 

management of the member from Arm River. 

 

 All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided . . .  

 

Now this is what I quote.  This is important for the viewers of 

Saskatchewan to hear. 

 

 All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided, and the member will know what that's all about, the 

gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was 

$3.5 billion. 

 

Now how come that he, Mr. Chairman, can get up here for . . . 

well for nine years you stand in this House and blame the 

government for the debt we were creating because they left a 

balanced budget.  How can he do these things?  It's absolutely 

misleading the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  Three 

point five billion dollars in 1982 dollars and put into 1992 

dollars is very, very serious, for accusations to be left out there 

for people to be able to actually believe that.  People believe 

that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But we've got this statement from you, Mr. Finance Minister, 

and I've said it all over my riding and I intend to make sure that 

every reader, that everybody that can read in the province of 

Saskatchewan gets this submission from you, that it was $3.5 

billion. 

 

But there's no sense . . .  Those are just a few questions that I 

was going to ask the other day that I put down there.  I could 

go on for a long time.  I've only got 20 minutes.  And it's just . . 

. So far as I can see, this whole thing's a farce.  What's 

happening here today is a farce -- that we have interim supply 

Bill and there was no doubt it was either going to end that night 

or the next day because we have never held up the interim 

supply Bill.  We've only had the accusations. 

 

Any government, Mr. Chairman, that brings in interim supply 

Bill in the last day or two and wondering why it doesn't get 

passed in an hour or two . . . Why didn't you bring it in 10 days 

earlier or 15 days earlier and we could debate it in a right and 

proper manner, instead of bringing it in the last day, the closing 

minutes, and then say, well you're talking too long, you're 

asking too many questions, and we'll have to bring in a Bill of 

closure.  Talk about a dictatorship type of a government. 

 

I've never known it.  It has never happened.  I'll bet you this has 

never happened, Mr. Chairman, in the whole Commonwealth.  

It's never happened -- that two closures in one day.  The House 

Leader made a statement a day or two ago - 

_ I believe it was last Friday morning -- to the public that we 

were going to give the opposition . . . it'll take at least two 

weeks to get the GRIP Bill through; we're going to give them 

lots of time.  And he didn't . . .  We only get discussing it just 

on the motion.  One man spoke.  One man spoke. 

 

And we could have got on with things today.  We could 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

have got on with things today.  We just had the critic for Crop 

Insurance, the only one that spoke and the only one that was 

going to speak -- the only one that was going to speak.  And 

you could have tabled your Bill and we could have got at it.  

But what are you going to do now? 

 

You wonder why we're angry.  Because you play this kind of 

tactics.  Why wouldn't we be angry?  Why wouldn't we as 

opposition be listening to the public out there? 

 

I've been in politics a long, long time.  I've got in over . . . it'll 

soon be 15 years as an MLA and it's 20 years since I was a 

campaign manager for Doug Neil in Moose Jaw.  I've been 

involved all over this here province in politics, and I've never 

had such a sad day in my life as . . . or these days is the people 

coming at me, what you people are doing. 

 

I have people daily, daily, no matter where I go . . .  I was at 

the fair last night to see the musical ride, Mr. Chairman.  And 

people that didn't even know . . . that recognized me: can you 

not stop this government?  Can they do anything right?  Is there 

one Bill they can bring in that's right? 

 

Oh I said, we've passed probably 25 Bills -- I'm not sure, 20, 25 

Bills -- and they've had Royal Assent.  Well how could they 

ever have brought a Bill in that was right?  They can't do 

anything right, these jerks.  And that's what you people are 

called . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, order nothing; I can 

call you jerks if I want. 

 

Nothing wrong with me calling you people jerks, because that's 

exactly what you are.  Well, and I stand here and I mean it.  

Because that's exactly what you are.  It's the worst type of 

dictatorship . . . there's probably never happened -- even in the 

socialist countries, it probably never even happened.  It only 

happens here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  Why is the Associate 

Minister of Finance on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'd ask for a ruling, Mr. Speaker, as to 

whether or not calling members "jerks" is in keeping with 

parliamentary language usually expected of members of this 

Assembly. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  In checking Beauchesne, the word 

itself has not been ruled as unparliamentary, but certainly it's 

not the kind of language that one would expect of members of 

the Legislative Assembly.  And therefore I caution the member 

in the use of his language, and try to use language that befits 

members of the House and is a credit to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, you're 

absolutely right.  We shouldn't have to stand here as members 

and use any type of those kind of slanderous words.  But after 

what they've done to us, I don't think I can come up with 

parliamentary words that could be fitting for you people. 

 

It's just unreal.  It's unreal, Mr. Chairman, what you people 

here have done today.  I'm absolutely ashamed of you.  I'm 

ashamed that I'm a part of an NDP government in this 

legislature.  I'm proud that I'm here as a legislator, but I'm not 

proud of this legislature today. 

Because what you people are doing, you're going closure when 

we're only at 57 days?  I never heard of such a thing.  The 

House Leader well knows, and so does the member from 

Churchill Downs, and Quill Lakes, that this House in the 15 

years we've all been here -- and some of you longer -- that 

we've been down to a week with less work than what we got to 

do now and this House finishes.  They know that's right.  All 

they've got to do is have co-operation.  And we can't get 

co-operation from the government opposite.  They don't know 

what co-operation is. 

 

As long as . . . all you have to do, because why we're into this 

argument, it's not interim supply -- you didn't do closure on us 

because what we're talking about pertaining to interim supply -- 

it's because of the GRIP Bill.  Because you know you've got to 

get it passed.  GRIP has caused all the problem and it brings 

right to interim supply.  And it isn't whether it's '91 or '92 

GRIP, it's because the people of Saskatchewan are catching on, 

the media's catching on, everybody is catching on.  I was in 

Bismarck for four days and they're even catching on there; for 

the province of Canada, they're catching on that what this 

government has done and that's why we're here in the closure 

position. 

 

And we'll have closure on every Bill.  Probably you'll start 

doing it in Estimates.  We'll have closure, closure, closure, 

because you know you've got to get your GRIP Bill passed.  

You have to have it as the House Leader said publicly to deem 

that the farmers got a letter on March 15, 1992. 

 

And you know that's why we're in this mess.  You know that's 

why we're in this impasse in this House. 

 

And so before I take my seat, I just want to say very clearly -- 

and I won't use the word that I used before -- that I'm ashamed 

of whoever is making the rules and regulations on that side of 

the House.  I'm ashamed of each and every one of you.  I'm 

ashamed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It doesn't bring 

me any pleasure at all to participate in this process that the 

Government House Leader has foisted upon this House.  

There's a few things I'd like to say, however, Mr. Chairman, 

before this business comes to its smelly conclusion. And I'd 

like to refer members of the legislature back to a couple of 

documents that were recently presented in this House. 

 

One is from December 2, 1991, Monday, December 2, 1991, 

and I believe it was a document presented by the Minister of 

Finance to this Assembly.  On page 3 it talks about democratic 

reform, and I can remember the statements: "My government is 

determined to restore the fundamental principles of 

democracy." 

 

That's a strange statement coming from a government which 

has now used closure twice in the same day, that is very fearful 

of members of this House asking questions; is very fearful of 

members of this House expressing opinions that obviously 

impact on a lot of people in the province of 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The second document, Mr. Chairman, was presented to this 

House on Monday, April 27, 1992.  And as part of it, it had a 

section, "A Mandate for Change," and I would quote from that 

document, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 A community that has lost faith in its elected representatives 

will not flourish.  People want my government to be open, 

honest and fully accountable. 

 

 A community divided will not succeed.  People want my 

government to re-kindle the Saskatchewan spirit of 

community and co-operation. 

 

Well I'll suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, as my colleague from 

Arm River said, on the 57th day of a session to have closure 

motions brought forward one after the other, this early in the 

session, by a government that has shown over and over again in 

the last few weeks that it says one thing when it makes these 

public pronouncements and does another -- it doesn't matter if 

it's the farm families of this province with their contracts.  It 

doesn't matter if it's the people that have to do business with the 

secret service and the Liquor Board.  It just goes on and on and 

on -- these people firmly believe that they have the right to step 

on anyone that gets in their road. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that what we're seeing in this 

interim supply Bill is the epitome of the hypocrisy of the New 

Democrats. 

 

We're on the third interim supply Bill of this session.  Before 

that we had two special warrants.  You know, Mr. Chairman, 

when the previous government even brought in one special 

warrant or one interim supply Bill, it was all the excuse New 

Democrats needed to go on a rampage around this province -- 

stand on public platforms and talk about making the province 

ungovernable because an interim supply Bill had been brought 

forward. 

 

The current Minister of Finance, amongst others, stood on his 

feet for days in this House with various interim supply Bills in 

the previous five years.  And I've read all of the verbatim, Mr. 

Chairman. I've quoted some of it in this Assembly, and it went 

on and on and on.  They felt quite at ease in asking the minister 

of Finance about revenue that he had garnered from various tax 

initiatives. 

 

This Minister of Finance stands in this Assembly and hides, 

hides behind the narrow interpretation of interim supply.  He 

can bring forward more than one-twelfth and nearly the sum of 

$14 million in regards to the federal government, and yet when 

this opposition asks him questions about a federal offer that's 

on the table, contingency plans that the Finance department 

might have, we can't answer that; we won't answer that.  We'll 

hide behind the narrow rules. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we haven't had a budget in this province 

for nearly two years.  We have a Minister of Finance in his 

own words that said he was going to change the way the world 

operated.  And we attempt to ask questions and what do we 

get?  We get closure after a 

few hours. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on Friday the press released a document.  It was 

budget analysis, done by survey.  Done by survey, Bannatyne 

Research.  Department of Finance paid over $50,000 to come 

up with certain conclusions -- certain conclusions.  Part of the 

questions that we have been asking in interim supply are very 

relevant to this document and how the budget was drawn up in 

this province, the questions that were asked.  There were lots of 

questions in here, Mr. Chairman, that would have been very 

pertinent to this interim supply Bill, the topics that the Minister 

of Finance outlined in it. 

 

And now we're into this charade of 20 minutes, that if I ask a 

question and sit down, I lose my place.  Well I say to you, Mr. 

Chairman, that is absolutely ludicrous, absolutely ludicrous that 

members in this Assembly, given that the taxpayers shelled out 

50,000 bucks for this thing -- 50,000 bucks -- that the press had 

to threaten to use freedom of information in order to obtain. 

And we're prohibited from asking questions about it for hours, I 

suggest would be the more appropriate, Mr. Chairman -- hours 

and hours and hours on that document alone, because the 

minister refuses to answer any questions.  He simply talks 

political rhetoric.  And you wonder why there's frustration. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, after a few hours in this Assembly, what 

we get from these people is closure upon closure upon closure.  

Fifty-five members, admittedly half of them never here, we get 

closure, Mr. Chairman, day after day after day. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there was a movie recently released.  As part of 

its closing it had a very powerful message delivered by Kevin 

Costner, playing the role of an attorney.  The movie was JFK.  

And as part of that dissertation to the jury in that particular 

trial, Mr. Costner was talking about the U.S. (United States) 

government and its attempts to hide truth and fact. 

 

And one of the statements he said in there, Mr. Chairman, that I 

think is very applicable to this Assembly today, is that truth 

often poses a threat to power.  And what we have from the 

New Democratic Party today in this Assembly is the fact that 

truth in many areas seems to present a threat to the power that 

they hope to exercise over Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think it might behove maybe members of that caucus to 

go and see that movie and just see exactly what they're acting 

like.  And then maybe they would be prepared to come in this 

Assembly and answer questions to a very small opposition, a 

very small opposition that has limited research ability, but has 

the ability to stay in contact, I say, Mr. Chairman, with 

Saskatchewan people.  And every day in this Assembly we 

present more and more petitions.  We get more and more phone 

calls from people that are unhappy with this government -- a 

government that said it would be open, honest, and fully 

accountable; a government that said it would have the spirit of 

community and co-operation; a government determined to 

restore the fundamental principles of democracy. 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

Fundamental principles, Mr. Chairman -- when a member can't 

ask a question, take his seat and stand up and answer another 

one.  Truth often does pose a threat to power, I guess, Mr. 

Chairman, and what we have in this Assembly today is that 

very fact. 

 

The Chair: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, what 

we see here today is a very, very heavy-handed government.  

Interim supply, in my view, is a legitimate thing to be asking 

for - very legitimate.  And also, Mr. Chairman, is it not also 

legitimate that the opposition should have the opportunity to 

ask questions of the Minister of Finance with respect to that 

interim supply?  I think it's a legitimate thing to ask; that we 

should have that opportunity to ask those questions. 

 

But now they've put closure on that motion, on the interim 

supply motion, Mr. Chairman.  So what it in fact means is that 

there's an opposition of 10 members.  We'd all, each and every 

one of us, would only be given the opportunity to ask one 

question each -- one question, Mr. Chairman.  So that means, 

Mr. Chairman, we'd all . . . to grant them supply, only 10 

questions would be asked of the minister -- 10 questions to 

supply him with one-twelfth of the budget for this period of 

time in the year.  Absolutely incredible -- 10 questions on 

one-twelfth of a $5.4 billion budget.  That's what it amounts to, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Each one of us as opposition members are given the . . . 

charged with responsibilities to ask questions in various 

departments, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, we have 

responsibilities in a number of areas.  We're concerned about 

what's happening in this province, Mr. Chairman.  We're 

concerned about what the Minister of Finance is doing to 

democracy in this province, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The opposition . . . or I mean the government 

members are yelling at me to ask a question. 

 

I will not ask one single question.  I want the opportunity to ask 

question after question after question.  We cannot ask more 

than one question.  If we ask one question then we sit down, we 

lose our place.  Simple as that.  That's the facts. 

 

You aren't even aware of that.  We're not going to be subjected 

to only asking one question in this House about all areas of 

government.  We want the opportunity to ask question after 

question after question.  In Economic Diversification and Trade 

we have questions.  In health care we have questions.  In 

Agriculture we have questions.  In Rural Development we have 

questions.  Every area of government we have questions.  And 

we are not allowed to ask those questions. 

 

The fundamental, the fundamental principle of democracy is 

grievance before supply.  Grievance before supply.  And each 

and every one of you should take a lesson in that if you don't 

know it already.  Each and every one of you should be aware of 

that. 

 

We are not given the opportunity to ask questions.  You want 

supply.  You want supply and then you say we'll be 

given the opportunity to ask questions in Estimates.  Well that 

isn't the way it's supposed to be in a democracy, sir, Mr. 

Finance Minister.  That is not the way it's supposed to be in a 

democracy.  Democracy says grievance before supply. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 

have a right to know, they have a right to know where you're 

going to spend their money before you ask them for it, not 

after, Mr. Finance Minister.  And every one of the members in 

this House knows that.  But they aren't going to uphold that 

principle of democracy.  They don't care about democracy.  

We've seen their principles of democracy in the last little while: 

closure after closure after closure after closure motions. 

 

That's the kind of democracy we can expect from these tyrants 

opposite us.  That's the kind of democracy we can expect from 

you, sir, you and your government, the government that said 

they were going to govern with a spirit of openness and 

responsibility, openness and co-operation. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, here's examples of openness and 

co-operation from these people.  Here's the kind of openness 

and co-operation we can expect from these people.  That's the 

kind of democracy we can expect from you. 

 

Maybe, I think, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to just read into the 

record a couple of examples of things that members opposite 

have said before about closure motions.  I think I'll take the 

time to do that.  The member for Saskatoon South, this is what 

he said about closure in August 7, 1989 Hansard: 

 

 That is why, Mr. Speaker, I find this piece of legislation so 

abhorrent.  He doesn't have the right to decide how long I can 

speak in this legislature.  He doesn't have that right.  The 

people of Saskatoon South have elected me to speak for 

them. 

 

That's what the member from Saskatoon South said about 

closure motions.  So I say again you don't have that right.  You 

just don't have a right as a government to tell me whether or not 

I can speak in this legislature.  The people will decide that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Chairman, and exactly that same principle holds today with 

the people of Saskatchewan.  The people of Saskatchewan, the 

people of the Kindersley constituency, elected me to ask 

questions of this government, but we aren't able to ask those 

questions.  We aren't able ask those questions, Mr. Chairman.  

We aren't given that right. 

 

If I would have the opportunity to ask one question, I wonder 

what question one could pose to the Minister of Finance that'd 

be all-encompassing, that you could put forward and answer 

every single area of government.  What question would that 

be? 

 

Maybe it would be whether he wants to tender his 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

resignation.  That would be a type of comment that I think the 

people of Saskatchewan would accept. 

 

The member for Prince Albert Carlton, he's even here today; 

the member for Prince Albert Carlton, I see he's taken his 

place. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  The member is 

drawing attention to the presence or absence of a member and 

he should know that according to the rules we have that he 

should not be doing that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  What did the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton say about a closure motion one 

time?  Here's what he said, and I quote: 

 

 What we can say about closure, Mr. Speaker, and closure, or 

in this case it's a matter of closure on closure (which is 

exactly what we see here today incidentally).  Sitting back 

and listening to a lot of arguments that (are) . . . presented, 

and listening carefully and knowing very well that this is the 

first time that closure has ever been proposed in this 

legislature and ever used in this legislature, I can say that to 

me that it smacks somewhat of totalitarianism. 

 

 I feel that closure is somewhat of an affront to democracy.  I 

think and I believe that it is an antithesis of democracy -- the 

exact opposite -- because what (does it) . . . it stifles debate as 

opposed to what the democratic principle is of encouraging 

debate. 

 

 If democracy, Mr. Speaker, if democracy implies making 

decisions that reflect the public good and the public mood, 

then this motion of closure is definitely an affront to it, 

because closure offends the (very) democratic principle of 

free speech. 

 

That's what the member for Prince Albert Carlton said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, as I said earlier promised -- 

promised -- the people of Saskatchewan in the election 

campaign and in their budget and in their throne speech that 

they would govern with the spirit of openness and 

co-operation. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we don't see that openness.  We don't see 

that co-operation.  What we see is closure.  That's what we see 

from this government opposite, and the House Leader suggests 

that too.  He's happy with closure.  It doesn't make any 

difference to him whether we're able to ask questions or not.  

The people of Saskatchewan want us to ask questions.  The 

House Leader, he doesn't want questions asked of his 

government. 

 

Every single day that goes by, the people of Saskatchewan 

know just exactly what kind of government they've elected.  

They've elected a government with a heavy hand.  They don't 

want opposition in this province.  They don't want opposition 

in this province, Mr. Chairman. 

We saw a few moments ago that they voted for the first time in 

history by themselves.  No opposition at all.  The 

Saskatchewan people now see what kind of people these people 

they have elected are.  They've elected a government that will 

ram things through, roll over the opposition.  They don't care 

about the principles of democracy one little bit, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in closing, I think it can only be said that this 

government simply does not respect the principles of 

democracy, and they will not uphold the principles of 

democracy.  And we've examined that, and we've seen closely, 

exactly the way they'll govern in the future.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to point out a number of things to the 

people of Saskatchewan that I think are significant.  And they 

are examples, Mr. Chairman, of the kinds of things that I see 

this government doing.  I rue the day that this would have to 

take place in a first year of a government's mandate.  And as 

awesome as the overwhelming majority of that government is, 

I will say these things.  And I hope the deeming of those people 

opposite will not exclude me from this Assembly because I say 

them. 

 

I want to point out a couple of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. 

Chairman.  One, the House Leader and the Minister of 

Economic Development in this province is doing to the people 

of Saskatchewan exactly what he did to the constituents of 

Elphinstone. 

 

That minister and that member for the province of 

Saskatchewan took it upon himself to buy, Mr. Chairman, to 

buy the votes so that he could be elected in his constituency 

and nominated in his constituency.  That, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister, is a fact.  And that is a fact that you are going to have 

to . . . that, Mr. Speaker, is what you are going to have to live 

with all of your life.  You bought the votes to get the 

nomination in your constituency, sir, and no one across this 

province has ever done that before.  You, sir, are the one that 

did that. 

 

The second point I want to make, Mr. Chairman, is this.  The 

second point I want to make is this, and it is just as disgusting 

as that member from Elphinstone.  And that goes to the 

Minister of Finance who on the steps of the legislature was the 

first one -- and television will record that he was -- the first one 

through the door and pushing his way in and kicking the 

security guard in this province, in this legislature. 

 

That, Mr. Chairman, is exactly what he did.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is absolutely, totally disgusting.  And you, sir, did it.  

And what you are doing in this legislature today is exactly that.  

You're thumbing your nose at every citizen in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You, sir, don't have the right . . . you, sir, don't 

have that right in a democracy to do that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to point out a couple of other things that 

I think are just as ridiculous.  Mr. Chairman, I want to point out 

some other things.  The Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan on December 2 of 1991 said that he was 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

going to have an open, honest government and he was going to 

set stringent guidelines for conflict of interest.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is exactly what your Premier said.  And what has he 

done?  That, Mr. Minister, is exactly what he said, and what 

has done? 

 

What has he done is the question.  By allowing you and your 

House Leader to have closure . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order.  I'm having 

difficulty hearing the member because members on both sides 

are engaging in their own debates.  And therefore I ask 

members to listen to the member while he's on his feet.  And if 

you want to be recognized, please stand and you will be 

recognized at the appropriate time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, and I want to 

point this out to the people of this province of Saskatchewan, 

that we have leading in this province people who will misuse 

their power. 

 

I had the privilege of watching the television, John F. Kennedy, 

the movie.  And in that the lawyer says that you, sir, are . . . 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, and I just did . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  We're experiencing some difficulty with 

the microphones and we'll try it again, but the member's mike 

wasn't on.  We'll try it again. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to point 

out to the people of this Assembly and to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, power in the hands of the wrong 

people and misusing democracy is occurring today in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Chairman, is what we're complaining about here today. 

 

Your Premier said that my government has also initiated the 

development of a comprehensive code of ethics -- my goodness 

sakes! -- and stringent conflict of interest guidelines.  My 

goodness sakes!  You, sir, are a part of a government who has 

done that, and what have you done?  You have thrown your 

hands up and said democracy is not going to run this province.  

This Speech from the Throne, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

said: that people want my government to be open, honest, and 

fully accountable.  Mr. Minister, that is not what you're doing.  

In fact, you don't even have your deputy here today.  Where is 

he?  Allow that, allow that . . . allow that to be recognized as a 

part of the democratic process.  You don't even plan on 

answering any questions.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what this is -- this is grievance before supply for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan giving you the right to tax.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is being affronted here today by your 

unilateral action. 

 

People want my government to be fair.  Well sir, here we have 

fairness.  It's the most disgusting part of a democratic process 

that you could ever imagine.  And, Mr. Member from Melfort 

or Yorkton or whatever, you have to be accountable for this, 

and you will be held accountable for this. 

 

Fair and compassionate.  Well my goodness sakes, it's time you 

were compassionate.  You haven't delivered a 

compassionate speech in the last six months in this Assembly.  

None of you have.  That's why you treat diabetics with scorn.  

That's why you treat elderly with scorn.  Kick them out of the 

hospitals.  Number 1 and level 2 care -- kick them out -- you 

don't have any conscience; you don't have any compassion.  

That's the kind of government you are.  That, Mr. Chairman, is 

why we are against the unilateral actions that are occurring in 

this Assembly these days. 

 

This Assembly, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, are forums for 

debate, forums for debate and discussion.  And, Mr. Minister, 

we are being curtailed on every hand, at every opportunity that 

you can.  And you, Mr. Minister, are doing that every time.  

We have speech after speech in this House, in the last 10 years, 

that we can quote, where we have given opportunity for people 

in the opposition to talk.  But have you given that to us, or to 

the people who didn't vote for you, and who never would vote 

for you again because of the kinds of things that you're doing? 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is exactly what the problem is.  And you, 

sir, are leading that kind of government.  Kicking in doors, 

allowing people who have . . . who in order to get nominated 

will buy the votes, buy the memberships.  That's what you're 

doing, sir.  And we think it's disgusting and deplorable. 

 

Truth often poses a threat to power.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

exactly what's happening here.  Truth is posing a threat to the 

power of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, because 

truth is what the people and the citizens of this province want 

to have, and you, sir, are not delivering it, neither through this 

Assembly, nor through the leadership in this Assembly.  You, 

sir, are acting in a disgusting, disparaging way.  And I think, 

sir, you should resign and apologize.  That's the reason why 

we're here discussing this.  And, Mr. Minister, I challenge you, 

I challenge you in 20 minutes to take and refute all of the 

arguments that are going to be made by members of this side of 

the Assembly for the role that you are taking in your despicable 

use of power. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before the committee is the motion 

by the Minister of Finance.  Is the committee ready for the 

question?  The question is: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $371,537,300 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- The second motion before the committee . . . the 

second question is the motion by the Minister of Finance: 

 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993, the sum of 

$371,537,300 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that the committee rise and that the Chairman report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:45 p.m. until 3:55 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Calvert 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Teichrob Johnson 

Shillington Trew 

Koskie Serby 

Anguish Roy 

Goulet Scott 

Atkinson Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Harper 

Penner Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Hagel Jess 

-- 30 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd  

-- 9 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and the resolutions read a first 

and second time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 86, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending March 31, 1993, be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, and under rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and third time. 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- I wish to inform the members that according 

to rule 12(3) this will be the first item on the agenda after 

orders of the day tomorrow. 

 

(1600) 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 71 -- An Act 

to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

second reading continuation on this Bill is extremely 

significant I think, in this time for Saskatchewan's history.  And 

it's something that deserves our full attention and for full 

consideration.  Albeit following the facade of democracy that 

we have experienced over the last three hours or two hours in 

this Assembly, it makes one wonder whether there is any point 

in the continuing on in this so-called democratic process.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill itself, Bill 71, 

indicates quite clearly again that this is a government that is 

bound and determined to take the bit in its mouth and continue 

on in its headlong rush to self-destruction as far as the NDP 

Party is concerned. 

 

We have witnessed it on repeated occasions, Mr. Speaker, this 

afternoon -- this attack on democracy, this total reversal of 

what the party apparently stands for and certainly what they 

stood for during the election and what they promised the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And when we take a look at Bill 71, 

Mr. Speaker, there's some damning evidence here that that 

group across the way is bound and determined once more to 

take the bit in its mouth and continue on in that headlong path 

of destruction. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this Bill purports to do exactly the 

opposite of what those folks across the way promised that they 

would do last fall, in October of 1991, where they promised 

unequivocally that they would do more with less; that they 

would spend more on health, on education, and some of the 

other priorities that they felt the people of Saskatchewan 

wanted and that they placed. 

 

And as we know and as their record will attest, the people 

believed them and the people supported them and the people 

voted for them.  And sad to say, sad for the people of 

Saskatchewan, they are now paying the price.  They are paying 

the price as is evidenced in Bill 71 --  Bill 71, An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly should be 

entering second reading on the debate on this Bill -- a Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, that is going to impose user fees.  Can you imagine 

that -- an NDP government, taking the bit in 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

its mouth, is bound to introduce user fees?  User fees for 

optometric services, user fees for chiropractic services, and 

certain unnamed services that I guess we will find out as the 

regulations are changed to accommodate this new Bill. 

 

When we take a look at the optometric services, when we take 

a look a the chiropractic services and how they are going to be 

impacted by this Act that is going to amend the medical 

insurance Act, we know that they are going to specifically 

impact upon chiropractors and optometrists.  We knew that 

before the Bill was tabled.  We knew that when we had one of 

the series of leaks in the budget, leaks of things that were to 

come.  And now we are finding out that all of these options are 

going to be imposed upon the people of Saskatchewan without 

consultation -- and I will repeat that -- without consultation. 

 

This is the government that said that we will be open, that we 

will consult.  But not only consult, Mr. Speaker, they promised 

that they would listen to the advice that the people of 

Saskatchewan would be giving them.  Well not only are they 

not acting on any advice the people are giving them, they are 

refusing to even give a means whereby people can express their 

opinions.  Public consultation did not, did not play any 

significant part in the development of this Act, of Bill 71. 

 

However there's one bright spot or one good thing about this 

Act because this Bill, Mr. Speaker, epitomizes, shows clearly, 

distinctly for all to see, what the NDP stand for, what are they 

about.  Along with the role that we've seen today, as my 

colleague has just expressing his opinion of the dictatorship 

role that they're playing, it also reveals to the people of 

Saskatchewan the height of deception and the height of 

hypocrisy of the NDP Party. 

 

Now those are pretty damning words for an individual to get up 

and characterize a party that has been part of the fabric of 

Saskatchewan for so many, many years.  They pre-dated by the 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation).  And when 

you take a look at what the CCF stood for and you take a look 

at Bill 71, which epitomizes what the current NDP 

administration stands for, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 

the comparison is very shallow, very hollow at least because, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are supposed to be the saviours of 

medicare.  They're supposed to be the saviours of medicare; 

that's a reputation that they have.  I don't know if it was 

particularly earned, but we'll grant it.  That's the reputation that 

they have. 

 

And what are they doing?  What are they doing?  They are 

disguising user fees by calling them something else -- user fees 

on the health care system.  And again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 

doing to the Saskatchewan people exactly what the NDP said 

they would never do. 

 

And therein lies the great irony.  Therein lies a great deal of 

disappointment in the people of Saskatchewan, in the NDP 

Party.  And I'm not saying that a great deal of disappointment 

only by supporters of the NDP, but all people of Saskatchewan 

are disappointed in the direction in which this is going. 

 

The NDP said over the last five, six years, utilization fees, 

user fees -- call them what you will -- this is abhorrent, you 

may not do that, you should not do that, you cannot do that, it 

is not right.  Mr. Speaker, what do we see in BIll 71?  We see 

user fees.  We see the beginning of a two-tiered health system: 

for them that's got and for them that hasn't.  Something that the 

party across the way always said they would never do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP in the past were always very, very 

high on consultation.  When they were in the election mode, 

they ran around promising to consult with everybody, and like I 

said before, not only consult but also to listen to what the 

people were telling them. 

 

And now as we have witnessed again this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, it's a sad and a sorry day when we find the 

government doing exactly that which they always said they 

would never do.  And therein again lies a great deal of 

disappointment as far as the people of Saskatchewan are 

concerned.  They expected something different from you folks.  

They expected something more.  And it would be laughable if 

it were not so devastating; the impact and the effect of your 

actions upon the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would ask you, I would ask you folks across the way, 

why are you so afraid to go to the people?  Why are you so 

afraid to meet them face to face in town hall meetings, in 

public hearings, where you would be accountable at at the local 

level, as a local MLA, in your seat with your people, the people 

that elected you, the people that put you here, the people that 

had trust and faith in you that you were going to do what you 

said you would do?  And you're doing exactly the opposite. 

 

Why is the Minister of Health . . . or why was the Minister of 

Health so reluctant to go out and to face health care 

professionals, the users of the system?  Why were they not 

consulted before such dramatic and -- yes, Mr. Speaker - 

_ Draconian measures were even contemplated, let alone put in 

effect?  The professionals were not even consulted.  They were 

not even consulted.  And the only reason they have had any 

input whatsoever is when we, as the official opposition, 

brought it to the awareness of the people of Saskatchewan 

some of the dirty deeds that were afoot in the ministry of 

Health. 

 

It's ironic, Mr. Speaker, that here we are discussing a Bill in 

this legislature, discussing user fees on the 30th year, on the 

30th anniversary of medicare.  The people of Saskatchewan 

sincerely and honestly believed and thought that the NDP were 

the only party that would protect, hold sacrosanct, medicare.  

And that party right now, Mr. Speaker, is destroying, is 

destroying the universality of that province . . . of this system 

in our province. 

 

The wellness model, based on the wellness model.  That seems 

to be the buzz word.  And I know that you're aware, Mr. 

Speaker, in the class-room situations, teachers are great ones 

for buzz words.  Well the political buzz words in the medical 

field these days seems to be the wellness model.  And I am 

highly suspect -- highly suspect -- of the wellness model 

forming the parameters of what our health care system is going 

to be in the future. 

 

I have no problem with the wellness model in itself. 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

There's good to be done in promoting healthly life-styles.  We 

had that in the Everyone Wins program when we were 

government.  And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, I don't have to 

remind you how the Minister of Health chided and ridiculed 

the amount of money that we were spending on the wellness 

program at that time as being an utter waste of money, that the 

money could be spent better elsewhere and else how.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, the irony of it is, when we turn to a Bill like we're 

discussing today, is that the total premise, the basis for the 

direction and the future of health care in this province, is based 

on the wellness model.  It's based on the wellness model. 

 

And I submit to you that the wellness model is based on one 

premise: to save money.  Again efficiencies of scale must be 

built into the health system.  Efficiencies must be improved.  

That's a given.  We have no problem with that. 

 

(1615) 

 

But if the entire premise is going to be we must save money 

and at the same time impact negatively on our Saskatchewan 

people -- all people, particularly rural people -- then it becomes 

questionable.  But, Mr. Speaker, it becomes even more 

questionable that when that bit is taken into the mouth of these 

people and they go off in a direction like this, it is so often 

totally counter-productive. 

 

And I'm going to do that here for the next few moments to 

show you folks that in your deficit-reduction mode, where the 

end justifies whatever means you use to attain it, you are not 

ultimately going to be saving money in the health care system.  

But you're going to be doing it at a great sacrifice to the people 

of Saskatchewan -- and for nought, for nought. 

 

The wellness model, the way you guys and gals are developing 

it, is not going to work in Saskatchewan.  It's not going to work 

particularly for rural Saskatchewan.  The only time that the 

wellness model will really work is if you are well.  But if 

you're a sick person out in rural Saskatchewan, it does not bode 

well for you. 

 

Thirtieth anniversary of medicare -- this is the year.  And this 

year is going to be remembered that the NDP has betrayed the 

medicare system.  This Bill, this actual Bill here is the one 

that's probably making John Diefenbaker turning over in his 

grave right now; that's not what he had intended.  And it's 

making Tommy spin in his grave, quite literally, because it's 

totally the antithesis of what this great province's medicare 

system was based upon. 

 

Now the people of Saskatchewan are enraged -- those who 

know -- though many of the people in Saskatchewan are not 

totally aware of the contents of this Bill.  They have not been 

impacted by the effects of that Bill, but those who know, those 

who have looked, those who have studied, are already angered 

by the betrayal that is inherent within this Bill.  Health care 

groups are angry.  They feel betrayed; they feel left out. 

 

And I know what I'm talking about, Mr. Speaker.  I have met 

with these groups.  I have sat down around their boardroom 

tables and talked to the groups, which they tell me is much, 

much more than the Minister of Health 

was willing to do.  And that's why these health care 

professionals are angry, they are enraged, and they do not 

intend to take it lightly or sitting down. 

 

This Bill unfairly singles out the optometrists and the 

chiropractors.  Why is the Minister of Health singling out a 

small group of health care professionals in our province?  Why 

is she doing that?  These are smaller groups.  These are groups 

that are finding it extremely difficult to fight back.  And yet the 

Minister of Health has singled them out as target groups.  But I 

believe that, the same as with the diabetics, the Minister of 

Health has underestimated, has underestimated the numbers of 

people that are going to be affected by this action. 

 

Now if the Minister of Health was truly dedicated to creating a 

wellness model or a blueprint of our province, she would not 

impose a Bill like this on the public.  She would not be singling 

out small groups in our province like the chiropractors, like the 

optometrists -- medical professionals who are actually 

delivering low-cost, high-quality services for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Low-cost preventative measures -- and that's important, Mr. 

Speaker -- low-cost preventative measures.  It has the potential 

of fitting in well with the wellness model that she is trying to 

implement in this province.  It has the potential of fitting in 

well.  But not the way, not the route, and not the direction in 

which the Minister of Health is steering this wellness model. 

 

Now prior to the leak, prior to the budget leak, chiropractors 

presented a proposal to the government -- a proposal that 

clearly outlined the unjustness of singling out chiropractors for 

any undue attention.  Because, Mr. Speaker, as you're well 

aware and people of this province are well aware, chiropractic 

treatment is effective.  It is effective.  It's a non-invasive -- 

doesn't do anything to your body -- it's a non-invasive, 

drug-free treatment.  There are no additional health costs for 

chiropractic patients that are spiralled into the system -- no 

additional costs.  There are no additional costs for medication 

or hospitals or any other kind of specialist activities and 

services. 

 

Chiropractic services are viewed as one of the most 

cost-effective methods for treating society's most costly 

medical complaint, and that's low back pain.  I don't think 

there's any member in our family, in all of our families, that 

hasn't at one time or another been affected by it.  And these 

treatments, cost-effective treatments, prevent higher medical 

costs at a later date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that has to be asked is: how 

does imposing user fees on these services fit into the minister's 

wellness model?  How would you include user fees in a system 

that has a potential to be cost-effective, deliver a good quality 

service, and now you turn around and you put a user fee on?  

Doesn't make sense.  And yet that's exactly what Bill 71 

proposes to do.  Exactly.  That basic fact relates directly to the 

principle of the Bill. 

 

I'm going to just walk you through a brief example.  Take 

Yorkton.  Take Yorkton.  What impact does this Bill have the 

potential for doing to the people and the citizens around 

Yorkton?  It's a rural area, and this entire area has 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

one physiotherapist located in the hospital -- one 

physiotherapist.  I know from experience, physiotherapists in 

Saskatchewan are relatively rare.  They are difficult to attract. 

 

Well this physiotherapist in Yorkton spends each and every day 

treating in-patient clients.  She has . . . this physiotherapist has 

no opportunity to treat the community at large.  In many 

instances chiropractic services are used as an alternative to 

physiotherapists. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the simple bottom line in what I'm saying 

about this example in Yorkton is, if this Bill, if Bill 71 is 

passed the way it is right now, the citizens of Yorkton are no 

longer going to have equal access to that type of a treatment. 

 

The community, particularly the rural component of that 

community at large, is going to suffer.  Clients no longer will 

have the option of going to and being covered by chiropractors.  

They are going to turn their attention to the physiotherapists.  

That's the one that they're going to go visit. 

 

Physiotherapists whose services are billed by whom?  They're 

billed directly to the government at high cost to the government 

-- much higher cost to the provincial coffers and the provincial 

taxpayer. 

 

So the situation that you have is that the people who use 

chiropractors will now let their condition, since they're going to 

have to be paying, they're going to let their conditions go 

untreated.  And certainly, the potential is there for their health 

to suffer as well, and/or they will be forced to wait to see their 

physiotherapist.  And/or, they will have to use and be 

prescribed drugs to live with their ailments, many times could 

have been prevented by going to the effective use of 

chiropractors. 

 

So I ask you again, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the Minister of 

Health: how does this fit into your wellness model?  How is 

this, I ask again, cost effective?  How are you going to save 

money? 

 

Because after all, that's the only thing that is leading your 

wellness model -- budget driven, deficit-reduction driven -- on 

the backs of the Saskatchewan people, and the backs of the 

Saskatchewan people are hurting, and they need chiropractors.  

And yet you are putting in . . . developing a vicious spin into 

this entire system. 

 

So how does reducing public access to chiropractic services fit 

into the wellness model?  Can someone answer that for me . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'll be asking the Minister of Health.  

I have been very patiently and slowly and carefully leading you 

folks across the way through an actual example of what is 

going to be happening here.  And it doesn't make sense to me.  

I'm just wondering if it makes sense to you.  It's going to be 

budget driven; we're going to reduce this deficit, we don't care 

how. 

 

But not only are you hurting the health of the people of 

Saskatchewan, you're not saving any money  You'll probably 

wind up costing more money.  And that's something that I can't 

understand. 

And I will be asking the Minister of Health in Estimates 

afterward if she can lead me through examples that will prove 

that there will be cost effectiveness as well as maintaining the 

integrity of the health system that we have now.  The only link 

seems to be, the only link seems to be that if it hits or hurts 

rural Saskatchewan, then it fits into the wellness model. 

 

That's a hard thing to say.  But when you start taking a look at 

all the areas that have been impacting negatively on rural 

Saskatchewan -- not only in health, but economic, agricultural, 

jobs, in rural Saskatchewan -- the pattern is developing.  And 

this Bill 71 has its own niche in that pattern and that mosaic 

that is being developed. 

 

And the Minister of Health is playing her role and her part in 

that model. And I've been spending some time with the 

chiropractors.  This Bill 71 also impacts another group that was 

not consulted, that did not know what was going on, that did 

not have a role to play in the development of this wellness 

model.  The consultative process once more seems to have 

broken down. 

 

I want to take a look at the optometric services and how the 

user-fees system pits rural Saskatchewan against urban 

Saskatchewan.  And it's happening.  That is happening. 

 

I was on the open-line show a couple of weeks ago talking 

about these kinds of things.  And a caller came in and said, so 

what?  Close all those rural hospitals. We don't need those rural 

hospitals.  Madam, where do you come from, I asked.  

Saskatoon.  How far do you live from a base hospital?  And I 

think that answers the question right there.  That answers the 

question right there. 

 

And that is why a system like this does nothing to unify and to 

salve the emotions and the feelings between rural and urban 

Saskatchewan.  It actually pits one against the other. 

 

In larger urban centres, once more something very similar to 

the example that I gave you with chiropractors and 

physiotherapists, the same analogy can be made between the 

optometrists and the ophthalmological care that is given.  

Ophthalmological services are fully covered by medicare, Mr. 

Speaker.  They are fully covered by medicare. 

 

(1630) 

 

In most rural centres, however, only optometric care now 

exists.  Ophthalmology is not there.  Optometry is.  Urban 

patients with decreasing vision will still be able to have full 

treatment, will still have that access to full treatment, whereas 

rural patients will have to either now pay for an examination or 

travel to the city to receive free opthalmological care.  So they 

are going to have that option.  It pits once more rural against 

urban.  The rural folks can still go see their optometrist, yes, 

but they're going to have to pay for it.  But they have the 

choice, I guess, of going to the opthalmologist in the city and 

getting free care, and then paying for the expense of going 

there. 

 

How is it cost-effective, I ask the Minister of Health again, 



August 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

to allow doctors to refer patients to a more expensive 

opthalmologist for treatment, but not allow referrals to 

optometrists?  How is that cost-effective?  I have no answer to 

that yet.  Why will the government allow referrals to that 

profession when many services are offered by optometrists -- 

optometrists who are more accessible to all residents of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is unfair to the health care 

professionals who provide these services, but it's also unfair to 

those who receive these services.  This Bill is essentially 

creating two types of patients, not only for chiropractic services 

but for optometric services as well.  And as I said before, 

essentially it's creating a two-tiered system.  And the two 

classes that are being created are those on welfare, who are 

fully covered, and then everyone else.  Talk about unfairness. 

 

The Minister of Health is also forcing chiropractors to absorb 

costs for those on welfare.  Chiropractors are receiving $13.10 

to treat a welfare client and $17.30 to treat everyone else.  Now 

that begs the question:  why are patients on welfare worth less 

when they have the same aches and pains as those people who 

are not on welfare?  What's the rationale, I want to ask the 

Minister of Health?  This is a terrible principle, Mr. Speaker, to 

base a health care system on. 

 

Where's the universality?  Where's the quality of treatment?  

Where's the equal access?  Where's the equality of access?  

These are questions that have to be asked.  These are questions 

that are going to have to be answered.  And as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, chiropractors presented alternatives to the government 

and the optometrists tried to give alternatives to the 

government. 

 

When they learned from the official opposition what the NDP 

government was going to do, they came up with alternatives.  

They presented alternatives.  But did the Minister of Health, 

not having consulted in the first place, listen to them?  Did she 

hear them?  Well she heard them, but she didn't listen to them.  

She rejected them outright.  The Minister of Health essentially 

was saying, it's my way or the highway, be it pot-holes or be it 

gravel. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is attempting to pit 

professionals of this province against each other.  And I want 

to get into that in quite some detail during the Committee of the 

Whole, Mr. Speaker.  During the Committee of the Whole I 

will be asking for answers on why the optometrists are allowed 

to overbill on the Minister of Health's advice and direction, I 

might add, while chiropractors have been instructed not to, 

because the legislation isn't in place yet.  This unequal 

treatment, this unequal treatment is creating two classes of 

professionals, Mr. Speaker, perhaps to coexist with the two 

classes of patients being created by this same piece of 

legislation.  And that's ironic.  That's ironic.  Divide and 

conquer, as my colleague was saying before. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it will not work.  I don't believe that the 

Minister of Health is going to succeed.  The professionals are 

not going to fall for it.  The people of Saskatchewan are not 

going to accept it and they're not going to fall for it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other grave 

concerns.  For example, the ramifications of this Bill on the 

public because insurance agencies will not cover people for the 

difference of what the government pays.  This is the total cost; 

here's what the government pays.  Who pays the difference?  

And right now insurance agencies are not looking upon that at 

all favourably, picking up that difference.  I know Blue Cross 

isn't going to touch it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, further I have grave concerns as to why the 

Minister of Health secretly put an August 10 deadline on this 

Bill.  She said it will pass by August 10.  I don't think it's up to 

the minister to decide when legislation passes.  That's what the 

legislature is for.  At least that's what the legislature has been 

for up until today. 

 

But of course, what direction this government is going to take 

from here on in, to ramrod its legislation through unilaterally, 

remains to be seen.  But, Mr. Speaker, the contents of this Bill, 

the contents of Bill 71, do not promote wellness.  They do not 

promote wellness because what they do promote is personal 

financial restrictions -- these restrictions which will prevent 

individuals from getting preventative treatment.  It's going to 

do exactly and precisely the opposite of what the minister 

intends, both in terms of cost saving and in terms of effective 

treatment. 

 

I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the health care professionals 

should have been consulted.  They should have been consulted 

before the cat was out of the bag, and then whoops, okay, now 

we'll consult.  They should have been allowed, the health care 

professionals should have been allowed, to assist the 

government in developing a strategy which better fits a 

wellness model. 

 

Unilaterally, and I say to members opposite again, unilaterally 

imposing user fees without looking at its alternatives is wrong.  

It's wrong.  Unilaterally imposing fees affecting the entire 

population without consultation or public hearings is wrong.  It 

is wrong. 

 

The wellness model should ensure that health care services are 

available and accessible to all residents of Saskatchewan -- all 

residents, urban, rural -- with no distinction.  That's what health 

care is based on.  That's what it used to be based on. 

 

And if this Minister of Health is allowed to have her way, that 

will be a thing of the past because we will have the uniqueness 

of having a two-tiered system, a two-tiered system of 

professionals and a two-tiered system of those requiring 

services. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, should be taken to the people.  It should 

have access to public hearings -- not just a bunch of happy 

bureaucrats running around doing the bidding of the minister, 

but true public hearings. 

 

And I know the member from Shaunavon wishes -- not the 

former member, the member of Shaunavon now -- wishes that 

the Minister of Health had consulted before embarking on 

unilateral decisions that are going to have tremendous impacts 

on towns like Eastend, for example, where 500 people came 

out the other night to protest vocally, loudly, vehemently, 

against the kind of reaction 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard August 3, 1992 

that she was creating by not consulting but coming in there 

after the deed has been done, forcing unilaterally the will of the 

NDP misguided new health policies upon the people of 

Saskatchewan as an after effect.  And then when the cat is out 

of the bag, going forward and saying, well here, this is what we 

planned to do; please give it our blessing . . . or your blessing.  

It won't work that way.  It won't work that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are so many unanswered questions, there are so many 

problems, there are so many people that want their concerns 

expressed in this House, that when the Bill comes to 

committee, Mr. Speaker, we will be addressing many, many of 

those issues. 

 

And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 

this. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:39 p.m. until 4:49 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 7 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Wiens Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet Crofford 

Atkinson Stanger 

Kowalsky Harper 

Carson Kluz 

Penner Carlson 

 

 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Jess 

Hagel  

-- 31 

The division bells rang from 4:54 p.m. until 5:24 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Hagel 

Wiens Calvert 

Simard Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Anguish Roy 

Goulet Scott 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Kluz 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Jess 

--30 

Nays 

Martens  

--1 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 


