




















































Hansard: May 06, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 211 

 May 6, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's nice to be 

recognized by you.  I would like to introduce to you, and 

through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 49 

grade 8 pupils from Wildwood School in Saskatoon — a 

wonderful school and a wonderful group of pupils. 

 

They are accompanied by Donna Hrytzak, the vice-principal, 

and their teachers, Corinne Morton and Joel Nostbakken.  And 

I ask the members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce a group of civil servants who are 

touring the legislature today -- and they're sitting in your 

gallery -- from Social Services, Justice, Highways, and 

Community Services.  I understand they're here to visit the 

legislature and to sit in on question period this afternoon. And I 

ask you to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, a group of eight SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) students.  This group of 

students are enrolled in the English as a second language 

program here in Regina.  I know that they will enjoy question 

period and the proceedings in the Assembly. 

 

I know that all members will join with me in welcoming them 

here to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

make some introductions this afternoon.  I notice that in the 

east gallery there's an old teaching partner of mine, Loretta 

Bell.  Welcome here, Loretta, and also 62 students who have 

accompanied her or she's accompanying them -- I'm not quite 

sure which is which -- from the town of Martensville, my home 

town where I have my constituency office, and I'm looking 

forward to meeting with them later on in the course of the 

afternoon.  I ask all members to please help me welcome the 

students and teachers and bus driver from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to join 

with my colleague from Regina Elphinstone in greeting the 

eight adult students from SIAST, and I'll be meeting with them 

at 2:30 for pictures and then join with them in the members' 

dining lounge to have discussion and any questions they might 

have of me about the Assembly and their tour. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Budget Provisions 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today in the media 

we see more of Saskatchewan's best kept secret splashed in the 

media.  Mr. Speaker, it was only a few short months ago that 

the NDP (New Democratic Party), the now government of the 

province, was very vociferous in its opposition to the former 

government saying that they would have to lay off people in 

the public service in order to be reasonable in their deficit 

reduction plan. 

 

Now I am informed, Mr. Speaker, that certain departments are 

even seconding extra secretarial work in order to issue pink 

slips to government employees, some of which have already 

received them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is: do either the real Minister of 

Finance or the toy minister of Finance . . . whichever one 

would like to take the responsibility for resigning should any of 

these leaks, Mr. Speaker, show up in tomorrow's budget?  

Which one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the budget 

will be presented.  I will be honoured to rise in this place and 

present the first budget of the New Democratic Party 

government.  At that time the House and the public of 

Saskatchewan will know that we have charted the right 

direction to put this province back on the financial path that it 

needs to be on. 

 

And we'll be beginning the correction of the waste and the 

mismanagement and the patronage and all of those things that 

were brought about by the former government, many of the 

members of which are seated over there, so that we can begin 

to get the province's finances back into a position of integrity 

and start rebuilding Saskatchewan for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Revitalization of Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Rural Development, a position, I suppose, will 

become extinct after tomorrow's budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, you and your NDP colleagues have promised that 

assistance for agriculture in rural Saskatchewan is the number 

one priority of your new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Even in the throne speech, the Premier from 

Saskatoon said that he wants to rekindle the Saskatchewan 

spirit of community and co-operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Can the minister explain to this Assembly and 

to thousands of people who count on the program's counselling 

and assistance and extension services provided by the 

Department of Rural Development how this government 

intends on achieving this lofty goal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 

the member opposite for the concern for my position here at the 

cabinet table.  We indeed do intend to revitalize rural 

Saskatchewan.  I think you will see the seeds of that in the 

budget that's presented here tomorrow.  And we will revitalize 

rural Saskatchewan.  We will lead rural Saskatchewan into a 

new future.  We will not go back to the past, but we will 

revitalize and rebuild rural Saskatchewan as we will rebuild all 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

already the ground is becoming very dry and the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) program has been gutted and 

forced upon farmers and you have failed in your promise to 

deliver more agricultural assistance.  You have increased input 

costs or utility rates; you've increased all kinds of rates and 

cancelled the rural gasification program.  You've decreased the 

funding to the RMs (rural municipality); just to name a few of 

the programs of your kind of help for rural Saskatchewan.  Can 

you articulate to this Assembly your vision for the future of 

rural Saskatchewan given the already dismal record? 

 

Can you, Mr. Minister, how you will accomplish your goals to 

promote and preserve our rural way of life through your 

department, the Department of Rural Development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, clearly we have made 

some tough decisions which were forced upon us by the legacy 

which we were left. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Programs in rural Saskatchewan 

are going to have to be done as programs in all of 

Saskatchewan are going to have to be done, to spend our 

money smarter and to get more bang for our buck and not to 

spend money wastefully as we have in the past.  And that is 

part of the plan. 

 

And we will call on the people of rural Saskatchewan to rebuild 

themselves and they well know that government alone cannot 

rebuild rural Saskatchewan.  And we refer to the member's 

sentiment of co-operation, and that's how we will rebuild rural 

Saskatchewan -- with the co-operation of rural people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, it is quite apparent that 

your government is bent on abandoning the residents of rural 

Saskatchewan, and you refuse to do your job and defend them 

as the minister.  It is your job as the Minister of Rural 

Development to defend the people of rural Saskatchewan even 

against your own colleagues.  It is your job to do that. 

 

I have a new question for the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, two months ago your government announced that 

there would be 7.4 per cent cut-backs to RMs in revenue 

sharing and other programs for this year and some more for 

next year.  Now the RMs swallowed your bitter medicine and 

budgeted for the decrease, using the same criteria and formula 

as was used last year.  However the RMs are now receiving 

cheques from your government that have been cut, for 

example, 30 per cent to the RM of Carmichael and 44 per cent 

to the RM of Star City.  Every RM I have talked to seems to 

have a different figure. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you explain to the RMs and to this 

Assembly how your new cut-back formula works? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll be glad to explain 

how the formula works.  I don't know if I have time to do the 

whole formula here today.  There's a very complicated formula 

which involves 27 . . . 24, I think, different factors which is 

used to calculate RM grants.  And so while there was a 7.4 per 

cent cut in total, that does not mean exactly that amount to each 

RM.  And therefore there will be some variation between RMs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It had, Mr. Speaker, a nice start there.  I 

almost thought we were going to find out what was going on.  

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the minister could in fact 

provide this information for the municipalities.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, my own municipality has an administrator that 

phoned in and asked for the information.  She was told it was 

too complicated to explain on the telephone and that she would 

receive a letter sometime later.  I have not seen that letter and 

neither has she. 

 

So I ask the minister again: will you, Mr. Minister, within this 

next week, provide for the people of Saskatchewan this kind of 

information so that we know what you're trying to do to us out 

in the country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat, the formula 

is one that was used in the past.  It is also . . . was one that was 

developed with the consultation with the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and it is a 

complicated formula and certainly it is not a secret and can be 

released to anybody that wants to know it.  It's public 

knowledge and certainly you can have it. 

 

Government Appointments 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

know that the NDP won the provincial election based on many 

promises, promises that quickly became transparent as glass.  

And allow me to be a little more specific, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would like to address a question to the member from 

Riversdale, the Premier.  The member from Riversdale stated 

the following on October 3, 1991.  On that date he stated, and I 

quote:  No more business of getting into the civil service 

because you pack a political card or access to government 

because you lack a particular political card, and I am absolutely 

firm on that at my stage in my political career. 

 

How, Mr. Premier, can you justify appointing Ted Boyle, a 

former NDP employee, as the new manager of corporate 

relations for Saskatchewan Government Insurance; Terry 

Bekolay, former president of the NDP party, as a provincial 

court judge; Terry Stevens, former premier of the NDP 

executive, as the new acting executive director of occupational 

health and safety?  Mr. Premier, how can you justify these 

blatant political patronage appointments after you promised to 

eliminate that very thing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not familiar with some of the 

appointments that my friend opposite asked about, but I want to 

speak particularly to the one concerning Terry Bekolay who 

was sworn in as a judge of the Provincial Court last Friday.  I 

was present at the ceremony as were senior members of the 

Prince Albert bar -- none of which I could identify as NDP 

supporters -- who all were enthusiastic about the support . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- . . . enthusiastic about the appointment 

of Judge Bekolay because he is a highly qualified person.  

Provincial Court judges are only appointed if they receive the 

approval of the Judicial Council of Saskatchewan.  The Judicial 

Council of Saskatchewan is made up of the three chief justices 

of the three Saskatchewan courts, plus the president of the law 

society plus Mr. John Archer plus, at the time of Mr. Bekolay's 

application, Mr. Gary Semenchuck -- who will be known to 

members opposite.  They approved his appointment and gave 

him an exceptionally high rating.  And we were pleased to 

follow their recommendation in the appointment of Judge 

Bekolay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you are now the government of this 

province.  And I ask you if you can give that answer with an 

honest expression on your face.  And, Mr. Minister, your 

Premier during the election campaign promised to do away 

with political patronage. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, your Premier made the same promise that 

I just quoted from in regard to government boards and 

agencies.  And I quote the Premier, Mr. Minister:  My general 

proposition is that partisan political people, party people, and 

defeated MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

candidates ought not to serve on boards.  They ought not to 

serve because they give the board the wrong perception.  That's 

the objective.  If we 

don't succeed in it and continue to appoint party hacks, even 

fewer, then I've gotten nowhere. 

 

In light of these comments by your leader, Mr. Minister, can 

you explain the appointment of Debbie Packet, the current 

NDP constituency president from Estevan, to the Saskatchewan 

energy board, and the appointment of Lorne Johnston -- Lorne 

Johnston, a defeated NDP candidate -- to the STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) board of directors?  

And will you admit that possibly your Premier has failed 

miserably to carry out his promise to eliminate patronage and 

that you have indeed gotten nowhere? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when you get 53 per 

cent of the votes cast in an election, it's a little hard to avoid 

appointing NDP supporters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- What we have tried to do throughout, in 

the case of Judge Bekolay and everyone else, is to appoint 

people who are competent to the position to which they're 

appointed.  We do not inquire what their political affiliations 

are.  We look for qualified people.  We look for people who are 

able to do the job. 

 

Now may I say with all respect that that stands in stark contrast 

to the appointing policies in this government over the last nine 

and a half years.  We are trying in every case to appoint people 

to boards and to positions who can do the job and who are 

qualified to do the job and have the experience to do the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, isn't it possible that you received 53 

per cent of the votes on October 21 simply because the Premier 

made these promises prior to election day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And isn't it even true, Mr. Minister, that maybe 

you don't have the 53 per cent of the votes you had on election 

day today?  We'll find out tomorrow and following tomorrow's 

budget where your percentage stands. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify the millions of dollars 

wasted every year on patronage?  You said that . . . the Premier 

said that back in 1990.  And in 1991 during the election 

campaign he stuck to his guns and promised to eliminate this 

very thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, in February your government fired Ray Fieber, a 

long-time SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) employee.  You fired Mr. Fieber, a non-political, 

long-term serving individual, and replaced him with Mr. 

Wawryk, a one-time aide to NDP cabinet minister.  Mr. 

Minister, how can you justify firing a non-political, long-term 

civil servant and replacing him with a blatant patronage 

appointment? 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of 

the circumstances surrounding the particular case cited by the 

hon. member.  But, Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of nerve for 

somebody from that side of the House to be lecturing us about 

patronage appointments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I repeat, we are . . . we have committed 

our . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I believe that the member for 

Moosomin had absolutely no interruption when he asked his 

question, and I wish the members would do exactly the same 

thing and let the minister answer the question.  Let him answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, we have committed ourself 

to the appointment of qualified people and we have committed 

ourself to the principle that we will not be making patronage 

appointments, and we have not.  In all of the appointments to 

all of our boards and commissions, we have tried to appoint 

qualified people.  We have tried to maintain a gender balance 

whenever that was possible.  We have tried to ensure that a 

reasonable percentage of aboriginal people are appointed on 

these boards.  If some of them happen to be NDP supporters, 

we can't help that.  Fifty-three per cent of the people of this 

province passed judgement on your government. 

 

One of the reasons they passed judgement on your government 

in the way they did was because of your record with respect to 

patronage.  Another reason why they voted against your 

government was the fact that you've left the province in the 

kind of financial mess that it's in with a $15 billion debt 

hanging around our neck. 

 

But on the question of patronage, it is passing strange that 

somebody from that side of the House would have enough 

nerve to lecture us on the subject of patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the minister: Mr. 

Minister, I find it interesting that as a minister of the Crown 

that you would continue to look back at a former government's 

record and continue to put all your emphasis on a former 

government's record.  I find it interesting that you would also 

find it difficult to know of the appointments, whether they've 

been made or not, when they've been splashed across our local 

newspapers for the past number of months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question here is not the fact of what happened 

prior to or regardless of what government.  The question is the 

promises made by this government, the fact that they were 

elected on October 21 based on a promise to eliminate 

patronage, to be open and honest.  And, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister, we see every day in the Leader-Post government 

advertisements for senior political executives -- each and every 

day.  These advertisements don't come cheap, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, why are you wasting the taxpayers' money on 

advertising these positions when the positions are being filled 

by individuals like the Jack Messers, like the Carole Bryants, 

like the Donald Chings, the former law partner?  Why are you 

wasting money on advertising government positions when they 

have already been filled or you've planned to fill them with 

NDP partisans? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, that's utter nonsense, and 

the member knows it.  That's utter nonsense, and the member 

knows it.  And I can certainly understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite, the members opposite, don't want us to be 

looking backwards.  If I were them I wouldn't want to be 

looking backwards either. 

 

Their record, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question of 

patronage appointment and political hirings are well known to 

everybody in this province.  And we will not be lectured to by 

the likes of them.  They have no moral standing to be making 

these charges in this legislature. 

 

I repeat, this government is committed to a process of hiring 

and a process of appointment that is not political.  We will be 

making our appointments as we have so far, as we will 

continue to do in the future, on the basis of appointing qualified 

people who can do the job and do it in the best interests of all 

of the people of Saskatchewan, not in the best interests of their 

political friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to reiterate again that the 

question that is being raised today is the fact that the people of 

this province spoke on October 21 based on promises made by 

that government.  The people spoke out on the fact that they 

believed, honestly believed that the government opposite 

would not enter into political patronage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can't hide behind the fact that many of the 

appointments made were well known activists in the NDP 

Party.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, today we also see the headline in 

the Leader-Post: "Walters sues crop board."  Today we see that 

Melville mayor Jim Walters has launched a legal action against 

you for firing him for political reasons. 

 

Mr. Minister, don't embarrass yourself by saying it wasn't 

political.  The people in Melville don't believe it wasn't 

political.  They believe in fact that there was politics involved. 

 

After all, Mr. Minister, we look at the firing of Mr. Walters, 

and just two days prior to his firing, who was appointed to the 

chairman of the board of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance? -- 

none other than the NDP constituency president, Mike Halyk.  

Melville doesn't believe you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many more legal suits like this one are going 

to be filed against you and your government for wrongful 

dismissal and how much will this cost the taxpayers of the 

province of Saskatchewan? 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, what does the hon. 

member expect me to say with respect to the situation in 

Melville?  The member himself says that an action has been 

started.  And he knows when he puts that question that we're 

not able to answer it because we're not able to discuss a matter 

that's before the court.  So that is not a fair question to be 

asking at this stage.  That's something that we'll answer for in 

court and we're not the least bit shy about doing that. 

 

Now you mention the case of Jack Messer and let's just talk 

about Jack Messer.  Sure everybody knows that Jack Messer 

was politically active, but does anybody in this province doubt 

Jack Messer's competence to run the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation?  No way.  No way.  No way. 

 

And a very significant selection committee selected the name 

of Jack Messer from a national competition -- a national 

competition.  And if he's sitting there in his place calling the 

members of that selection committee dishonest, then he better 

walk outside the door of this House and make that allegation. 

 

In the meantime, we say that Jack Messer was the most 

qualified, most competent person for that job, and the fact that 

he had NDP connections does not disentitle him to that job.  

Nor are we prepared to disentitle the 53 per cent of the 

Saskatchewan population that supported the NDP in the last 

election from being appointed to government boards or to 

government jobs.  They are entitled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, a final question to the minister.  I 

find it interesting that he would stand here defending Mr. 

Messer.  In fact I'm not a little bit unsure that he isn't just a 

little embarrassed by some of the things that have happened 

recently. 

 

First of all, taking $27,000 of taxpayers' money to renovate a 

bathroom.  Secondly, driving around with Lexus vehicles . . . A 

person wonders whether or not they maybe were building a 

ramp and they'd be building a garage up on the third floor for 

that vehicle. 

 

Mr. Minister, the question before you today is the fact are you 

indeed going to honour the promises and the commitments you 

made to the people of this province prior to the election, 

promises which the Premier said that he would never enter 

into; that indeed, this province would be open; that people 

regardless of politics would be able to apply for jobs fairly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Now let's just talk, let's just talk about 

the car, shall we?  Let's just talk about Mr. Messer's car.  Mr. 

Messer's car was arranged for under policies which had been 

established under the previous government and continued in 

force at that time.  It was your policy.  It was your policies.  

His arrangement with respect to that car was the same kind of 

arrangements that were allowed under the guidelines that the 

former government established.  Now we . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I wonder if the member from 

Wilkie has a question that he wants to put before the House?  If 

you have I will recognize him when he stands.  I've asked him 

once before not to interrupt, and I ask him again to please quit 

interrupting when the minister is trying to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- And I would remind the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that anything that may have happened 

as he has related, relating to Jack Messer, absolutely pales, 

absolutely vanishes in the face of $1.3 million trust fund 

established by Mr. Messer's predecessor -- absolutely pales. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister who appears to be in charge of patronage, the 

Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, will you give this House the 

assurance today that the hundreds of pink slips being issued by 

your Minister of Finance, not one single one will be back-filled 

by NDP partisans in the months to come.  Will you give that 

assurance today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I give the member that assurance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Telephone Rate Increases 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

minister responsible for telephones.  Madam Minister, in 

January you announced in a news release rate increases for 

telephones and you said they were 4 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, as 

it turns out this was not the accurate figure.  I have a telephone 

bill here from a rural medical practitioner and his telephone 

rates went up in three different categories by 47 per cent, 25 

per cent, and 22 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, will you admit that you misled the people of 

Saskatchewan about the true magnitude of these rate increases?  

The evidence is already in the people of Saskatchewan's 

pockets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to answer the 

hon. member's question by referring to the rate action that was 

taken on January 31, or announced on January 31, effective 

March 1.  It was a large range of changes in telephone charges 

necessitated by the competitive aspect of the CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) in 

competition in long distance rates.  So long distance rates 

interprovincially went down substantially.  In-province rates, 

that is calls of over 100 miles, went down substantially. 

 

In attempting to communicate the rate action to the subscribers 

of Saskatchewan, we took what would be a typical profile of an 

average mix on an average telephone bill.  And this is a very 

difficult thing to do because of the 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

nature of our subscribers, where some may use no long 

distance whatsoever; some may use a great deal.  And the 

typical profile produced an average increase of between 3 and 

5 per cent.  And that's what was communicated to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At no time did we represent it as being an overall increase.  In 

fact we pointed out that many people would experience a drop 

in their rates if they were a substantial long-distance user. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the minister has answered 

sufficiently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I beg leave of the Assembly to make a 

brief statement respecting Battered Women's Awareness Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

STATEMENT 

 

Battered Women's Awareness Week 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak on a matter of grave importance to the people of this 

province.  My colleague, the Minister of Social Services, has 

declared May 3 to 9 as Battered Women's Awareness Week.  I 

wish to add my voice to those from the Provincial Association 

of Transition Houses and its member agencies who are using 

this week to raise public awareness about wife abuse, and to 

encourage strategies to work toward the eradication of violence 

in our society. 

 

According to Linda McLeod, a leading authority on wife 

battering, wife battering results in the loss of dignity, control, 

and safety.  It is accompanied by feelings of powerlessness and 

entrapment.  It is experienced by women who are the direct 

victims of ongoing or repeated physical, psychological, 

economic, sexual, and/or verbal violence, or who are subjected 

to persistent threats or the witnessing of such violence against 

their children, other relatives, friends, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those who have researched the historical role of women in 

society tell us that wife battering or wife assault has been a 

common practice for many centuries.  In fact it has only been 

in the last hundred years that laws permitting wife battering 

have been repealed. 

 

None the less the practice of wife battering would seem to be 

as common today as it ever was.  Indeed the statistics would 

suggest that it is even more prevalent.  One in ten women, for 

example, is the victim of violence.  This means that 36,000 

Saskatchewan women are abused by their husbands or male 

partners. 

 

Almost one in five Canadian men admits to using violence 

against his wife, and on average during 1990 in Canada two 

women were killed by their partners every week.  Almost half 

of wife assaults result in physical injuries to the woman.  In one 

out of four cases of wife assault, the children of the assaulted 

women are also hurt 

or threatened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is estimated by the first time a police report on wife assault is 

made, a woman has already experienced on average assault on 

35 occasions. 

 

Despite the facts, Mr. Speaker, wife battering is still not taken 

seriously by everyone.  The nature of wife battering runs the 

full spectrum of violent, degrading, and abusive actions and 

words.  The long-term psychological effects are often 

destructive of a woman's self-esteem.  The repeated violence 

often fosters feelings of self-hatred leading to withdrawal or the 

overuse of alcohol and drugs.  Forty per cent of battered 

women report using drugs to sleep and  74 per cent of battered 

women report using drugs to alleviate anxiety. 

 

There are short-term effects as well, Mr. Speaker -- bruises, 

cuts, burns, and broken bones.  Indeed, wife battering can even 

lead to death.  About 40 per cent of homicides in Canada 

involve a domestic relationship.  Most commonly men kill their 

legal or common-law wives.  Statistics Canada reports that 79 

per cent of spousal homicide victims are women.  The picture 

is not pretty and the violence must stop. 

 

This week those who work with battered women in transition 

houses and other programs will be undertaking a public 

education campaign.  Their goal is to give the public a greater 

awareness of this significant societal problem.  I wish to add 

my voice to theirs in saying that, as minister responsible for the 

Status of Women, I am committed to achieving equity for 

women in all aspects of life. 

 

I believe that as a society, we must value the inherent worth of 

every individual in society and expect each person to treat 

every other person with respect.  Until that day we will all pay 

the costs of society's tolerance of violence.  We pay in health 

care costs and social services, in court system costs and an 

increased use of the penal system, not to mention the human 

tragedy involved. 

 

Let us all join together this week, Mr. Speaker, in working to 

eliminate violence from our society.  It will take a concerted 

effort by both men and women, by our teachers, our judges, 

police officers, churches, social workers, mental health 

workers, governments and many others in society acting 

together to eliminate wife battering. 

 

Let me assure the people of the province that this government 

recognizes that it has a role to play in eliminating this form of 

violence.  We look forward to the report of the Canadian panel 

on violence against women.  And I want to personally thank 

each and every person who shared their experiences, expertise, 

and recommendations with that panel. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I wish to close by 

once again recognizing the many organizations and individuals 

who are working to eliminate violence in our society and to 

help all of those who are affected by it.  Working together we 

can achieve the goal of zero tolerance of violence in our 

society.  Thank you. 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

official opposition I would like to add a few words of my own 

and our own to the suggestions that the Hon. Minister of Health 

has just made.  And I would like to start off by commending 

the minister and commending the government in pursuing this 

avenue, and also commending the many women and the many 

workers in PATHS and so on, Provincial Association of 

Transition Houses Saskatchewan, that are involved in this kind 

of thing. 

 

And having been the minister of Social Services for the last 

couple of years, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, and members 

opposite, and indeed the viewing public, that violence is part of 

our society, unfortunately.  And I feel that the only way in 

which we as a society can come to grasp with this everyday 

violence is to do away with the cyclical nature of it.  Because, 

Mr. Speaker, violence is cyclical in nature. 

 

If you're going to have abuse in a home, invariably it is those 

kids, it is those children that are going to grow up and actually 

seek a violent partner because that is what they are familiar 

with. That's actually what they are comfortable with, in a crude 

sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we must do is break the cyclical nature 

of this transmission of violence from one generation to another.  

And so in order to do that we must reach out as a society.  We 

must reach out.  And I would suggest to the hon. minister that 

we reach out not only to battered women, but we must expand 

and we must seek out the abused, yes, but the abuser as well.  

We must also have programs in place to treat the abuser. 

 

Children are being abused as well as battered women, Mr. 

Speaker.  And another not very often mentioned people in our 

society that are suffering abuse is the elderly as well.  We must 

reach out to the elderly in so doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I hope is going to come out as a result 

of what we're doing here today is that we will be sending out a 

message to society that violence is wrong.  Society must get up 

on its hind feet and say, violence is wrong. 

 

I agree with you, Madam Minister, zero tolerance is what we 

must strive for.  And the only way we can do that is by making 

society aware of it and society saying, we will grapple this 

situation to the ground and that it's all right for people to stand 

up, it's okay for them to say, I have been abused.  They must 

not hide; they must not feel ashamed of coming forward and 

saying, I have been abused.  And when we can start doing this, 

I think together we will be able to fight this enemy of societies. 

 

Madam Minister, I say this in the most non-partisan way 

possible.  You don't have enough money in your government -- 

neither did we when we were in government -- to be reactive 

all the time to solve this problem.  We must be proactive, as 

you're suggesting today, if we're going to be able to solve this 

problem.  Madam Minister, I support very much your initiative 

this time. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

add my words to those so articulately expressed by the minister 

responsible for the Status of Women. 

 

On Battered Women's Awareness Week, we must reflect upon 

the increase of violence in our society at every level, and be 

determined to work together toward creating a healthier, more 

caring environment for our children.  And by teaching our 

young children to honour and respect each other, by ensuring 

that individuals are empowered at every stage of their lives, 

we're going to reach a time, I truly hope, when weeks such as 

this are no longer going to be required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, item no. 10, I would ask that this 

question be converted into a motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to 

questions put by members 11, 12 and 13, are hereby tabled. 

 

The Speaker: -- Questions 11, 12 and 13 tabled by the 

minister. 

 

(1445) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I began 

yesterday to speak to the throne speech and the blueprint for 

change by the Government of Saskatchewan.  And I pointed 

out a number of things that I think are necessary to analyse 

what it is they're trying to say in the throne speech and the 

things that they are leaving out and the things that they are 

putting in. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that as I said yesterday, there 

are opportunities that are available in this province because of 

some of the things that we have and some of the things that we 

are. 

 

I want to point out to the Assembly that the provincial 

government made the decision -- and I hope that they would 

reverse it -- that the province would not endorse the 

memorandum of understanding on energy.  And I want to point 

out to the people of Saskatchewan again that what we have by 

not doing this is a clear put-down of the opportunity for young 

people in this province to do 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

the things that they are very, very capable of doing. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, a very honourable lady, a woman in this 

province who has achieved excellence on the basis of her 

capacity to provide research in nuclear medicine.  She, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  She has received the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit.  She has received the Canadian order of merit, and on 

the basis of achievement. Mr. Speaker, she is a person from 

Saskatchewan.  She has received recognition for her services 

across this province and across Canada and internationally for 

the things that she has done in medical research in nuclear 

medicine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have young people today who are just as 

capable as she is -- young men and women who understand 

nuclear medicine better than any political person opposite, and 

we have them where we could have medical research in nuclear 

medicine.  We could have nuclear physicists coming out of this 

province where we could market the opportunity to develop the 

kinds of things that the future holds for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We have nuclear chemistry that we could put 

together with individuals from the province of Saskatchewan 

that we could be the centre in Canada for nuclear research. 

 

But what have we done?  We have turned down an opportunity 

to study the opportunity.  We have turned that . . . or they have 

turned it down, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that is an indictment 

against the government for ever for taking this opportunity and 

giving it to someone else.  Someone else in Canada is going to 

do that.  They're going to take our uranium and take it into their 

provinces and study it.  Our children will have to go to New 

Brunswick or Alberta or British Columbia to deal with that, 

Mr. Speaker, and I find that appalling. 

 

I find that . . . the opportunity available to young people only 

happens as the windows or the door swings open once in a 

while.  And this was an opportunity for our young people to be 

career scientists in the province of Saskatchewan with an 

energy option available to them that would be able to be used 

by young people in learning how to be an example throughout 

the world.  And I believe that, Mr. Speaker; we have lost that 

opportunity. 

 

We have a science centre in Saskatoon in agriculture.  Why?  

Because Saskatchewan is an agriculture province. 

 

We have a science centre there that is a science centre of 

excellence.  It is going to produce people who are excellent.  

We have people who have been very prominent in agriculture 

in this province.  We have people, Mr. Speaker, who are 

prominent in Canada for the financial institutions that we have.  

We've trained people to be able to deliver in financial 

institutions across Canada and across the United States, in 

financing fiscal management across Canada.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we had . . . the Bank of Canada vice-president was 

from Saskatchewan. 

 

We had people all over the world who can hold their heads up.  

But why would we neglect an opportunity such as this, as we 

have in the nuclear side, to study it and give ourselves an 

opportunity to develop.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that is wrong.  I believe it's wrong, and I think that the 

government will for ever regret it. 

 

And as I look it, it stands in the face of public opinion.  The 

public opinion said -- from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), yes, do it; we need that 

opportunity.  SARM -- yes, Mr. Speaker, we want to do it.  Do 

it for us.  Why not do it?  It didn't have anything to do with a 

CANDU reactor.  It was a part of a study to look at it. 

 

And the Minister of Energy laughs.  He could have had that 

along the Diefenbaker Lake just north of his constituency.  

What kind of opportunity would he have had to make that kind 

of an opportunity available to the people in the south-west part 

of Saskatchewan?  That is exactly what he could have done. 

 

And he is avoiding the question.  He is avoiding the 

opportunity, and I think it's wrong.  And from an academic to 

think that that was the only function that was available is also 

to think that an opportunity would not have been available for 

our young people. 

 

What will our young people do?  Mr. Speaker, they will go to 

Alberta, or they might go to work on a reactor in Ontario.  Or 

they might go to France to work on a reactor -- all the uranium 

coming from Saskatchewan.  Seventy-five per cent of our 

uranium goes into the nuclear reactors in France, 50 per cent in 

Sweden.  All of this is an opportunity for our young people to 

become a part for growth, and I don't understand why this 

opportunity would have been missed. 

 

"A Mandate for Change" was one of the titles that they headed 

off the throne speech with, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that that 

mandate for change should be  some mandate in the mentality 

of the individuals opposite to adjust and get a grasp of what can 

happen with young people in our province and with the ability 

to learn and the ability to excel.  And I think they've missed a 

great opportunity. 

 

I want to point out a number of other things that the mandate 

for change said and what it was supposed to be.  And I find it 

really striking. 

 

The quote is that the people want my government to be open, 

honest, and fully accountable.  Well, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

few days in question period and throughout the past week and a 

half we have come to realize that there are a whole lot of things 

that aren't open and they aren't honest as it relates to how 

they're going to deal with the public and the rural people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to say, I want to say to the members opposite, that 

when this government brings forward a Bill that will deem to 

have had information provided, when farmers don't want to 

have it, and that will be deemed to have been provided, Mr. 

Speaker, is not open and it's not honest.  And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say it's dishonest.  It's morally wrong, it's 

ethically wrong, and it's legally wrong. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is fundamental to what is going 

on over there.  If it doesn't suit me, then we'll make it a change.  

If it doesn't suit me, even though the law says 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

one way, we'll make a change.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

that is wrong.  It's absolutely wrong.  Is that open, honest, and 

accountable?  No, Mr. Speaker, it is not. 

 

People want my government to be fair and compassionate.  Is 

that being fair and compassionate when we have the farmers of 

Saskatchewan having to go to court to protect themselves in an 

action against the Crop Insurance Corporation and the 

government?  No, Mr. Speaker, it is not. 

 

They want a spirit of co-operation and community -- very fine 

objectives.  But, Mr. Speaker, in reality is it happening?  No, 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think so. 

 

Going on to the second page, Mr. Speaker, they want to deal in 

a way to amend The Provincial Auditor Act -- very, very 

commendable.  We want to see what it's going to do for the 

Provincial Auditor in reviewing the books, and I'm very 

interested in seeing it.  And in the bottom line it says: ". . . to 

improve the Provincial Auditor's access to the books of all 

Crown agencies." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you have a verbal agreement with the 

president of Sask Power Corporation, what is a verbal 

agreement?  Will the auditor be able to say, on the basis of a 

verbal agreement, you have completed the contractual 

arrangement with the president of Sask Power Corporation?  

Will you?  I ask the question: will the auditor be able to say to 

this Assembly that Mr. Messer with a verbal contract got paid 

what he was supposed to be paid? 

 

A verbal contract, Mr. Speaker.  What does the verbal contract 

mean?  Does that mean he drives a Lexus this week, and next 

week he doesn't?  This week he has a bathroom and next week 

he doesn't?  Is that the way that works? 

 

Access to the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker -- is that the 

way the verbal agreements are going to be?  Or are they 

embarrassed with the fact of what they're paying him?  Would 

they be prepared to provide that information to us on a verbal 

agreement, because what is it?  What really is it? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in the news it said 

that his bathroom was going to cost $27,000.  Well in this 

verbal agreement, how many months pay is that?  One month 

for Mr. Messer, or two months?  How much is it?  And how 

many people in this province don't earn $27,000 a year, Mr. 

Speaker.  And here, Mr. Speaker, is the president of this 

corporation spending $27,000 to renovate his bathroom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to this Assembly that in the 

throne speech they had some discussion for the members of the 

Assembly and it's a code of ethics for public civil servants.  

Now that is an interesting one. 

 

Today we stand on the threshold of the budget.  And we had 

some questions earlier about pink slips being handed out 

tomorrow.  Are those pink slips going to be filled and 

back-filled with people who have identified themselves as 

supporters of the NDP party?  It's a question that we seriously 

want to have the government consider. 

And we will be asking, Mr. Speaker, in the budget, in 

reviewing the budget, whether in fact this has really happened.  

And that's a question we have to ask the members opposite and 

we will be asking the ministers opposite to do that. 

 

I notice here, Mr. Speaker, that the government is going to 

introduce a Bill on the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code.  

Now I would think that this would be an ideal opportunity and 

an ideal place to give the unborn child some rights.  And I 

think that as we take a look at this we will probably be looking 

at how this can be done to amend the Bills that will be placed 

before this Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that will be a primary function and a focus of 

what we are going to initiate from this side of the House.  And 

I want to make that clear to the people of Saskatchewan and 

also to this Assembly that that's one of the things that we will 

be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a part of the responsibility that I had with a 

minister of the Crown, we had many things in agriculture that 

we dealt with to provide opportunities for initiating economic 

development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, some of them were 

opportunities that we had with processing our agricultural raw 

product.  Mr. Speaker, we had some very, very important 

successes in this province, and one was Harvest Meats.  And 

wouldn't you know, for an example, an example of a business 

that would be open and moving forward with initiative and 

proactive in its sales and marketing opportunities, they would 

put into their budget or their throne speech a recognition of one 

of the functions that we assisted in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's a credit to the people who are in Harvest 

Meats for what they have done.  It's a credit to them for their 

skills and marketing, their skills and management, that they 

have succeeded as well as they have.  And, Mr. Speaker, they 

are an excellent asset to this province. 

 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the government is going to 

use Crown corporations to stimulate the economy.  Now as I 

understand it, there was 10 per cent of the province left to deal 

with as it related to natural gas distribution in the province.  

And, Mr. Speaker, what an excellent opportunity to reduce 

costs, increase the income of SaskEnergy, and allow that as an 

opportunity to develop the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1500) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these weren't places that were in outlying 

areas of the province.  No, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it they 

were along the lake here just north of Regina.  Some of those 

places were told last year that they were going to get natural 

gas into their homes, and now they won't be able to. 

 

And why, Mr. Speaker, why would you put an opportunity like 

this for stimulating the economy, giving an excellent 

opportunity for, number one, SaskEnergy to make more money 

. . . and for the province to be able to 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

sell gas to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is beyond me, Mr. Speaker, why the people of this kind of 

government have always been against developing the natural 

gas industry.  They have been against it.  It's a history.  It's a 

tradition.  And they've been against it all the time.  And I find it 

very difficult to understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Power Corporation has been used as a tool 

of opportunity to develop the economy across this province in 

many, many ways and in many, many places.  We have the 

northern electrical development, we have the grid increased 

from the west side -- from Alberta moving into Saskatchewan 

-- we have Shand, we have Alameda and Rafferty as parts of 

those developments, an opportunity as a part of that 

infrastructure.  And, Mr. Speaker, I know that members 

opposite have a passion for those two reservoirs.  As a matter 

of fact, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if they will ever go fishing in 

those lakes, or if they will ever go water-skiing on those lakes 

because of that passion that they have as a resistance to the 

development of those two projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members who sit in the 

back and especially to the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley, that member was consistent in his adamant 

disregard for the truth as it relates to Rafferty and Alameda.  

He consistently was against it -- consistently. 

 

Now I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that I have lived 

in the driest part of Saskatchewan for all of my life.  And I had 

a very highly regarded hydrologist born at Maple Creek, who 

teaches at the university, told me one day, he said: you know 

the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) built a 

dam on the north slope of the Cypress Hills.  It took three years 

for that to fill.  And you know something, he said: it's never 

been empty since. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a part of what we are here to do.  

There are times when, Mr. Speaker, that lake valley has been 

wall-to-wall water, washing down for ever into United States 

and then back up into Canada destroying . . . raising havoc 

everywhere it went.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

that dam was built there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, representation was made here by the 

member from Bengough-Milestone saying that the total cost 

was $42 million.  Mr. Speaker, that representation is incorrect.  

And I believe that the people should be discussing among 

themselves what it actually cost. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A hundred and ninety-five million. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley says $195 million.  But what did he say and 

what did he do as a part of that interaction with all of the legal 

costs and all of the implications of the extra environmental 

studies, extra litigation and all of the things that are involved 

with it. 
 

What did he say?  How did he provide the benefit to the people 

of Saskatchewan?  Well sir, he probably lost the province of 

Saskatchewan between 50 and $60 million personally because 

of his vendetta against that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not a 

good thing to have. 

So Sask Power Corporation has developed lots of reservoirs in 

this province, and I believe that they should still be doing that, 

and they should continue to do that. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that the throne speech talks about 

is the involvement of Saskatchewan in the Free Trade 

discussions with the United States and Mexico.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that it is very important that we seriously 

consider that.  I think we need to seriously investigate the 

opportunities that we have to make North America a 

community that can survive because we have the freedom to 

trade across the border going north and south.  I believe in that, 

Mr. Speaker.  Every time we close a door, we build a wall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a privilege for me to be in the Soviet Union 

the beginning of February.  And I have had people come back 

and say to me: how did you find the economy?  Well I said, if 

you went back there, you'll find the economic balance is 

somewhere about 1930-35.  That's where the economics of the 

Soviet Union are today.  And what did they do?  For every time 

the world economy went up, they would build the wall a little 

higher.  And every time that the world economy went higher 

again, they would build the bricks a little higher.  And then two 

years ago, what happened, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I had a colonel, who was a member of the city council of 

Moscow, tell me this, and he said: communism has killed the 

soul of the Russian people.  He said, I said to the military 

leaders that the enemy was not the western world, the enemy is 

inside.  And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  He told me that he 

was right.  I didn't say that to him.  He said he was right, 

because the economy could not resist the international pressure 

on those walls always going higher, because the people 

themselves were not willing to participate in that kind of an 

economy. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we have to think about when we 

want to isolate ourselves, or if we think we can isolate 

ourselves from our neighbours and the communities around us.  

And, Mr. Speaker, the more opportunities we have to trade 

with other countries -- whether they're Mexican, whether 

they're South American or whether they're Canadian, 

interprovincially, or United States -- the better off we are.  

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a very, very important part of the 

function. 

 

And I would encourage the government opposite to be as 

open-minded as they possibly can.  Don't throw away the 

mandate.  Don't throw away the opportunity like you did in the 

energy agreement.  Don't throw it away because our children 

are going to have to take that opportunity and use it to build 

this province.  You can't build it without it.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I wanted to point that out. 

 

One of the things that is in this throne speech -- and I want to 

focus on that a bit -- is the area of agriculture.  And they make 

special references to the programs that farmers are finding a 

great deal of difficulty with today and that's the GRIP program.  

They say in here that the changes that they've made are 

moderate and they're slight, and that they will have some sense 

of wanting to fix it and make it better.  Well I'll go along with 

making it 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

better, Mr. Speaker, but I don't think what they've done today is 

making it better. 

 

I want to point out that as I went around this province, and 

ministers in 1991 went around this province, we probably 

spoke to 30,000 people -- individuals who were interested in 

the program.  If you take and expand that to people who really 

attended the meetings, there would be pretty close to 50,000.  

And, Mr. Speaker, that opportunity said more than one thing to 

me.  It said, number one, Mr. Speaker, that people wanted in 

this province an opportunity to insure their farms on an 

individual basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order for us to understand that, I want to draw 

a parallel.  A farmer is being asked today to insure on an 

average -- an average of the commodities, an average of the 

farmers around him.  And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  If 

you took the block that you lived in, or any of these people 

here who live in a city block, and would take the insurance on 

that city block and say: your house is worth $50,000, we'll 

insure you for 50; yours is worth 75, we'll insure you for 75; 

and his is worth 100, and we'll say that we're going to average 

the whole thing out.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the 

government is asking the farmers to do today.  They're asking 

not only to average the insurance, they're asking them to 

average the contents of those houses -- average it all out so that 

everybody is the same.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what's wrong 

with it. 

 

Individuals have come to me from across this province and 

said, we want individual coverage for individual crops.  The 

rural members have heard this in their own constituencies and I 

don't know why they haven't said it to their minister.  Mr. 

Speaker, that is a point I want to make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question and my question in the budget and 

the question in this throne speech is: why don't they make it 

available?  Why don't they let the farmers choose?  If their idea 

is so good, it should be able to sell itself.  Give them the 

opportunity to decide --'91 or '92.  Give them the opportunity to 

decide.  Are you prepared to do that?  I'm prepared to live with 

that. 

 

And then let's go through the summer, Mr. Speaker, and go 

through the summer and make some adjustments to what they 

choose as their option.  And, Mr. Speaker, they will probably 

as the summer progresses be more in line with '91 than they 

have ever been with '92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province needs to have a stable economy in 

agriculture.  And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite in rural 

Saskatchewan went around promising cost of production.  Now 

that's a good one.  They're not even prepared to fund 70 per 

cent of an index moving average price, and they want cost of 

production.  They're not prepared to spend 70 per cent of the 

index moving average price, and they want the cost of 

production put on this yet on top of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that wouldn't be 70 per cent of the index moving 

average price; that would be 100 per cent.  They're not 

prepared to pay 70 per cent because they've got to reduce the 

program.  They're not even prepared to pay 100 per cent on the 

yield, Mr. Speaker, and they want 

cost of production over on the other side. And in fact their 

committee members who met on it from the National Farmers 

Union said, we'll make our own report.  SARM said, we're 

going to make our own report.  Did we ever hear the minister 

talking about that?  No, Mr. Speaker, we did not. 

 

As a matter of fact, in February the Minister of Agriculture 

received a letter indicating that SARM was not in agreement 

with their proposals as it related to the new GRIP.  They 

weren't in agreement with it.  Did he tell anybody?  Oh no, Mr. 

Speaker, he wouldn't tell anybody because he had a 

commitment to the taxpayers that he was not going to spend 

more than $140 million.  That's what he was told, that's what he 

told his committee, and that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what they 

had to deal with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they really had to wrestle with that one.  

They couldn't give, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for the 

farmers in the province to have any kind of a guarantee.  No, 

Mr. Speaker, they'll guarantee all of the teachers in this 

province a fixed return.  They'll guarantee all of the nurses in 

this province a fixed return, and I have no problem with that.  

But will they give the farmers one?  No. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the basis of a cultivated acre which these 

farmers are getting their money for, it's likely $4 a cultivated 

acre -- $4 a cultivated acre to bolster the economy of 60,000 

producers and thousands of other small-business men across 

this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, they weren't prepared to put 

$4 up. 

 

And yet we have members opposite who are teaching 

professionals.  We have people opposite who are medical 

professionals. And they have a guarantee.  They know how 

much they're going to earn.  They know what they're going to 

get. But will they give the producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan even 70 per cent of their cost of production?  Oh 

no, they promised 100 per cent of cost of production.  Going 

around the province, they had meetings about it, and the 

Premier said it in Harris; he said it in many other places -- cost 

of production.  It says it in here, cost of production. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  That is only to highlight it 

so that the people who are against what they're doing as it 

relates to GRIP, that they will be satisfied.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

they're not going to be satisfied.  I don't think that they should 

be. 

 

I'm going to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this throne 

speech probably, in my view, demonstrates the weakest -- no, 

Mr. Speaker, the second-weakest throne speech that I've ever 

heard in this Assembly.  The second weakest.  The first one 

was in December. 
 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- And, Mr. Speaker, the second-weakest one is 

this one we have here today.  Half of it -- half of it, Mr. 

Speaker -- is filled with platitudes; the other half is filled with 

things that the Tory government did in the last 10 years.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this throne speech represents.  

They're going to make changes 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

here and there and try and smooth it all over. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what they really are saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan: you can handle it on your own; do it yourself; 

we're not here to help you.  And yet in their campaign slogans 

across this province what they did is they typically said, we're 

here to help you, we're big brother, we'll look after it, we'll 

defend you, we'll uphold all of the things, we'll eliminate 

poverty, Mr. Speaker, create jobs, balance the budget, do all of 

those things.  But, Mr. Speaker, the mandate of this 

government isn't big enough to do that. 

 

And in this throne speech they said that . . . it's all full of 

platitudes and Tory commitments from other years.  Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the throne speech on the basis 

of the platitudes that have been given to us today.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pride to participate in the debate from the Speech from 

the Throne.  I'd like to also congratulate my colleagues from 

Meadow Lake and Regina Wascana Plains for moving and in 

seconding this Speech from the Throne.  They did a fantastic 

job and I congratulate them on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the third time in history that the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan has turned to the New 

Democratic Party, or to the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) prior, to get the financial shape of the province in 

order. 

 

My dad used to talk about the dilemma that the Clarence Fines 

administration -- he was the Finance minister of the Tommy 

Douglas government -- faced in 1944.  The economic crunch 

that the province found themselves in at that time was as bad as 

it is today if not worse.  But even with that financial crunch at 

that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government of Tommy 

Douglas and the Finance minister, Mr. Fines, were able to turn 

the road around and we did some very unique things in the '40s 

and '50s, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I'm sure we're going to be 

able to do that again as we set a new direction in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we find ourselves in the province 

of Saskatchewan with a deficit of almost $9 billion.  And in 

1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had an operating surplus of 139 

million.  How did we get there?  How did we get there? 

 

For 10 years, for 10 long years the Tories' expenditures rose at 

double the rate of the revenues.  The economic factors of the 

time with agricultural prices being low, low resource prices, 

high interest rates, increased unemployment, and out-migration 

were all factors.  Also the reduction in the federal transfer 

payments which total $550 million this year were also factors. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former government didn't have 

any plans to address these issues and concerns -- no long-term 

employment strategies, no long-term small-business plan.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that's where 

job creation lies -- in small business, in small-business 

development. 

 

I'd like to spend a few minutes talking about our Crowns.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Crown corporations historically paid 

dividends, based on their earnings, to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  What we see in the last nine and one-half to ten 

years was a raiding of the Crown corporations, and an example 

is with SaskTel. 

 

In 1988, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskTel was forced to pay $238 

million into the operating budget to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and more like 18 or $20 million had been the 

norm over the years based on their earnings. 

 

In 1990, Crown Management Board was forced to contribute 

$310 million into the operating budget of the province, and I 

might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was against the 

recommendation of the board. 

 

This display of mismanagement showed the unethical way that 

the previous government operated.  Not only racked up a 

record deficit on the operating side in the last nine and a half 

years, but they all but bankrupt the Crown corporations as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

economic plan, or failure, which I would like to call it, is 

highlighted in a few of the examples that we see have 

transpired over the years, and I would like to talk about a few 

of them. 

 

The tractor plant in Weyburn with a $700 million loan with the 

perception or the wish of getting approximately a hundred jobs 

-- that fiasco started in June of 1989 with a loan, and by August 

of 1990 it was shut down.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've heard of 

comments in this Assembly about GigaText; there was over $3 

million blown there.  Pro-Star Mills, in March of 1983 a loan, 

$490 million from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation); January 1985, shut down.  And we 

all know about Joytec.  And we all know about the Supercart 

fiasco.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a record that the former 

government members should be ashamed of. 

 

I'd like to talk a bit about wasted tax dollars.  Nine hundred 

million dollars from Sask Property Management on an option 

to purchase the Regina YMCA (Young Men's Christian 

Association) in 1988, only to be written off the books two 

years later. 

 

Nine hundred and eighty million dollar salary spent by 

departments and Crowns to provide political staff to the 

premier's office.  I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unforgivable.  

Three hundred twenty-two million dollars spent by Crown 

management to pay salaries and severance to the former 

president of the Crown Management Board.  Seven hundred 

and five thousand dollars spent by Crown Management to the 

Rothschilds, a British firm, for "general advice" on 

privatization, on something that the people of the province had 

absolutely no interest in, privatization of our Crowns, and spent 

almost a billion dollars. 

 

I'd like to talk a bit about agriculture now, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Our Premier and Minister of Agriculture, along 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

with a hundred-and-some farmers last fall went to Ottawa, 

trying to put the case forward to the federal government that 

Saskatchewan agriculture, the farmers in Saskatchewan, need 

and must receive $500 million payments in a third line of 

defence.  And I'd like to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

opposition voted against that measure the other day when we 

were debating emergency resolution. 

 

We're also going to be talking about, in agriculture, protecting 

the Canadian Wheat Board and other agricultural programs that 

have been or are going to be under attack as a result of the Free 

Trade Agreement with the United States, and as possibly a free 

trade agreement . . . North American Free Trade Agreement. 

 

We supported the method of payment to be retained to the 

railways, and our Premier has called for provincial 

representation -- the bargaining table -- during the North 

American free trade agreements to ensure sure that we . . . that 

farmers in Saskatchewan have a voice on what's going to 

happen in the North American Free Trade Agreement.  

Because in the last round of talks with the Canada-U.S. (United 

States) Agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only agriculture 

representative on the Canadian side advising the government 

on agriculture was individuals representing big business, in 

particular Cargill Grain.  That's not necessarily what the 

farmers of Saskatchewan . . . is in their best interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talks 

about a mandate for change, talks about an open and honest 

and accountable government, talks about jobs and job creation 

and stimulating economic growth.  Also talking about 

protection of our environment. 

 

What this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the beginning of 

getting our debt under control.  And it also talks about more 

importantly, I believe, is restoring hope for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and to renew the spirit of 

co-operation and community back into the values of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- These are the reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that I do support the Speech from the Throne, and I will be 

voting accordingly.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is a great 

honour and privilege for me to be able to reply to the Speech 

from the Throne on behalf of the people from Saskatoon 

Wildwood.  And it is an especial privilege because I have just 

for the last one-half hour been talking with students from the 

Wildwood School in the constituency of Saskatoon Wildwood. 

 

I must say they had a great many creative and interesting 

questions to ask of me, ranging all the way from why does the 

Speaker take his hat off when he comes into the House to what 

is the value of the mace and would you sell it to pay off the 

deficit? 

What I said to the students was no, I would not sell the mace to 

pay off the deficit despite the fact that the deficit is almost 

overwhelming in this province.  There are certain things that 

are priceless.  Certain things that we will not bargain away.  

One of them is democracy. 

 

Unfortunately we saw the members opposite prepared to give 

away anything to their friends in big business, prepared to 

bargain away our future and our children's future.  They are 

now paying the price for that profligate spending, that waste 

and mismanagement.  Because, Mr. Speaker, on October 21 the 

people of Saskatchewan gave us a mandate for change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- And six months later the people of Saskatchewan 

know that we still have that mandate for change and they know 

that we will introduce change. 

 

Earlier this week I came down to Regina and I arrived here at 

about 8 in the morning.  Since I didn't have a meeting over at 

the legislature until 9, I decided to take advantage of the brief 

time I had free, and take my dog for a walk. 

 

I was walking along the Wascana Creek bank, not to be 

compared of course to the beautiful Saskatoon river bank, but 

still a nice asset for the city of Regina, and I met a gentleman 

who said to me, what are you doing here in Regina?  And I 

allowed as how I was a member of the Legislative Assembly.  

And he said, for whom?  And I said, well I'm a New Democrat 

and proud of it. 

 

This gentleman then went on to say, you know, I've been in 

business for several years and I've had a lot of employees.  I've 

always fought against unions, even though I realize sometimes 

they're good, sometimes they're bad.  And I've never voted for 

your party.  I've always voted Conservative all my life.  But I 

want to tell you, he said to me, this time in October I voted for 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- And I looked at him rather surprised, because 

quite frankly he didn't look to me like your typical New 

Democratic supporter.  And I said, well why in Heaven's name 

would you vote NDP?  And he said, because quite frankly I'm 

sick of the mess and we trust you guys to clean it up. 

 

And guess what?  That's what 53 per cent of the voters in this 

province said.  They trust us to clean up the mess.  They want 

our financial house in order in this province so that we can 

have a future in this province. 

 

What we're seeing now is that ideologies are shifting.  People 

are changing and they're moving beyond traditional politics.  

Because what they see -- with record high bankruptcies, record 

high unemployment, record high statistics in terms of violence 

against women -- what they see is a Saskatchewan that is 

unravelling at the human seams, and people do not want to see 

that.  They are sickened by it.  They are sickened by the deficit, 

they're sickened by the waste, and they're sickened by 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

the unemployment and an economy that's out of control.  And 

that sickening was caused by nine years of Tory waste, 

mismanagement, and poor government. 

 

(1530) 

 

People now are banding together, moving beyond traditional 

ideologies and looking at the party that they know will give 

them common-sense management, will help them to put the 

financial house in order in this province and will help to save 

the value and uniqueness of this province.  We don't want to be 

a province where the last person has to turn out the lights.  We 

want once again to grow, to prosper, and to flourish. 

 

We know that there is a value and a uniqueness to living in 

Saskatchewan.  We know that we have values that are above 

and beyond partisan politics.  There's a uniqueness to the 

Saskatchewan people.  We're real tough.  We live in a 

relatively isolated, land-locked area and yet at the same time 

we still reach out a neighbourly hand to help people. 

 

We see the uniqueness in the person who's willing to walk 

through a snowstorm to help his or her neighbour.  We see the 

value and uniqueness of this province when we go to the 

Saskatchewan Indian and Metis friendship centre and we join 

together in an Indian round dance, or when we go to one of the 

local theatres -- Globe Theatre in Regina or Twenty-fifth Street 

Theatre in Saskatoon -- and we see the talent and skill and 

creativity of our artists.  What we see all around us is people 

who are willing to help other people -- people who are willing 

to tough it out in the short term so that in the long run our 

children and our grandchildren can have a future. 

 

Right now our province is crippled in debt.  It's not a debt that 

the majority of people in this province asked for.  It's a debt 

that's been imposed upon us.  It's an unprecedented debt and it's 

the highest per capita debt in the whole Dominion of Canada.  

Just this Sunday the Premier of this province went on 

province-wide TV to give a frank and full disclosure of the 

level of the debt in this province.  He talked about the fact that 

every man, woman, and child in this province now is indebted 

to the tune of $13,000. 

 

And what kind of a response did we get from the opposition 

members to this disclosure?  We saw one Tory member say, it's 

time to stop the partisanship.  Of course he would say 

something like that.  He wants to hide the fact that it was his 

party that created this massive, overwhelming debt that our 

party will now have to clean up. 

 

And then we saw the Leader of the Liberal Party say, well it 

was a waste of a half hour of hockey.  I don't know why she 

would say something so shallow as that unless she was simply 

trying to get media attention.  But quite frankly I say to her and 

I say to the members opposite, it's time to move beyond 

political fashion statements.  Simply because they have no 

responsibility for cleaning up the mess is no justification for 

making shallow statements about the level and the depth of the 

mess. 

 

We have the responsibility as members of the government to 

clean it up.  We were elected to make tough decisions.  We will 

make those tough decisions, 

and we will clean up this province.  And the reason we'll do it 

is because Saskatchewan, unfortunately, is almost on the verge 

of bankruptcy.  We must get our financial house in order in this 

province. 

 

We know it's going to be a difficult balancing act.  We know 

we have to maintain our credit rating.  We know as well that 

we have to maintain Saskatchewan's ability to manage 

Saskatchewan programs -- programs like medicare, like our 

education programs, like the programs that we will be 

implementing to finally deal properly and respectfully with 

outstanding aboriginal land claims. 

 

Our task will be difficult.  And unfortunately we've just 

discovered it's going to be even more difficult because the 

previous government plundered our Crown corporations.  We 

commissioned, after we had the Financial Management Review 

Commission, we commissioned the firm of Ernst & Young to 

do a report on Crown corporations.  We knew the news would 

be bad but, quite frankly, how bad the news is I think shocked 

and dismayed almost every one of us. 

 

What we found out when the Ernst & Young report was tabled 

was that the Tories, those great financial wizards, had 

borrowed money to pay the borrowings on the borrowings of 

the operating debt.  I mean what kind of financial management 

is this?  I call that not free enterprise but Houdini economics, 

and we've got to stop it.  Because our goal, quite frankly, is a 

Saskatchewan that is free from debt, a Saskatchewan that's free 

to live on the good, basic Saskatchewan values of compassion, 

co-operation, and community. 

 

We've been in government now for six months, and it's been an 

interesting and exciting and occasionally rocky six months.  Up 

in Saskatoon people will often ask me:  well, Pat, you've left 

city council and now you're in the legislature.  What do you 

think of it and do you enjoy it?  Now enjoyment, I have to say, 

is not an adjective that I would use to describe what we're 

doing here.  But I do have to say that I think it is tremendously 

important, it's a great privilege and, quite frankly, I am frankly 

glad I left municipal politics and now have the opportunity to 

serve at a provincial level. 

 

I'm glad because we have major difficulties facing us and I am 

convinced that this government will face them in an 

appropriate, respectful, and humane manner.  We've had 

several successes just in the last six months.  We've 

demonstrated -- as we said during the campaign -- that we 

would be accountable.  We had the Financial Management 

Review Commission, the Gass Commission, we've 

demonstrated openness, and most particularly we've 

demonstrated restraint. 

 

We just this week announced that we've done away with many 

of the perks for senior Crown management executives.  We 

have a very small cabinet and our cabinet has taken a salary 

cut.  We've set a moral tone for this province that unfortunately 

the members opposite are both unable and unwilling to follow.  

We've also partially reorganized the civil service.  And I know 

that we will continue to do that so that we get an effective, 

lean, and efficient service-driven civil service, rather than a 

patronage-ridden civil service. 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- We've set up an energy institute and we've 

developed a new vision of health, the wellness model.  I'm very 

proud of these things.  Those are successes that I think we can 

look back on with some pride over the last six months. 

 

Some people would say, well maybe everything hasn't been 

entirely roses and sunshine, and indeed there's been a few little 

political skirmishes and battles that we've had to deal with, 

some perceived problems.  I don't think they're real problems, I 

think they're perceived problems. 

 

The members opposite a moment ago were heckling me, as a 

member from Saskatoon, that I should feel ashamed that this 

government did not sign the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) memorandum of understanding.  I say to you now, I am 

not ashamed of that.  I am proud that this government did not 

get snookered into the AECL memorandum of understanding.  

That memorandum of understanding, if you would take the 

time to read it, you will see that quite clearly what we were 

going to get for a payment of $1 billion -- in a province that is 

$13 billion in debt, I don't know where we would find the $1 

billion -- we were going to get 170 jobs.  That's very expensive 

job creation. 

 

And SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) would have been 

forced, if we had followed through on the $25 million initial 

investment, SPC would have been forced to build a prototype 

nuclear generator, a CANDU 3.  And most importantly and 

most reprehensibly from my point of view, SPC and the 

province of Saskatchewan would have been forced to develop 

this province into the nuclear waste dump site of the world.  

And that is wrong.  Saskatchewan is far more important and far 

more precious than that, to be a dumping ground for the waste 

of the world. 

 

Now some people say, oh no, the memorandum of 

understanding didn't really say that.  There were separate 

clauses, and you could deal with them individually.  And you 

weren't committed to building a CANDU 3, and you weren't 

committed to a dump site.  If that is so, why did the Hon. Jake 

Epp then say, I'm sorry Saskatchewan you can't have the 

research jobs if you don't take the prototype CANDU and if 

you don't take the disposal site.  Jake Epp said, no cherry 

picking for Saskatchewan.  It's all or nothing. 

 

Well quite frankly, I don't want that kind of a great deal.  I 

don't want Saskatchewan to be a nuclear waste dump site for 

the world.  And I don't want us to follow what Bernard Michel 

of Cameco keeps promoting, that our rock formation is 

supposedly so stable that we should take the waste of the 

world.  That's wrong. 

 

And then we see it's not just the members of the Progressive 

Conservative Party and their cohorts, their few cohorts who are 

pushing that. We see that the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Greystone is also promoting that, but promoting it, I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, in a most inconsistent fashion.  In 

her reply to the Speech from the Throne on April 30 she said: 

. . . the NDP have given no indications . . . how they will 

create an environment which will encourage growth and 

wealth creation.  There is talk about the concept of 

creating jobs through the Crown corporations -- the old 

NDP stand by (she says) -- government job creation 

through government jobs. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone says: 

 

 All this does is to re-route some of the profits from the 

Crowns, which would normally come to the treasury as tax 

revenues or dividends to government, in order to put a few 

people to work. 

 

Now you would hear that and you would think that means that 

she believes that Crown corporation jobs are no good, and we 

shouldn't have Crown corporation jobs.  But one paragraph 

later she goes on to say: 

 

 The most disappointing and crucial evidence of this is the 

completely ill-advised decision to cancel the memorandum of 

understanding with AECL.  Twenty-five million dollars in 

federal money which would have been spent largely on jobs 

for the next five years has virtually evaporated before our 

eyes. 

 

That $25 million would have created Crown corporation jobs.  

Now what does the member opposite want?  She says Crown 

corporation jobs aren't any good, but AECL Crown 

corporations are wonderful. 

 

It seems to me that what she's basically doing is paraphrasing 

George Orwell: all Crown corporation jobs are equal, but some 

are more equal than others.  I don't think there's logic in that 

kind of argument and I categorically reject it. 

 

We've seen lately a few problems and partisan furore over the 

GRIP program.  The problem, I think, is that a few farmers, the 

5 per cent factor I would say, want simply to take advantage of 

the guarantee.  Farmers that I have talked to say that they want 

to farm the land.  That's what they want -- an opportunity to get 

out and farm the land. 

 

(1545) 

 

They're also asking that they be able to farm the land, not the 

program.  And they want us to work and clean up Tory 

patronage.  Many people that I talk to are angry that we haven't 

fired a whole bunch of people.  They keep bringing me lists 

and say, this person is a Tory, this person is a Tory, and this 

person does nothing at his job -- let's get rid of him.  And I say, 

no, what we have to do is do a review and people will stay in 

their jobs if they're competent and if they're doing the job that 

they were hired to do and if it is a necessary job in this 

province. 

 

Because what we have to do basically is to clean up the mess.  

We've got to lay the foundation for new initiatives.  We've got 

to focus on the deficit.  It is extremely important over the next 

few years that we continue focusing on the deficit so that 

eventually we will be able to build on the solid principles and 

key programs of New Democrats --  



226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

programs of health, education and social assistance. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, the Deputy 

Premier, will be tabling his budget in this House.  I expect that 

it will be a tough budget.  But quite frankly, the future of this 

province, the future of our children, is at stake.  We must get 

our finances under control. 

 

This means that all of us, all sectors, all income groups, will 

probably have to contribute to cleaning up the Tory mess.  But 

we will do it because otherwise, unless we finally wrestle to the 

ground the atrocious, unacceptable level of interest on public 

debt that we're paying, this province will indeed be bankrupt. 

 

I think, though, what we will see, even though I expect fully 

that this will be a tough budget, it will still be a New 

Democratic budget with compassion at its basis and with a 

good, solid foundation for laying the brickwork for our new 

vision in this province.  Together we're going to rebuild this 

province for our future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I said earlier that the politics in this province are 

changing, and I think they are.  As we enter the 21st century, 

we're seeing that people want direct empowerment; they want a 

more direct response.  They're tired of the bafflegab that they 

have occasionally received from politicians. 

 

People recognize the seriousness of the economic situation in 

this province and they're willing to shoulder their share of it.  

They know who got us into this mess and they've entrusted us 

to lead us out.  And we will do it by specific initiatives. 

 

We're going to, for instance, focus on the wellness model.  

We're going to change the whole piece of action around health 

around.  We're not going to be focusing on illness any longer.  

Instead, what we're going to be focusing on is making sure that 

we can improve the quality of life for people, that we can, all of 

us, own responsibility for our own life-style decisions, and that 

we can work in partnership with the professionals in the health 

care field so that together we can all make a difference and 

maintain a state of wellness. 

 

Wellness isn't just about saving money, even though that is a 

part of it.  Wellness, I believe, is the responsible and effective, 

empowering use of our health care resources for everyone.  

Wellness isn't just a unitary focus; it isn't a one thing; it's many, 

many programs all combined together. 

 

Wellness to me means resources to poor people; it means an 

emphasis on literacy; it means stamping out the "isms" of 

sexism and racism and elitism.  It means adequate housing for 

people, it means jobs for people, and it means working directly 

on all those factors that affect the physical and mental health of 

all of us. 

 

Wellness to me means dealing directly with the issues of the 

forgotten minorities -- the refugees who come to this country, 

people who have been forgotten in the programs, the women 

who are working double days, the 

racialized people, the working poor. 

 

We will, I believe, working in partnership, actually move 

beyond the concept of health as an absence of illness and move 

instead to the concept of wellness.  So we'll be doing that as a 

specific initiative over the next few years. 

 

We will also, at the same time as focussing on wellness, focus 

on the illness system because that is part and parcel of 

wellness.  There are unfortunately some people who still 

continue to get ill. 

 

We'll move into the next generation of medicare in terms of our 

health care provisions.  We see that in the throne speech where 

we're moving to create health boards in Regina and Saskatoon, 

and we will see them eventually in other parts of the province. 

 

We will be moving to having a health services utilization and 

research commission so that we can look at why people are 

going to doctors, what the diagnoses are; we can look at what 

kinds of education people may want so that they know when it 

is appropriate and responsible to go to a doctor and when, quite 

frankly, it isn't. 

 

We'll be moving to have a provincial health council that will 

consist not solely of professionals, but the other people who are 

gatekeepers in the system: the consumers, the community 

leaders, and also, the health care providers. 

 

There are other specific initiatives that we will be undertaking 

that are briefly outlined in the throne speech that I think will be 

laying a foundation for a new vision in this province, a new 

vision of compassion and caring.  We will be making changes 

to the human rights legislation.  Quite frankly, I am very proud 

of that and very excited about it, that we will be recognizing 

that all groups in this society will have and must have the 

opportunity to live and to work in dignity without fear of 

discrimination. 

 

We'll be making changes where we'll be putting people first, 

especially aboriginal people.  It is time that we recognized that 

we have several unique cultures in this province, and most 

particularly, peoples of the first nations and Metis people are 

extremely important in this province. 

 

We're recognizing the inherent right to self-determination and 

self-reliance.  We are recognizing aboriginal peoples' right to 

define and practise their own culture, their own customs, and 

their own values.  We'll be doing that in very specific ways as 

they are outlined in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

We'll also be doing it in attitudinal change ways as we work -- 

all of us, I hope, everyone in this province -- to clean up, for 

instance, our racist language.  It is time that we recognized in 

this province that when we talk about our pioneers and when 

we talk about our agriculture base in this province, that there is 

more to this province than simply people who came here in 

1870 or 1880 and started farming the land.  It is time that we 

recognized that this province originally started as a territory 

based on the fur trade and that it is aboriginal people who are 

our pioneers, not people from Europe. 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

It is time that we recognized too that aboriginal people are not 

our aboriginal people, just like white people are not aboriginals' 

white people.  We've got to stop using the phrase, our native 

people. 

 

And I think we will clean up our language.  We will start to 

develop both attitudinally and in programs an approach of 

respect and dignity.  This is extremely important, because what 

we've seen in the last week or so is that there is a very thin 

veneer to this civilization.  I look with dismay and with 

extreme sadness at what happened in Los Angeles where we 

see well over 55 people dead, several hundred injured, and 

thousands in jail for rioting and looting. 

 

And that's not confined to Los Angeles.  It's not a unique 

United States phenomena.  We saw it as well in the last couple 

of days in Toronto with people rioting.  That to me, Mr. 

Speaker, is extremely sad.  We have to recognize that the roots 

of racism are alive all throughout this society and we have to 

actively, as a government, do something to stop that. 

 

So that's another specific initiative that's outlined in the throne 

speech -- an initiative of which I'm extremely proud. 

 

We have as well in the throne speech outlined initiatives 

dealing with the special and unique concerns of women.  We 

have to, I know and I am convinced, deal with gender parity 

and we will eventually have to bring in pay equity.  Those are 

simply issues that will not go away and that we must deal with. 

 

At the same time, we have to deal with other issues that are of 

unique concern to women.  Earlier today the minister 

responsible for the Status of Women, the Hon. Louise Simard, 

stood up and talked to us about the problems of battered 

women -- the fact that one in ten women is battered in this 

province. 

 

We also know the shocking statistics for poverty for women, 

the problems of discrimination.  We have to deal with these 

things, these core issues, in a caring and compassionate manner 

so that we can then go on and address the other issues like pay 

equity and employment equity.  We can work on those things 

now; we can begin in a non-legislated way through our civil 

service to gather the data on compression and job 

ghetto-ization, to do the research on the job classifications so 

that when this province's finances are in order we can move 

very quickly and immediately into pay equity. 

 

And I'm convinced that we will do this because what we see 

now in this Speech from the Throne, this New Democratic 

Speech from the Throne, is a start, the foundation for a new 

vision in society.  We're going to see, both through the 

initiatives outlined in the throne speech and through the budget 

speech tomorrow, the foundation for compassion, for caring, 

and community.  I'm proud of the throne speech.  I'm proud to 

speak affirmatively for it.  I'm proud to be a New Democratic 

MLA, and I'm proud to be a representative in this House.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great 

pleasure to have the opportunity to speak in support of this, the 

second throne speech of the twenty-second legislature of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  My congratulations are extended to 

Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, and for the mover and 

seconder of her address, but also to all the other capable 

speakers who have preceded me. 

 

More particularly I would like to applaud the author whose 

thoughts were expressed so nobly in that speech, a person with 

not only a deep and perceptive mind, but one who sees clearly, 

not only to the horizon, but beyond it.  Oh nameless prophet, I 

salute thee. 

 

You will, I hope, sir, excuse me if I do not recapitulate those 

lists of things done and projects yet to be completed.  These are 

of course very important, but they're laid out very eloquently in 

the throne speech and by the speakers, much more capable than 

myself, who've spoken already.  What I would like to do is to 

give you some ideas that this speech and its responses have 

inspired in me. 

 

Sir, we have only formed the government for six months, and 

rebuilding a province is rather like rebuilding a house, a house 

that has fallen to pieces as the result of neglect of an 

incompetent and bankrupt previous owner. 

 

The first throne speech in December, sir, was in fact a 

declaration of intent to clear the site.  During the short session 

that followed, we rolled our sleeves up.  We spit on our hands 

and got our working tools in order.  We got rid of the broken 

bottles, the old bricks, pieces of barbed wire, and the plastic 

bags that are everywhere.  And we levelled the ground. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- In the second throne speech, this is where we 

start the real work, our own work.  This throne speech in effect 

digs the trenches in which the footings and foundations will be 

laid.  And trenches is a very evocative word.  It implies warfare 

and preparation of defences for what is expected to be a 

prolonged battle.  A fixed and secure position from which we 

can sally forth to engage the enemy.  And that enemy, sir, is 

not the opposition. They're already the prisoners of their own 

stupidities and multiple mistakes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- They lost their war last October.  The enemy, 

sir, is a disastrous economy they left behind like the four 

horsemen of the apocalypse. 

 

But to get back to my original analogy, sir.  Tomorrow, 

Thursday, we will have the budget speech which will be the 

foundation on which we build a solid edifice of fiscal policy 

and laws over the next four years.  And from that solid fortress 

we will fight the next election, secure in the knowledge that we 

have prepared the province well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

Mr. Draper: -- The member for Estevan gave us the catch 

phrase, there is so much more we could be.  So true, but so sad 

that that is as much as his mind could encompass.  Catch 

phrases, sir.  We say, there is so much more that we shall be.  

And under our new Premier and with our new NDP 

government, we will be, we shall be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- And that, sir, is the difference between this side 

of the House and that. 

 

Actually I'm very disappointed that the hon. member for 

Estevan is not in the House today. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member doesn't know, he is not 

to refer to whether members are present or not present in the 

legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you know now. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- It's just that rumour had it that he dug himself a 

hole to China to hide from my speech. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member is out of order again by referring 

indirectly that the member is not in the House.  I ask him to get 

back to his speech or I'll call upon another member. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I apologize.  As a neophyte I am ignorant of so 

many of the rules and regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, I've been listening with great interest to the 

debates that have been going on in this House.  And I was 

particularly interested in the -- what shall we call it? -- the 

altercation that occurred on Friday morning between the 

member of Thunder Creek and the Premier. 

 

The logic of the member opposite appeared to have been that, 

one, the Finance minister of the previous administration cooked 

the books; two, the member of Saskatoon Riversdale knew that 

and said so; and, three, the Leader of the NDP said that he 

could govern without raising taxes after corruption and 

accounting fraud had been eliminated.  Therefore his argument 

went that if the present Premier increased taxes, he is guilty of 

misleading the electorate in the election of last October and 

ought to resign. 

 

Sir, this is the strangest logic I've heard since, as a medical 

student, I removed a pencil from the bladder of a young man 

who swore me blind that he'd swallowed it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- And I remember as a young child hearing an 

old vaudeville song which went: How could you believe me 

when I said I loved you when you know I've been a liar all my 

life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- There were no apologies for having run the 

province into such a terrible amount of debt.  There were no 

apologies for hiding expenses in inappropriate places.  Strange. 

I also remember the election campaign of 1982 when the leader 

of the Progressive Conservatives at that time promised to 

remove the 5 per cent health and education tax, sir.  He 

promised to reduce the income tax by 10 per cent.  And do you 

know what happened to those promises, sir?  Does anybody 

here or there remember the member from Thunder Creek 

demanding the resignation of the premier for breaking those 

promises? 

 

On Friday, sir, what we got was a double dose of hypocrisy.  

And I suggest that in future we get less thunder from the party 

opposite and maybe more creak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- A hundred years ago or so, sir, in another 

House, a certain Benjamin Disraeli, himself a very well-known 

Conservative premier, is reported to have said a Conservative 

government is an organized hypocrisy.  I suggest that it still is.  

And the member's support of this amendment to the motion is 

so much horse feathers. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Greystone seems to have fallen for 

the 50 cent coupon trick.  You know the old con, sir. A 

catalogue comes through the mail with a 50 cent coupon.  You 

can either put the coupon in the bank -- you get 50 cents; or 

you can buy $50 worth of knick-knacks and your coupon's 

worth 10 bucks.  Great saving.  Don't kid yourself, sir, you're 

still out 40 bucks. 

 

But the federal Tories and the AECL believe in megacoupons.  

For our $25 million coupon we get a down payment on what? 

-- a $5 billion nuclear reactor?  Quite a bargain, don't you 

think?  And by the time it's built it'll cost us $15 billion, just 

like the one in Ontario.  I believe it started at 3 billion, ended 

up at 14.  Oh, peanuts.  Just like Rafferty-Alameda -- 45 

million to start with, up to 150 million, and still going strong.  

In fact, I got information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No 

water?  What's water got to do with a dam? 

 

Yesterday I got information, sir, that the Alameda dam is 

moving. It's going downstream, and it's going down towards 

the centre of the earth apparently, too.  And it needs repair, the 

repair which will be a touch of $4 million. 

 

No, by now we've got used to the idea of first building a dam 

and then studying environmental aspects, the problems.  Now 

we're going to get used to the idea of first building a dam and 

then designing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- This really is a devine folly.  I too have had 

letters from constituents regarding a nuclear power reactor, and 

everyone has been against it, sir.  I've had a letter from a 

builders' association and from a group of professional 

engineers, and they are for it, but that's to be expected.  They 

are hoping to make a killing out of it.  My fear is that we'll get 

a killing as a result of it.  One of the most important matters 

discussed in the throne speech, sir, is health care, and is a . . . 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'd like to ask the member from Pelly 

and the member from Kindersley if you want to carry on at that 

volume, to go behind the bar or outside the chambers. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- As a physician with over 30 years of practice 

behind me and experience in hospitalization in four continents, 

you can imagine that I'm very interested in the subject of 

health.  All physicians, myself included, are anxious to keep 

people well.  We spend much of each day counselling patients 

about what is euphemistically called life-style.  But in my day 

it was always called bad habits.  The name has changed, but the 

game is still the same. 

 

Doctors don't wish to spend their time dishing out expensive 

pills.  Take one pill three times a day, granny, and we'll see you 

in a month and check your blood pressure and be fine.  That's 

not what we were taught or brought up to . . . (inaudible) . . . 

was medicine, and we don't want to do useless operations 

either. 

 

We would much sooner persuade people to eat less and better.  

But we find ourselves overwhelmed just as much and just as 

dangerously by adverts for junk foods and deep fried kittens 

and other such abominations.  And I think that these are far 

more dangerous, or at least equally dangerous to our health as 

cigarettes and liquor. 

 

I hope, sir, that with my qualifications and experience in this 

field I shall get the opportunity in the near future to contribute 

to this program. 

 

Education, sir, costs the province more than anything else 

except health care.  I believe it's $1 billion a year.  And I think 

that education is probably more important than health care in 

that our students see their teachers five hours a day, whereas 

they see the doctors once or twice a year if they get bashed in 

the nose by a hockey puck. 

 

Obviously the primary responsibility for nipping bad habits in 

the bud and promoting good life-styles and good habits lies 

with the parents.  But if the parents are incapable of doing this 

alone, then the back-up presumably should be in the schools 

when all's said and done -- 5 hours a day, 5 days a week, 35, 40 

weeks in the year, for a period of a minimum of 12 years. 

 

We only wish that as physicians we had the opportunity to 

guide our patients every day, every week, every year. 

 

One of our problems is of course that so many teachers go into 

teaching as a last resort.  An educator interviewed on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio last Saturday 

morning, May 2, stated that two-thirds of all Canadian teachers 

reported that teaching had not been their first choice of career 

-- a very significant number.  And if you combine this with a 

lack of enthusiasm of so many students to be taught, and my 

own children were no better -- I wasn't much better myself, to 

tell you the truth -- we have a problem that money alone can 

never solve.  And the arson at Delisle school is an indication of 

the frustration of students with the education process. 

 

And the teen-age suicides in Moose Jaw that have been in the 

news so much lately, surely they've got to be taken 

into consideration.  They must be involved in this context. 

 

Motivation, sir, cannot be bought at any price.  And add to this, 

sir, the incredible rate of burn-out amongst teachers and we 

have an enormous problem.  Do you know, sir, that the average 

length of time for a teacher in Britain to collect his pension is 

two years -- two years.  And I doubt if it's much better here, 

although I don't have the figures for Canada. 

 

My own father, sir, was a teacher and, following that, a senior 

lecturer at a college.  He retired at 34 . . . at 64, I beg your 

pardon, 64, and died at age 68.  He was very lucky, he 

considered, because he collected his pension for twice as long 

as the average.  But that's not much compensation for a 

lifetime's work. 

 

I would like to see some sort of sabbatical leave introduced -- a 

year off with full pay maybe after 15 years.  It could be worked 

by taking deductions from the teacher's salary and maybe an 

equal amount from the Education department.  It would give 

them an opportunity to recharge their batteries, conduct 

research, maybe tour the world before they're too darned old to 

be able to do it and appreciate it.  What's the use of perfect 

software if the hardware is worn out? 

 

It has come down to us from classical times -- I believe it was 

Lucian around about AD 100 who said, mens sana in corpore 

sano -- a healthy mind in a healthy body.  And for the best of 

everything, we need the best of everything -- the best of food, 

the best teachers, the best schools, the best educational system, 

and the best of health.  Without that you're wasting your time. 

 

(1615) 

 

I'm also very pleased, sir, to see in the throne speech reference 

to that much neglected natural resource, and I refer here to the 

aboriginal people. 

 

Shortly after coming to Canada, my wife and I adopted two 

young children, one a Chipewyan boy from the North and the 

second a very beautiful girl of Cree extract from the Fort 

Qu'Appelle area.  And unless you have direct experience, sir, 

you just cannot understand the problems such children have in 

growing up in an alien society. 

 

Both of them ran away from school, sir.  Both of them ran 

away, separately, from home.  Both of them ended up with 

alcohol problems.  One of them ended up a guest, should we 

say, of Her Majesty on more than one occasion.  You know 

what I'm referring to.  Neither of them are bad.  Neither of 

them are evil or wicked.  They're just confused and very lonely.  

Both of them have passed through the fire and both have 

survived.  Both have subsequently taken training and are now 

established in what looks like stable careers. 

 

But there are too many like them languishing in our 

correctional centres, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout 

Canada and in the United States as well, sir.  Totally wasted.  

Not criminals, just ignorant and largely illiterate.  They're 

unwanted on the reserves; they're unhappy in our cities.  They 

have no jobs, no hope, no 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

future. 

 

But our government has pledged itself in this throne speech to 

do something about it, and I congratulate them from the bottom 

of my heart. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- It is not only the just thing to do, sir, it is 

humane, and it is good economics to boot to get these young 

people -- and for the most part they are young people -- out of 

jail where it costs $20,000 a year to keep each one.  Get them 

producing.  Maybe they can produce $20,000 a year when 

they're training, and we're not just saving 20,000, we're saving 

40,000. 

 

I hope I haven't bored you, sir.  I know that all this will take 

time and be costly.  But we really don't have a choice.  It has to 

be done and we have to start it today.  And I thank you for 

listening to me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It 

certainly also gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 

engage in the debate on the Speech from the Throne.  And I 

have been listening very carefully as speaker after speaker gets 

up, and I am encouraged by the sincerity that all of these ladies 

and gentlemen are showing, from both sides actually, Mr. 

Speaker, in letting their views be known.  And I congratulate 

all of them for doing a job particularly well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I continue on into the meat of my speech, 

which is obviously going to have to be very abbreviated in 

terms of what I had planned, I would like to thank the 

constituents of Rosthern very sincerely for once more returning 

me to this legislature and to be able to speak on their behalf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Actually, Mr. Speaker, it was one of my 

constituents that said to me, any fool can get elected the first 

time; it's getting elected the second time that really counts.  

And I take that I'm sure in the spirit in which it was given, that 

I am here once again, the second time, representing my 

constituents.  And it's difficult for all of us and any of us to be 

an MLA and to do a good job.  I know that I speak for I think 

every member here that very often at the end of the day we say: 

what was all this about? 

 

A lot of people came with problems -- problems that we could 

not solve.  And we feel dejected about that, but then comes that 

moment when we were able to help someone in need, point 

them in the right direction, and certainly that makes us feel 

good. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot has happened in my constituency with 

the seniors' housing complexes, the nursing homes, sports 

complexes, the decentralization that took place, as far as North 

Park, and for the handicapped and less privileged people were 

concerned.  And we have group homes now in Rosthern -- 

which the opening will take place in about 10 days time, very 

proud of that -- group homes in Waldheim, group homes in 

Hepburn.  And 

certainly it was very comforting to me to have been indeed part 

and parcel of that process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not zero in on 

particular concerns that I have in this Speech from the Throne, 

the Speech from the Throne that indicates at the beginning that 

there is a mandate for change, a mandate for change initiated 

with the results of the election.  And I want to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that yes, I will agree that there was a mandate for 

change, but a very narrow, restricted mandate for change.  And 

that mandate for change does not, Mr. Speaker, that mandate 

for change does not entail the ripping off of the people of this 

province by saying one thing and then doing exactly the 

opposite once these good folks across the way were elected.  

This mandate for change does not include utility increases, tax 

increases, and attack on our health structure. 

 

This mandate for change, I will concede, does include such 

things as the elimination of patronage, for example.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I was very enheartened today when the Minister of 

Justice stood in his place and made a solemn commitment to 

the people of Saskatchewan and to this legislature that the 

people who are getting the pink slips as a result of what that 

Minister of Finance is going to be doing tomorrow, that those 

individuals who get those pink slips even today, even as I 

speak, that none of them will be back-hired and that none of 

them would be NDP supporters.  And I congratulate the 

minister for taking that firm and honest stand. 

 

And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we as an opposition 

intend to hold him and his Premier to that promise because that 

was a solemn promise made in this House, and we all know the 

consequences of a member standing in his place, making a 

commitment, and breaking that commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn my attention for just a few 

moments, if I might, to the Star-Phoenix, the latest Star-

Phoenix that I've been able to get hold of, and I notice on the 

front page of the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, the headline says: 

"Crop insurance agents gagged: PCs."  Crop insurance agents 

gagged. 

 

And then I notice also on the throne speech here that it talks 

about openness of government and it talks about the ability for 

people to freely and safely being able to express themselves.  

Yet we have the crop insurance agents being gagged. 

 

And I can attest to that personally because at the first few crop 

insurance meetings that I was at, the first thing that those 

agents had to tell us:  folks we are not allowed to talk about the 

'91 GRIP program -- we're not allowed to talk about that.  

That's openness. 

 

Now furthermore of course, and I don't want to go through the 

whole litany, but the farmers -- we saw them on the steps here 

-- they objected to the GRIP program changes to which they 

were not party.  These programs have been changed, gutted to 

the point where they're not bankable. 

 

I asked the bank manager in . . . I won't name the bank in 



May 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

Saskatoon, his major portfolio is agriculture -- he says: no, 

we're not loaning out any money now; the only farmer that we 

will give money to in a loan right now is the farmer that is so 

well-heeled that he doesn't need the loan. 

 

That's the extent to which this government has created concern 

and pessimism in the farming community.  It's not bankable; 

it's not predictable.  The only thing that is predictable is that the 

premiums are higher and the coverage is lower. 

 

And then when farmers say: well you've broken the contract, 

you didn't give us the information by March 15, what is the 

Minister of Agriculture's response?  Oh well, we will have 

deemed it to be; we will pass an Act retroactively. 

 

And ladies and gentlemen in the public, and ladies and 

gentlemen in this House, what this House is going to be asked 

to do is to vote on something that we all know that did not take 

place. 

 

No farmer, not one farmer, got a notice in the mail saying, 

we're going to be making those changes.  Heads up, do you 

want to stay in or do you want to get out?  Not one farmer got 

that letter. 

 

But the Minister of Agriculture is saying, oh that doesn't 

matter.  That doesn't matter, he's saying to you.  And he says, 

we're going to vote it in anyway, and we'll pretend that 

something happened when we didn't.  Well what do we call 

that, Mr. Speaker?  What do we call that?  I can't say what we 

call that.  But that's what members in this House are going to 

be asked to underwrite.  And I don't think that there are 

members on that other side . . . they may tow the party line on 

it, Mr. Speaker, but they are going to have second thoughts.  

And they will not feel good about doing that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I wanted to spend a little bit of 

time on the Star-Phoenix.  And normally I don't read the Star-

Phoenix or like talking about it too much because in my 

opinion it's not a paper that's usually being accused of being 

balanced or anything like that, but we'll let that go. 

 

Turn to page 2.  "Continuing exodus likely result of . . ."  And 

I'm quoting, Mr. Speaker:  "Continuing exodus likely result of 

Honest Roy's budget". 

 

Now what I'm going to do in the next few minutes is just give 

you a brief idea of what people are thinking and people are 

saying and people are dreading about this government and what 

it's got in store for us.  "Continuing exodus likely result of 

Honest Roy's budget," I quote again.  And he continues, Les 

MacPherson, and I have my own personal opinions there too of 

better left unsaid. 

 

 I missed the premier's speech on T.V. the other evening . . . 

There are but 10 such people in Saskatchewan (that watched 

it), and they're all in Romanow's cabinet. 

 

All right?  But then he goes on to say: 

 

 It was Honest Roy, you may recall, who not so 

long ago was denouncing high taxes.  We're going to change 

all that. 

 

And that's what we've been saying.  That's what you folks 

across the road were elected on, the promise that there would 

be no taxes.  They were not necessary. 

 

Four point five billion dollars is a large enough budget for any 

government to operate under.  We do not need more taxes, he 

says. 

 

 It was Honest Roy (and I quote again) who said over and 

over again that, $4.5 billion in provincial revenues was 

enough.  He does not say this any more (he says). 

 

He does not say this any more. 

 

 It was Honest Roy who, during the election campaign, 

warned us of the deficit, that it would be hundreds of millions 

of dollars higher than the devious Devine administration let 

on.  Now he feigns surprise at the dimensions of (the) deficit. 

 

What I'm telling you good folks across the way is that it's not 

washing.  It's not washing with the people out there.  The 

people are telling us, you knew.  You knew the state of the 

finances of this province, and yet you went ahead, and yet you 

said you would do more with less.  That is what you said.  And 

I hear the toy minister chirping in the background. 

 

Well what else did you say, Mr. Minister?  I'll quote what you 

said.  It's in the paper.  And this time I happen to choose the 

Leader-Post.  I try to be balanced.  And the Leader-Post says, 

and I quote, Shillington -- and there's a nice beaming 

countenance of his is in here -- and it says:  The NDP won't 

raise any personal taxes for four years. 

 

These are not our ads, it's a total third party, totally divorced 

from any political affiliation.  And I am quoting what the 

former critic for Finance said: the NDP won't raise any 

personal taxes for four years.  That comforts me.  That 

comforts me, Mr. Speaker, knowing that I can rely on the 

words and the promises of our government; that I can relax, 

that I'll be able to sit back in my seat tomorrow while the 

Minister of Finance reads his budget, and not have to worry 

about being taxed more. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, that's precisely why the members 

opposite were elected.  We had our economic plan and we gave 

it to the province.  We gave it to the people.  They looked, they 

judged, and they said: we don't like it because the NDP are 

saying this, and we like that better, we like that better because 

he says no taxes, more services for less.  That's what he said. 

 

That's why you were elected, ladies and gentlemen, and that . . . 

 

(1630) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I must inform the Assembly 

that under Rule 13(4), it is my duty at this time to interrupt 

debate and put all questions necessary to dispose of the main 

motion. 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1992 

Before we -- could I have your attention, please? -- before we 

call in the members, I would just like to draw to the attention, 

especially of the new members but I noticed also some of the 

more experienced members, you should all have been aware 

that the motion was going to be taken at 4:30 and therefore you 

should have been in your seats or close to your seats and not 

cross in front of the Speaker when he's reading the motion.  

You either then stay behind the bar, but you don't cross in front 

while the Speaker is on his feet.  That is a standing rule, and it 

has been a tradition in this House for a long time.  So I ask 

members to please be aware of that in the future. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:31 p.m. until 4:38 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Roy 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Kujawa 

Carson Stanger 

MacKinnon Knezacek 

Penner Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

-- 42 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon River Heights: 

 

 That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 

Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Ways and Means 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That this Assembly pursuant to Rule 87 hereby appoint a 

Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be granted to 

Her Majesty and consider ways and means of raising the 

supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:45 p.m. 

 


