




















































Hansard: July 21, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1607 

 July 21, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petition has been 

reviewed pursuant to rules 11(6) and (7) and has been found to 

be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature a list of people of Voyageur Canada 92 that are 

going to Peterborough.  And in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, is 

the supervisor, Mr. George Marcotte from Estevan.  And other 

people that will be going to Peterborough this year are Marie 

Ballenas from Weyburn, Jennifer Fichter from Estevan, Nadine 

Fichter from Estevan, Ken Kessler from Pangman, Sherry 

Kennedy from Radville, Lindsay Mitchell from Minton, Patrick 

Nielson from Parry, Heather Ribling from Estevan, and 

Rhonda Thomas from Alameda. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'll point out that exchange students are 

coming to Saskatchewan from Peterborough, Ontario, and they 

will include the following: supervisor, Pat Simpson, Anya 

Annis, Marianna Boneshyn, Chris Cavanah, Heidi Haensel, 

Tanya Johnson, Laura Kennedy, Joanne King, Philip Saunders, 

and Darcy Werger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Legislative Assembly and its members 

to welcome these people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to 

extend my introduction to this group that is visiting the 

legislature today, Voyageurs.  I met with them this morning 

when they came and we had pictures and had a chance to have 

a discussion.  They are visiting in my constituency and Estevan 

and Weyburn area.  Like I said, I met with the group this 

morning.  The Saskatchewan host students will be returning to 

Peterborough in two weeks. 

 

I hope both groups find that this is a very valuable learning 

experience and have a lot of fun on their exchange.  And please 

join me again in welcoming the groups from Ontario and 

Saskatchewan here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask the members 

of the Legislative Assembly to bear with me as I introduce two 

or three groups to you.  And as I introduce them, Mr. Speaker 

-- they're in your gallery -- I would like to start with two 

students who are very near and dear to my heart.  It would be 

my son Noel and daughter Amber. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Noel is a part of the Voyageur 92 program, 

and has been very fortunate to have as parent guardian 

Laurianne Jacques, who's with the exchange group today; and 

parent helper, Donna Clarke.  With them is Zuzana McDonald, 

who comes from Etobicoke with a group of exchange students 

on the Voyageur 125 program.  And I'd ask the students from 

Etobicoke to stand.  They're with also their host students from 

Regina. 

 

With them also is Ms. Jessie Yee, Wannetta Yee, who are 

hosting exchange students from France.  And the exchange 

students are Maxime Laisné and Oliver Morel d'Arleux.  And 

I'd ask you to welcome them from France and welcome them to 

Canada, and also to the Assembly and to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- With the students that are visiting from 

Etobicoke, we have the Regina host students, and they will be 

going to Etobicoke at the end of this month.  They've had a 

very busy schedule, and this evening they'll be going to the 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) sunset ceremony and 

to the museum.  And they have many other things planned on 

their stay and will be returning this week.  So I ask the 

members of this Assembly to welcome them and greet them to 

Regina with a hearty welcome. 

 

As we were on tour, I also met with a Margaret Rippley who is 

here from Nova Scotia, and I would welcome Margaret who 

has been on our tour and in your Speaker's gallery as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  Thank you very much, and wish everyone a safe 

journey home as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today marks the 

25th anniversary of the opening of the Gardiner dam on the 

South Saskatchewan River.  This dam, like so many others that 

currently grace our province, was a dream founded in the 

dust-filled winds of the Depression, a dream of the then Liberal 

premier, Jimmy Gardiner. 

 

The project cost $136 million, went $6 million over budget.  

Measured in today's dollars, the value of the dam is in excess of 

$890 million, a testimony to the importance of careful planning 

and vision where projects of this nature are concerned.  In the 

25 years since its completion, the dam has provided many 

benefits: irrigation, hydro-electricity, tourism, and water 

supply.  Although the dam has fallen short of meeting all of its 

expectations with regards to irrigation, it has produced 

immeasurable benefits in terms of hydro-electricity and 

tourism.  The economic benefits of the project approaches $1.7 

billion today. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I urge the government, the planners of 

our province, the people, to support the development of 

policies such as this that will ensure that other dreams, coupled 

with careful management of public funds and our natural 

resources, will create a secure future for us all. 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to again raise the issue of off-loading.  I believe it is 

worth raising again on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan 

and indeed all people of Saskatchewan to ensure that the 

federal government gets the message. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1987 and '98 the federal government did take 

responsibility for major farm programs in Saskatchewan and 

Canada.  But since 1989, in fact up until 1991, Saskatchewan 

had paid up to 50 per cent of what the federal had offered as 

financing for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Since 1988 western provinces have been forced to pay costs of 

25 per cent crop insurance, 25 per cent revenue insurance, and 

25 per cent of debt income stabilization.  Prior to that, federal 

and provincial government properly took major responsibility 

for price instability through western grain stabilization at 60 

per cent federal, 40 per cent producer, and through other 

instabilities like crop insurance, 50 per cent federal, 50 per cent 

producer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, western provinces, and Saskatchewan in 

particular, have a large agricultural sector -- 43 per cent of 

Canada's farm land, 3 per cent of the population, and 2 per cent 

of the GDP (gross domestic product). 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have a case where the last government 

mortgaged our future and now we're paying those payments 

from yester-year.  It is not our fault, Mr. Producer, that we're in 

this state.  On behalf of all farmers in Saskatchewan, I urge the 

opposition to join with us and go to the federal government and 

unanimously call upon them to bring forth aid to Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We all know that 

education is important for a healthy environment.  As part of its 

education program, Saskatchewan Environment and Public 

Safety recently developed a new poster series.  During 

Environment Week the department distributed the posters to 

every school in the province.  I'm happy to inform members of 

this House, Mr. Speaker, that for the rest of the school year 

teachers kept up a steady stream of requests for additional 

class-room sets. 

 

As a teacher myself, I can attest to their value.  Their message 

is that our environment is both fragile and beautiful and we 

must all take responsibility to protect this natural heritage.  

This set of five posters shows our air, land, water, flora, and 

fauna in striking photography. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Environment and the Economic Development 

departments shared the cost of photography for the posters.  So 

far the Economic Development department has used the posters 

to promote the province's tourism features at the Calgary 

Stampede and it plans to use them to help sell Saskatchewan 

food products in eastern Canada this fall. 

 

If your group or organization could use the posters to promote 

Saskatchewan, contact the Department of Environment and 

Public Safety.  The posters are unique and truly beautiful, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe they will 

provide many years of effective use for both tourism promotion 

and environmental education in Saskatchewan.  Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

talk about the Hudson Bay Route and the Port of Churchill.  

Starting in July grain shipments will be allowed to leave the 

port.  I've been aware of the Port of Churchill and its 

importance to north-central and north-east and east-central 

Saskatchewan for some time now.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

attended my first Hudson Bay Route Association meeting in 

Melville back in about 1965 or '66. 

 

With the changing face of the Soviet Union the port becomes 

extremely important.  It provides us a close and direct route for 

importing and exporting goods.  For this port to survive and 

expand, the political will must exist.  I firmly believe under the 

years of indifferent federal Liberal and Tory governments the 

port has just barely survived.  The time has come to recognize 

the vital importance of Churchill and fully utilize it.  This port 

is critical to our long-term economic viability. 

 

And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to use 

whatever influence they have to see to it that the port is used to 

its fullest potential.  I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Today marks day 3 since the loss of the 

traditional democratic rights for the people of Saskatchewan 

and for the members of this Assembly.  The official opposition 

in this legislature no longer has the right to oppose the 

government with our traditional, tangible means, and any 

member opposite who would say otherwise is not telling the 

truth.  These rights exist no longer because this NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government doesn't believe in preserving 

democracy and has no respect for our parliamentary heritage. 

 

No longer can the bells ring when the government brings 

forward controversial Bills, even if the Bills themselves break 

the law.  No longer can every person in Saskatchewan be heard 

in this Assembly. 

 

Along with the people of this province, the opposition has been 

left with little to grasp until the people indeed politically revolt, 

and revolt they will.  Far stronger than a cold-hearted, 

contemptuous NDP government is the will of those striving for 

fairness and justice and freedom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On day 3 I'd like to 

report some very good news from Meadow Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- The housing market in Meadow Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, remains one of the hottest in the province.  When 

compared to communities of similar size, there literally is no 

comparison.  Our market remains strong, Mr. Speaker, for a 

number of reasons. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

Over the years there has been movement by federal 

government employees, Crown corporations, financial 

institutions, and the RCMP to Meadow Lake.  The people of 

our fine community remain optimistic, and optimism, Mr. 

Speaker, is what contributes to our healthy economy. 

 

As hard as it might be to believe, Mr. Speaker, houses in 

Meadow Lake are receiving a better price than they are in 

Saskatoon when comparing comparative homes.  Prices are 

from 5 to 10 per cent higher than they really should be, based 

basically on optimism.  There were 16 new starts in Meadow 

Lake to June 30 of this year, Mr. Speaker, with 37 permits 

issued so far.  The 37 permits include 16 homes, one 

eight-plex, 15 residential renovations, and five commercial 

renovations.  This year's permits so far are in excess of $2 

million. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to commend the fine people of 

Meadow Lake for believing in themselves when the rest of the 

province is hurting in other areas.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, the focus of this segment 

of House business is provincial, just as the prime duty of its 

members is to debate the affairs of Saskatchewan.  Mel Hurtig 

once said, the business of provincial politicians is to be 

provincial.  However, from time to time, as the Leader of the 

Opposition did recently, we should lift our heads above the 

border and acknowledge affairs of the wider world of which 

we're also a part. 

 

As a case in point, Mr. Speaker, is the current involvement by 

members of the Canadian Armed Forces from all across the 

provinces, in the United Nations effort to restore and maintain 

peace in that troubled part of the world which was once 

Yugoslavia. 

 

It is a dangerous mission, its outcome doubtful.  But if that 

region is not to degenerate further into bloody anarchy, there 

must be a moral presence there to uphold the values of 

civilization.  This is why the UN (United Nations) was 

founded.  This is why Canada has always been such a fervent 

supporter of the UN and its mandate. 

 

As a Canadian I am proud to see that once again Canadian 

military forces are peace-keepers.  They are inserting 

themselves between foes rather than engaging the enemy.  This 

is a practice which I believe takes far more courage and 

intelligence than the historical function of war where ignorant 

armies clash by night, as Matthew Arnold once said.  Our 

troops, under Major General Lewis MacKenzie . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Members' statements have ended. Why is the 

member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I'd ask leave to introduce 

guests, please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

you and through you to other members of the Assembly, 

representatives from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council.  At 

the back of the Chamber we have students, along with a staff 

person, Jill Hunt.  And in the Speaker's gallery we have a 

number of volunteers with the Abilities Council, accompanied 

by the staff person Kerri Buchberger. 

 

If they would like to stand, and I'd ask other members to give 

them a warm welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rail Transportation Policy 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of Highways and Transportation.  

There seems to be some confusion regarding your 

government's transportation policy.  Please go on record 

regarding what you think will happen to rural Saskatchewan if 

our roads and railways are allowed to deteriorate further. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, that's a very, very large 

topic, the transportation evolution in Saskatchewan over the 

years.  There are I guess two areas of concern to the member 

opposite and ourselves. That is the ongoing discussions on 

transportation within the branch-line system that is clearly a 

focus and important discussion for all of our farmers who are 

grain producers particularly.  And as the member opposite may 

be aware, it's been an ongoing topic of discussion at 

federal-provincial ministers' meetings.  And we will continue to 

support the view of the Saskatchewan farmers that the present 

method of payment best secures a stable and secure system for 

transporting grains and making export markets accessible to 

farmers in every corner of the province. 

 

On the question of roads, clearly there is a challenge as the 

branch-line system slowly becomes smaller and the road 

system takes on a larger share of the traffic.  We have a road 

system that has over the years been built up -- 11,000 

kilometres of pavement, about 8,000 kilometres of thin asphalt, 

and about 69,000 kilometres of municipal road -- that will 

require more upkeep and more construction as the loads on it 

increase. 

 

And clearly it's a concern for us in discussions with the federal 

government that as we look at the interests of the Canadian 

economy, we ask them to address with us the needs of both our 

road and our rail systems in the long haul. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

people of this province would be utterly 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

outraged if they understood what your government's taxation 

policy on the railways truly means.  And everyone in this 

Assembly agrees that the railways should be taxed.  But you 

tell us: why does Saskatchewan have the highest rate on 

locomotive fuel on the North American continent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it again an interesting 

contradiction that the member opposite would be apparently 

interested in the fiscal stability of the province and our ability 

to create a sound transportation system; on the other hand, 

express the concern she expresses. 

 

As the member opposite may be aware, there was no increase 

in the taxation for locomotives in this spring's budget, that the 

rail system has continued to have its expenses paid through the 

calculations that are done at the national level in the provision 

of service for Saskatchewan, and that in fact the rail systems 

have done very well, thank you, having had access in a 

relatively monopolistic way to the various corners of 

transportation for Saskatchewan products here in 

Saskatchewan.  And I'm . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the previous 

government's policy was so intelligent that it cost 3,000 jobs in 

the railway system in this province in the previous nine years, 

and you're saying it was so good that you're going to maintain 

it. 

 

Now there are people who represent the ridings of Moose Jaw, 

there are someone here who's representing Melville, there's 

someone here who's representing Biggar, and I want you to tell 

me what you're going to tell the people in those rail 

communities, who have suffered and continue to suffer under 

this policy, what they can expect from your government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite I think 

fails to recognize that national transportation policy is very 

much in the hands of our federal government and the direction 

is set by them. 

 

We have certainly seen the evaporation of our transportation 

system for people through the rail system.  The rail system 

continues to be functioning in a regulated fashion across the 

province and the work that's done is a very significant amount 

of work here in the province in collecting grain and in taking 

other raw commodities to market and in bringing some produce 

into Saskatchewan. 

 

I fail to see the point of the member opposite, that she would 

challenge the province's taxation policies when clearly the 

biggest sin of the last 10 years is that we failed to take the 

money required to pay the expenses necessary to run the 

economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

think you fail to realize what this means -- 

having 19 cents per litre fuel tax for the railway system.  We're 

talking here about jobs -- you have mentioned about moving 

products, the products that in fact create the backbone for our 

economy -- and we're talking about peoples' lives here in this 

province. 

 

I'm going to table a letter from you to me dated June 19 

outlining your intention to continue levying the largest tax that 

there is on the North American continent on locomotive fuel.  

And what I'd like to do is to have you tell me how many more 

jobs you're willing to have lost; how much extra you're willing 

to have farmers pay for freight; how much more freight will 

have to be moved by trucks on already worn-out highways; and 

how much more traffic is going to have to go to the United 

States before your government is going to come up with any 

kind of sensible transportation policy at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite forgets 

that the railway continues to carry significant amounts of 

product from Saskatchewan to market.  It is no less and no 

more than it would be under any other taxation policy. 

 

The interesting fact is that we meet on a regular basis with the 

various sectors in transportation.  And they respect the need of 

the province to collect taxation.  They respect the need to 

maintain a transportation system. 

 

I fail to see what the alternate system the member opposite 

describes that would be somehow different if all of a sudden 

the people of Saskatchewan paid more and the CPR (Canadian 

Pacific Rail) and the CNR (Canadian National Railway 

Company) paid less.  I fail to see it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I 

doubt very much if your department has done any studies at all 

about how much longer the rail industry can sustain this. 

 

And if you did your homework, you would know that 750,000 

tonnes of potash are shipped annually from Esterhazy potash 

mines by truck to the United States in order to get on their rail 

service and go elsewhere because of the policies on taxation on 

locomotive fuel in this province. 

 

Now what are you going to be doing to show us that you in fact 

are going to do something about this policy and your taxation 

policy before this industry becomes a memory in this province 

like VIA passenger rail? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite would 

seem to be on the same path that her predecessors in the federal 

government began in the 1970s in order to begin to speak 

against the farmers and the average taxpayers in Saskatchewan 

and in favour of the railroads. 

 

The fact is that national policy has resulted in some changes in 

the rail system, but it certainly is not the Saskatchewan fuel tax.  

The Saskatchewan taxation is a reasonable return for the people 

of Saskatchewan for an immense amount of business that's 

done here. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

We have at the national table, between Highways ministers and 

Transportation ministers and with the federal government, 

discussed the other dilemma you describe, which is the threat 

of the transportation system moving into other areas.  But it has 

much more to do with the questions of level playing-fields and 

the manner in which other systems treat their people as 

opposed to us trying to run a system where . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trade Mission Travel Arrangements 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

Minister of Economic Development.  Welcome back to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  A simple question.  Can you tell 

us which one of the 700 club of businesses did you meet with 

in New York?  And can you be telling us which ones will soon 

be relocating to Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that while in Pennsylvania and New York, 

Washington and New Jersey, we met with about 20 various 

groups talking to them about trade and economic development.  

We met with Julius Katz, one of the main trade negotiators in 

Washington on the NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement) agreement. 

 

And members opposite who are pushing that agreement will be 

interested in knowing that there are some very, very difficult 

problems with the agreement.  And in meeting with Mr. Katz, 

he's trying to meet an agenda basically surrounding the 

American election. 

 

But yesterday in meeting with Mr. Wilson in Ottawa, it became 

very clear that Canadians in general are having a very difficult 

time coming to a resolve on that agreement because of the lack 

of definition that has been put forward. 

 

I have a list here of some of the other people that we met with.  

We met with Bruce Wilson, the chair of the trade 

subcommittee of the Ways and Means Committee in 

Washington.  We met with . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, we'd ask if you would table that list 

for us, please.  And I'm also sure that the taxpayers and 

unemployed in this province will be just salivating over your 

successes in New York. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand a Mr. Stobbe accompanied you to 

the Big Apple.  Mr. Stobbe does not work for you or the 

Department of Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, can you 

tell us why you took this NDP political hack from Social 

Services department with you on an economic development 

mission? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, very clearly the 

members opposite, including the former premier, will well 

know that when ministers travel and when 

 individuals in government travel, they often take assistants.  

We had four people in total on the tour.  One other person from 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Don Loewen, was with us 

at a number of the meetings that dealt with pasta production. 

 

We're trying to sort out a deal that was begun by the previous 

government in Swift Current, to find out whether they had any 

marketing for pasta when they made the announcement.  And 

it's very clear that if we're going to build that plant, we have to 

have a place to sell it to.  That had escaped the former premier 

when he made the announcement. 

 

And so we're very anxious.  We met with about five pasta 

companies in the area of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York 

-- in those three states.  Hershey foods, for example, uses a 

large quantity of pasta in many of their products, and the 

member from Estevan would know that in setting up the deal . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I'm sure that everyone will be interested in finding 

out what Mr. Stobbe's expertise is when it comes to pasta 

production.  In fact, Mr. Minister, the Gass Commission 

recommended that political hacks not be taken on missions like 

this, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I don't think the 

member can be heard.  We need to just simmer it down a bit 

and let the member be heard.  Order! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Stobbe is a 

political hack for the Social Services department.  And, Mr. 

Minister, you also promised that you would abide by the Gass 

Commission's recommendation not to use political hacks from 

other departments in your department.  You made that 

commitment to this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Stobbe is also the same gentleman who wrote a book about 

the opposition leader which contained as much inflamed 

political rhetoric as your budget address contains.  You've 

claimed that you never . . . You also claimed, Mr. Minister, that 

you never attended the Democratic national convention, which 

Bill Clinton conveniently scheduled during your visit. 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, if Mr. Stobbe attended the 

political convention?  Was Mr. Stobbe researching another 

partisan book, or was he studying the food bank in Times 

Square? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it is true that Mr. 

Stobbe wrote a book that had less than glamorous things to say 

about the former premier.  But the problem is that everything 

he said was right.  And that's not our problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- But I want to indicate that Mr. 

Stobbe was with us as an assistant to the group.  He made 

writing reports, calling back to Regina, attending meetings.  

Whether or not he attended the Democratic convention, he 

certainly didn't do it during the working hours.  He was 

working with us during the day. 

 

And I want to tell the members opposite that if we want to go 

through the litany of Christmas holidays that were taken by the 

then premier on . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand you donated the convention registration fees to the 

Democratic Party.  Mr. Minister, given your success on the 

economic front, may I suggest you also donate the entire cost 

of the trip to the Saskatchewan taxpayers.  Mr. Minister, how 

much did this cost, and what kind of return can we get on our 

money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I want to say to the members 

opposite, that any of the arrangements that come as a result of 

our trip -- whether it's the sale of lentils or wild rice or some of 

the pork products -- it will not be a GigaText that came about 

as a result of trips to Montreal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say, as to the registration 

of the fee that supposedly some of the press people are carrying 

as a story, I had pre-registered for the convention, had planned 

to stop in.  I didn't make it.  And the Clinton-Gore team were 

good enough to refund my money, so I don't have to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to the 

Minister of Justice.  Obviously we're not going to get anywhere 

with the Economic Development minister with respect to Mr. 

Stobbe, so I'll direct my question to the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, considering the NDP law firm of Oliver Waller 

& Waller engaged in law suits against former government 

employees, will you instruct them to also launch legal action 

against Mr. Stobbe to recover the costs of his trip to New York 

at the taxpayers' expense when he obviously, obviously did not 

work for the Social Services department which pays his salary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that the . . . that people who were on the tour, Mr. 

Hart and Ms. Torrie, and as well as Mark Stobbe, were very, 

very attentively working while on the trip.  The same as 

members of the staff of the Premier.  I hope the former 

premier, while he was on tour in China and the long list of 

places he went to, worked while they were on the job on those 

tours.  And Mr. Stobbe is a very excellent employee, works for 

the government, and has a work 

ethic in record that is second to none.  That certainly can't be 

said about the members opposite in the last month here in the 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Letter on Health Care Changes 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

absence of the Minister of Health, I direct my question to the 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, last week your plan to close or convert 66 rural 

hospitals was finally uncovered.  Now we understand your 

department officials are frantically changing the wellness plan 

to fulfil your minister's claims that the leaked copy was just a 

draft.  Mr. Premier, eraser sales in Regina are rocketing right 

now, sky-rocketing just as they did in the leaks of the Minister 

of Finance's budget. 

 

We also uncovered the fact, Mr. Premier, that you were 

engaging in a massive direct-mail campaign to do damage 

control.  At that time, on July 9, we asked you if the letter that 

you were sending out would contain any inflamed political 

rhetoric.  By avoiding your question, you implied that there 

would be none. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, could you tell us whether the taxpayers 

have paid for your political message?  Can you tell us if that 

letter on government letterhead contained any partisan attacks 

on the PC Party?  Can you tell us that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much 

for that question.  I guess I have three points to make in 

response to the question.  First of all, the leaked document was 

merely one of a series of proposals being considered by the 

cabinet.  It is not in any sense definitive. 

 

If a letter was sent out by the Department of Health, it was in 

response to a letter sent by the member opposite, which the 

government thought was very misleading.  The purpose of the 

letter from the Department of Health was to clarify the 

situation. 

 

And I guess my final point is, what the letter said is the clear 

position of the government.  Whenever any changes are made 

in the health care system, there will be extensive consultation 

with the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

the truth is that that document is valid.  You admitted that 

yourself through your Minister of Health. 

 

The wellness report, I remind the House and the people of this 

province, was not authored by us.  You and your department 

planned and developed a comprehensive document which 

contained some very, very disturbing strategies.  We merely 

did our job, in fact we did your job in telling the public about 

it.  Scare tactics are the kinds of statements that your Minister 

of Health is very well aware of when it comes to choosing 

between groceries and drugs. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

Madam Minister, we have received -- and I say this to the 

Minister of Health now -- we have received your damage 

control letter, and clearly its main purpose is a political attack 

on the PCs (Progressive Conservative).  Why did you not 

attack the Liberals in the same letter?  Is it because they agree 

with your devastation on the rural health programs?  That's 

what I'm asking you.  Madam Minister, a simple question: how 

much -- how much did this latest round of political advertising 

cost the taxpayer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

there was a leaked document that was referred to in the 

Legislative Assembly and we pointed out that it was not 

government policy.  The members opposite wrote to people 

across Saskatchewan stating that this document indicated the 

closure of 66 rural hospitals.  That is clear and simple scare 

tactics and abusive with respect to the residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It has caused a lot of concern amongst Saskatchewan residents.  

People are concerned. They're upset because you have written 

to them and suggested that there are 66 closures of rural 

hospitals.  Notwithstanding that in this legislature, before you 

sent that letter out, we explained it was not government policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

we did not send a letter out.  The people were upset because we 

sent your wellness plan out to them.  That's what they were 

upset about. 

 

Now we have here, and I'm holding it in my hand, a message 

from the Minister of Health, government document, talking 

about Tory opposition -- Tory opposition.  A blatant, political, 

partisan approach using taxpayers' money to do that.  That's 

what the problem is. 

 

You have a caucus budget, you have a communication staff, 

and you have an extensive NDP Party communications 

network to do your dirty work for you, Madam Minister.  

That's who you should be doing your dirty work with. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you wanted to allay the concerns of 

rural Saskatchewan, why did you not tell the thousands of 

people that this letter was sent to, that you would be holding 

extensive public hearings before any hospitals would be 

converted or closed?  Will you commit to that, Madam 

Minister, that you will hold extensive public hearings and listen 

to what the people are saying? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

been trying to interfere with the government's plan with respect 

to reform in Saskatchewan by disseminating information 

throughout the province that is causing undue concern to 

people.  That's what the members opposite are doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

The fact of the matter is, is this government will be consulting 

widely with people.  We have made a 

commitment to do that in the past and we make a commitment 

to do it again, that we will be consulting widely with people on 

health care reform in the months to come. 

 

And this was the intent of the letter that was sent out, to advise 

people not to worry about the scare tactics of the opposition but 

to wait and see what we have to come forward with, what we 

will come forward with, and to wait for the consultation that 

will take place.  We made that commitment in our letter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier with 

respect to his philosophy about fairness. 

 

In the letter from the Minister of Health on government 

letterhead, Mr. Premier, clearly it's a partisan attack paid for by 

the taxpayers.  The letter says: 

 

 . . . the Tory Opposition continues to circulate the document 

and to escalate their scare tactics in rural communities. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you believe that it is right and proper to bring 

in partisan politics on the letterhead of the Minister of Health, 

the deputy minister of Health, in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I say to the 

Leader of the Opposition that it would be my hope as Premier 

that although we understand there are times for partisanship 

and political ideological differences, that where possible we try 

to minimize that in the Legislative Assembly, even in the 

charged atmosphere of the various debates that we have.  I 

would hope that he would subscribe to that view as well. 

 

But as the Minister of Health has indicated, this letter that 

you're questioning about was prompted as a result of statements 

made by, if not yourself, members of your caucus on the 

interpretations about this leaked document.  Now there had to 

be a response.  And since you were the people who made the 

statements, the letter responded to those statements made by 

you people.  And the result is that that is an answer that was 

made. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about the Liberals?  What about 

other political parties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the member says, what about the 

Liberals, because quite frankly, so far as I know, the Liberals 

did not make those kinds of outrageous statements that you 

people have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, could we have leave to go 

back to a ministerial statement? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Equipment to Treat Heart Disease 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to 

report on the steps my government is taking to provide better, 

more efficient health services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Heart disease is the biggest health threat to people in 

Saskatchewan and indeed across North America.  Cardiac 

catheterization equipment is key to the diagnosis and treatment 

of heart disease and the need for this equipment has been 

growing steadily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announced that my government 

has approved the funding necessary for the hospital to proceed 

with renovations needed to install new cardiac catheterization 

equipment at the Regina Plains Health Centre.  The renovations 

are expected to cost 423,000 of which the provincial 

government will contribute a maximum of 350,000. 

 

My government approved the purchase of the 1.7 million 

equipment in March and we will be paying 75 per cent or 1.3 

million of its cost.  The equipment has been ordered and is 

expected to be available once renovations have been completed 

in mid-winter. 

 

As I have said, Mr. Speaker, cardiac catheterization equipment 

is used in the diagnosis and treatment of heart disease.  

Catheterizations are done to examine the heart's arteries, 

valves, and/or pumping chambers and are used in a variety of 

treatments such as angioplasty. 

 

(1415) 

 

The prevention of disease is one of the fundamental goals of 

my government's health care reform initiatives.  This new 

equipment will not only allow the hospital to provide vital 

treatment to the sufferers of heart disease by allowing for more 

sophisticated types of testing than is currently available, it will 

save lives by assisting in the early detection of this killer 

disease. 

 

I am pleased we have been able to assist the Regina Health 

Board and the Regina Plains Health Centre to provide this 

valuable service to the people of southern Saskatchewan.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

have leave to respond? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Assembly.  I do wish to congratulate the 

government on its decision to bring forward more innovative 

equipment into the province of Saskatchewan and to allow for 

more thorough diagnoses and hopefully better prognoses for 

the people of this province who suffer heart disease.  It just 

gives me pleasure to, first of all, thank the minister for making 

her words available; and secondly, to be able to join with the 

government in congratulating them on their move to bring 

better health 

services to the people of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, we certainly have no problem at 

all in the government using its resources and so on to improve 

health facilities in the province so that our people can indeed 

continue to have the best kind of health care possible.  And I 

know the minister has already made some other 

announcements in this House of projects that they are 

undertaking, and as an individual project we would stand in our 

place here and commend the minister and the government for 

those kinds of initiatives.  We have no problem with that. 

 

But I understand, and with quick preliminary look at the 

statement that the minister has just said, that I understand that 

this is going to be put into the Plains hospital in Regina.  Now a 

concern that we in the opposition benches would have with that 

is that we're not quite sure what the future holds for the Plains 

hospital in Regina.  I don't know if the minister does, and if she 

does, we would, I'm sure, and many people in Regina would 

like to hear the minister's comments about the future of the 

Plains hospital in Regina. 

 

The Atkinson report indicated five different options that we 

could pursue.  Three of those five, which is 60 per cent of those 

options, indicated either the closing of the hospital or 

drastically altering the procedures and the medical facilities 

that would be available to the general public in the Plains 

hospital.  That to me right now is almost a bigger concern and 

I'm sure to many of the people of this city of Regina. 

 

So on the surface, Mr. Speaker, although we commend this 

particular step, we question some of the wisdom of the minister 

in making this announcement the way it was made.  We have 

those concerns that I think, for the benefit, Madam Minister, of 

all the people of Regina, that you lay out as quickly, as rapidly 

as possible what the future does indeed hold in store for the 

Plains hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River on his feet? 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Leave to introduce some guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you and to the members of the Assembly, I'd like to 

introduce to you some people from my constituency.  We've 

got the reeve from the RM (Rural Municipality) of Buckland, 

Lawrence Viala, Sid Zdrill, and Bill Richard, and Harvey 

McKeen.  I will be meeting with them at 3 o'clock and I'd like 

everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, ask for leave for the 

introduction of a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I noticed in the gallery opposite a 

distinguished Saskatchewan citizen that I met in my previous 

life involved in the school business and learned to appreciate, 

George Bothwell, who's been involved with the library trustees' 

association and many other important Saskatchewan 

endeavours in his career.  I welcome you to the Assembly, Mr. 

Bothwell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I move that a 

Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day I wish to ask for leave to drop, under government motions, 

motion no. 1 by the Hon. Mr. Shillington to move a motion: 

 

 That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, following 

the adoption of this motion, meet from 1:30 p.m. until 5:00 

p.m. and from 7:00 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. on Mondays, 

Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, and from 10:00 a.m. 

until 1:00 p.m. on Fridays. 

 

The government would ask that that motion be dropped. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Granting Leave for Members to attend Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That leave of absence be granted for hon. members in the 

constituencies of Saskatoon Wildwood, Meadow Lake, 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University, Bengough-Milestone, 

Wilkie, and Rosthern, from Monday, July 27,1992 to Friday 

July 31, 1992 inclusive for the purpose of attending the 

Thirty-second Canadian Regional Conference in St. John's, 

Newfoundland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, 23 students that 

are seated in the Speaker's gallery.  They are part of the 

Voyageur '92 program.  We have 10 students from Ontario and 

13 students from Foam Lake and area which is in my 

constituency. 

 

They are accompanied by Donna Evans, Doreen McLinchey, 

Barry Howe, and the bus driver is Peter Kwasnitza.  And I 

would like all members of the Assembly to welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to make 

a statement on a point of order that was made yesterday. 

 

Yesterday, the member from Rosthern raised a point of order.  

The point of order is well taken. 

 

Yesterday the member from Rosthern raised a point of order 

stating that the government's response to question no. 43, 

tabled on Friday, July 17, 1992, was not a complete response to 

the written question asked. 

 

When a question is called in the Assembly there are several 

possible courses of action available.  The minister may table 

the answer, convert the question into an order for return, 

convert the question into an order for return (debatable), or 

refer the question to the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations.  In addition, the Clerk may convert the answer, 

once tabled, into a return, if the answer is lengthy. 

 

It is a well-established practice in this Assembly that a question 

must be answered as written.  It is not a motion and therefore 

cannot be voted on, debated, or amended.  In order to change 

the wording of a question or to debate the matter, the question 

must be converted into a notice of motion for return (debatable) 

as provided for in rule 38.  For an explanation of this process, I 

refer all members to the Report of the Special Committee on 

Standing Orders and Procedures of the Assembly, dated 

December 1969, page 23. 

 

Last Friday the minister tabled a response to question no. 43 

which the Clerk converted into a return.  I have examined the 

answer to question 43 as tabled by the minister.  In my 

estimation the tabled response fails to answer one element of 

the question, that is, the names of individuals with whom the 

wellness team consulted.  Only the number of individuals 

consulted was provided.  This is not what was asked in this part 

of the question. 

 

While the minister had the option to convert the question to a 

motion for return (debatable) in order to have it 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

amended, she chose not to do so but tabled a reply which, in 

my opinion, failed to answer one element of question no. 43.  

Therefore I rule that the member may resubmit his question at a 

later date. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, no. 45, I'd ask the question be 

converted to motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for returns (debatable). 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

Ukrainian Catholic Parishes within Saskatchewan 

 

Pages 1 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition Association, 

Limited 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited 

 

Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- Would one of the members move that the 

committee rise and report progress. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I would move the committee rise and report. 

 

The Chair: -- It's been moved by the member for Regina 

Wascana Plains that the committee report progress.  Is that 

agreed? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that I 

believe that a member of cabinet needs to be addressing that. 

 

The Chair: -- No, this is private members' day, these are 

private Bills and therefore is the purview of the members of the 

House and need not need any . . . need not require the 

assistance of the government and therefore the motion is in 

order. 
 

THIRD READINGS 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

Ukrainian Catholic Parishes within Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An 

Act to provide for the incorporation of Ukrainian Catholic 

Parishes within Saskatchewan, be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition Association, 

Limited 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would move that 

Bill No. 02, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition Association, 

Limited, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that Bill 

No. 03, An Act to amend An Act to amend and consolidate An 

Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society 

Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services 

Limited, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Wellness Program 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to address the 

legislature on the very important topic of wellness.  As a 

psychologist, I was involved in various stress management and 

public educational activities to help people choose healthier 

life-styles.  Much of my work was in community development, 

implementing community empowerment measures for primary 

prevention in the area of mental illness, so I am extremely 

pleased that our government will be moving toward a model of 

prevention and community involvement in health care. 

 

You know, it is curious to contemplate that over half the 

world's population are dying of the diseases of deprivation, 

communicable illnesses, and infections, while Canada ranks 

among the top 10 countries in the world in life expectancy.  

Only Japanese women live longer than Saskatchewan women.  

Meanwhile Saskatchewan men are ranked sixth in the world. 

 

Not only do we live longer than most people in the world, 

when we do die it tends to be from life-style-related causes 

such as various heart or respiratory diseases or 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

certain cancers.  Research tells us that many of these illnesses 

can be prevented through greater life-style management.  

We've made great progress, Mr. Speaker, and we will make 

more as we work towards a healthy and responsible 

community, to halt cigarette smoking, reduce alcohol 

consumption, and improve road and work-place safety. 

 

Our health care system is the envy of the world; however it is 

time for us to recognize some problems inherent in it and move 

on to the next generation of health care.  We in Saskatchewan 

can be justly proud of having pioneered socialized medicine, 

first with insured hospital services in 1947 and then with 

insured physician services in 1962 -- the birth of medicare in 

Canada. 

 

The principles of medicare, Mr. Speaker -- accessibility, 

universality, comprehensiveness, portability, and public 

administration -- have served us well.  It is time though to add 

another principle, and that principle is wellness.  For too long 

our health care system has in fact been an illness care system.  

It is now time to move beyond our reliance on technological 

advances targeted at treating illness.  Instead we must work 

actively to prevent illness and disabilities.  We must view 

people in an holistic manner and recognize all the factors that 

affect our health. 

 

Bricks and mortar, beds and capital construction, are simply no 

substitute for community involvement and responsible decision 

making.  We have the highest number of hospital beds of any 

province in Canada, and an extremely intensive use of 

hospitals, physicians, and prescription drug services.  At the 

same time, people want a greater sense of empowerment and 

involvement in decisions affecting their lives, including health 

care services.  The wellness model is designed to respond to 

those trends. 

 

As a board member of Saskatoon City Hospital, I became 

aware of the ironic fact that Saskatoon does not really need 

three hospitals.  Despite the fact that over 50 per cent of 

patients admitted to City Hospital and St. Paul's Hospital, and 

75 per cent admitted to University Hospital come from outside 

that city, Saskatoon still probably needs only about two and 

one-half hospitals. 

 

Ironically, the reason for this comes from technological 

advances and day-surgery techniques, many of them pioneered 

at Saskatoon City Hospital.  This occurred at a time when the 

former government was approving massive expansion and 

renovations in Saskatoon's hospitals -- the bricks and beds 

theory of health care that is absolutely no substitute for quality 

patient care and decent home care services. 

 

It will require the wisdom of Solomon and the community 

sensitivity of the recently appointed Saskatoon Health Board to 

decide where that adjustment to two and a half from three 

hospitals will occur. But I'm confident that they will succeed, 

Mr. Speaker, just as I am confident that we will see success 

with similar other community wellness boards across this 

province.  The individuals who are working to change our 

illness system into a wellness system are genuinely committed 

to developing a system that prevents diseases and promotes 

health. 

Mr. Speaker, we have many hospitals in this province, yet the 

pattern of utilization is not what many would expect or want 

from a modern health-oriented system.  Too often people drive 

by the hospital in their home community to go to a larger, more 

modern hospital.  Often these are the same people who want to 

see their hospital stay open as a means of employment in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I spoke recently with a woman who argued that her local, small 

hospital should remain open because she needed the $300 per 

month that she gets as a cook for that hospital.  That money 

supplements her farm income.  Jobs are important, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly jobs that help women and their families 

stay on the farm.  However, it is not a question of jobs or no 

hospital; it is a question of jobs and a modern, responsive 

health care system meeting the real health needs of people. 

 

(1445) 

 

Just think of the community benefit and health-enhancing 

activity this woman could be sharing by using her skills to 

provide nutritional advice and community education to seniors 

in their homes.  Think of how this new wellness model can be 

used to expand and enhance the quality of jobs, the quality of 

life, and the quality of health care in rural Saskatchewan.  

Sociologically and demographically it is important to begin to 

deinstitutionalize the health care system, particularly for 

seniors.  We're living longer.  Let's work now to ensure that 

we're living better. 

 

We anticipate that seniors will make up 15 per cent of 

Saskatchewan's population by the year 2000.  Since seniors 

currently use an estimated 45 per cent of all public health 

resources in Saskatchewan, this could translate into increased 

service and cost pressures.  We simply must be able to respond 

adequately and sensibly to those pressures.  An evolution, the 

third wave of medicare, the wellness model, is the way to do 

that. 

 

We know the public expectations about the provincial health 

care system are very high.  There is a pervasive techno-fix-it 

attitude that is at odds with a compelling need to work on the 

prevention of disease and the promotion of health.  The 

wellness model, Mr. Speaker, will establish a collective view 

of the health care system that emphasizes healthy life-style 

choices and individual responsibility within a framework of 

community-oriented decision making. 

 

As we age, we must recognize that we will want and need 

health care for terminal illnesses.  In many cases we will be 

faced with the need to provide those services at home.  And in 

many cases those home services will be the most dignified and 

humane services that could be provided.  But as long as we 

continue with a bloated system that over-emphasizes 

institutional care and cannot provide the necessary educational 

and support services for sensitive and loving care at home, we 

will never have the sort of system that can adequately respond 

to people's real health care needs. 

 

I want to talk a bit about my experiences in providing home 

nursing care for my husband during his terminal illness, and the 

kinds of trends and evolving health care patterns that I foresee 

as our population continues to age. 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Only through the adoption of a wellness model will we be able 

to respond adequately and humanely to the inevitable pressures 

that come from an ageing and ailing population. 

 

When my own husband was dying of cancer, likely a 

preventable life-style-related disease, I was fortunate to have 

the helpful support of a number of friends and neighbours so 

that he could remain at home.  Not only did he remain at home, 

he died at home.  This was his choice, Mr. Speaker, and we 

were fortunate for the community support that allowed him to 

make that choice. 

 

We were lucky to have that support because, Mr. Speaker, we 

could not obtain official home care services.  At a time when 

hospitals in Saskatoon were engaged in renovation projects 

costing over $80 million, there was not sufficient money 

budgeted for adequate home care services. 

 

We have had too much of an emphasis on capital construction.  

Bricks and beds do not make a health care system, and bricks 

and beds do not heal -- people do the healing, and people 

should be emphasized in our health care system.  An expansion 

of home care services and a move away from institution-based 

services will allow other individuals to make the same choices 

my husband and I did. 

 

My personal experiences have convinced me, Mr. Speaker, that 

only through implementation of a wellness model will we have 

a strong and healthy system of health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

I am pleased to move this motion.  And I do so with a strong 

sense of the critical importance of making the bold and 

innovative community-oriented changes that are necessary for 

an evolving wellness system that will fit the health needs of 

Saskatchewan people for the 21st century. 

 

I do now move: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the importance of broadening 

our approach to health care and support the introduction of 

the wellness model which stresses the need to improve our 

collective well-being by enhancing our social and physical 

environment, adopting healthier life-styles and working to 

prevent disease and disability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to say a few words in response to 

the member from Saskatoon in her motion, and I will be getting 

to that in a few moments. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I give notice right now that I will be 

moving an amendment at the conclusion of my remarks.  But 

before I begin that, I want to read the amendment into the 

record.  And I would ask all members opposite to listen very 

carefully.  It's rather a lengthy amendment, but I found as I 

perused the issues that we were talking about and discussing 

that a lengthy amendment was indeed necessary. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the following amendment: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 (1) Condemns the government for secretly creating a 

so-called wellness model that to date has included: (a) 

creating secret plans to dramatically reduce access to health 

care in the province; (b) unilaterally and without warning 

de-insuring optometric services; (c) unilaterally and without 

warning imposing user fees on chiropractic patients, and in 

consequence causing an immediate fee increase to patients of 

30 per cent; (d) unilaterally and without warning imposing 

user fees on cancer patients; (e) unilaterally and without 

warning tripling the user fees associated with the 

Saskatchewan drug plan; (f) unilaterally and without warning 

increasing the charges against diabetics by 3,000 per cent; (g) 

unilaterally and without warning announcing the government 

will within two years absolutely cease to fund level 1 and 

level 2 care for seniors; (h) unilaterally and without warning 

changing the structure and dramatically increasing the fees to 

the sickest elderly in special care homes; (i) unilaterally and 

without warning removing the seniors' heritage grant from 

seniors in innovative and subsidized housing; (j) secretly 

scheming to close up to 66 rural hospitals and creating two 

classes of citizens -- those with access to timely acute care 

and those who may die in transit to a major urban centre; (k) 

destroying the morale of physicians and surgeons by 

threatening to force them all to become government 

employees; and (l) using taxpayer money appropriated by this 

Assembly for health care purposes, instead to support the 

partisan exercises of the Minister of Health, including a 

recent letter campaign replete with political attacks on the 

opposition; (m) failing to act seriously on its own rhetoric, 

that the so-called wellness model requires action to reduce 

poverty and increase and create employment, and instead 

actively increasing poverty and destroying employment by 

cancelling intergovernmental agreements, and a complete 

failure to accept its responsibility as exemplified by such 

action as the cancellation of the AECL agreement and the 

refusal to meet financial obligations to farm families. 

 

 (2) Demands that prior to the government making any major 

changes to Saskatchewan's health care system, a committee 

of the Legislative Assembly holds full-scale public hearings 

to obtain genuine public input on the shape of their health 

care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the amendment, and that is the litany of 

issues and concerns that have been created by this government 

as far as the citizens of this province of Saskatchewan are 

concerned. 

 

I listened very carefully to the member of Saskatoon 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

Wildwood as she spoke, and there was a ring of hypocrisy 

involved in the remarks made by that member as she was 

tippy-toeing, tippy-toeing around the real issue, the issue that 

this is simply budget-driven.  It's deficit-driven. 

 

And I remind members and I remind the public who are 

listening to this debate about the position taken by the Minister 

of Health while she was the critic of Health in opposition.  She 

roundly condemned our government of the day for our money 

that we were investing in the Everyone Wins program, which 

was a wellness program. 

 

We have no trouble with the concept of the wellness model as 

long as the wellness model is designed to be preventative.  

Where our concern and our problem comes in, when the 

wellness model is designed to save money -- to save money. 

 

And the hypocrisy for the Minister of Health to claim the 

wellness model as her own, while when she was in opposition 

roundly condemning it at every twist and every turn of events, 

therein lies the hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now she made mention . . . or the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood said we have such a wonderful health care system 

but that we cannot afford to support it.  Using the documented 

evidence, the fact that we have as many hospitals in 

Saskatchewan, I believe she said, as does Ontario, but of course 

with only one million people. 

 

But I'm sure the Minister of Health and the member opposite is 

not equating the circumstances that we find ourselves in 

Saskatchewan to the circumstances that the millions of people 

in Ontario find themselves in.  Surely you members opposite 

recognize the uniqueness that is Saskatchewan.  Our rural 

element -- you cannot ignore that. 

 

The member from Athabasca sits there listening very 

attentively and I appreciate that, but he's got to have concerns 

about what this could mean for rural Saskatchewan.  I know he 

does, and so does the member from Cumberland.  And I 

suggest that so do the members in the rural Saskatchewan.  

What does this mean for rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Why are you telling and talking about the wellness program, 

about the closing and the potential closing or at least the 

converting of 66 rural hospitals, and who gets up and makes 

the motion?  Who gets up and makes the motion?  I want 

members of the audience and the public to notice this.  It's a 

member from Saskatoon. 

 

And all I have to do is say to the member of Saskatoon, why 

are you not only condoning what the Minister of Health is 

doing, you're promoting it?  And I ask the member from 

Saskatoon Wildwood, how far do you live from the base 

hospital?  Pretty close, she says with a grim smile.  Pretty 

close. 

 

(1500) 

 

Therein lies the dilemma that we're facing as rural MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) here.  Yes, the people in 

Saskatoon are close to those services but what 

about the members who are representing areas that are now 

going to be how far from rural services or from acute care 

services?  How long does the ambulance drive going to take?  

How much further is it going to take if this scheme is 

implemented? 

 

And I repeat again, Mr. Speaker, therein lies the dilemma that 

this opposition has.  If we could sit down and if the Minister of 

Health would screw up enough courage to come forward with 

this wellness program that she has been scheming about in 

secret, that she refuses on a daily basis to answer in this House 

. . . She blames us for scare tactics. 

 

And I remind members of the public, it is not our document. 

The 66 rural facilities are not our figure.  They are the figures 

of the Minister of Health appointed by the Premier of this 

province.  That is what our concern is. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed.  I 

need the . . . I hope the member has the amendment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll just move it then I'll have it all signed and 

ready, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Having been moved -- I think the member 

clearly indicated that he was moving the amendment -- I want 

the Clerks to have a look at the amendment.  It's a fairly 

lengthy amendment and I hope the members give us just a few 

minutes to have a look at it. 

 

Order.  When the member was reading his amendment, I felt 

that part of it was probably not in order and I would ask the 

member if he would allow me to delete (m) from his 

amendment.  I believe the rest would be in order; (m) is simply 

not relevant to the last part -- the first sentence is, but the last 

part is not relevant to the motion that is before us.  And we 

could either delete that last part and let the rest of it stand, or as 

Beauchesne's says, the Speaker can simply rule out the whole 

amendment and I didn't want to do that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, while I was reading the 

amendment and concluding (m), the issue that you raised 

crossed my mind as I was reading it.  So we will withdraw 

section (m) and go with the rest of the motion. 

 

The Speaker: -- The Speaker does have . . . Beauchesne's 

makes it very clear that the Speaker may delete parts that are 

not relevant and therefore (m) will be deleted from the 

amendment, but the rest will stand.  And the debate will 

continue concurrently. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to speak 

to the motion put forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood. 
 

During the past election campaign, I talked about the need to 

carefully examine our health care system, to shift the focus 

from an over-emphasis on treatment to preventative medicine.  

I talked about evaluating the ways in which we spend our 

health care dollars to ensure that we are not duplicating 

services.  I talked about the necessity to provide people with 

choices in health care and to involve them through consultation 

in making decisions about the future of their system.  And I 

said that 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

not changing our health care system would threaten the future 

of medicare. 

 

Contrary to allegations made by members of other parties, I did 

not talk about the need to close rural hospitals.  I clearly 

addressed the fact that we do indeed have more hospitals than 

Ontario with 10 per cent of the tax base, and at that time, they 

paid health care premiums. 

 

I spoke openly and honestly about how we should not be 

building one more hospital until we had a comprehensive 

health care plan based on a wellness model for health care.  I 

discussed at a news conference in front of St. Paul's Hospital in 

Saskatoon during that election campaign the irresponsible 

decision making that had resulted in the expansion of the 

hospitals in Saskatoon when there was no funding to staff the 

beds that they contained. 

 

I want to make it clear that the Liberal wellness model was 

outlined through our policy committee; that a structure was put 

in place for providing for complete consultation with all 

affected groups from professionals to consumers of health care.  

And these proposals were made clear. 

 

I did speak of rural hospitals.  I talked about them in this 

context, Mr. Speaker.  Throughout this province, I talked about 

them being palliative care units, emergency care units, and 

centres of wellness.  That is the major difference in approach 

between the Liberal wellness model and the NDP wellness 

model. 

 

While other politicians stayed away from health care, except to 

make very general and rhetorical statements, I told the people 

of Saskatchewan what the reality was and that they would be 

forced to deal with it sooner or later no matter who they 

elected. 

 

The Conservatives took every opportunity to take things out of 

context and scare people in rural Saskatchewan about hospital 

closures.  Indeed I still have copies of the advertisements that 

were taken out in rural newspapers during the election 

campaign.  The NDP talked of its commitment to medicare and 

its wellness model, but never provided specifics. 

 

It has now been almost nine months since the New Democratic 

Party promised its wellness model.  Almost nine months since 

the people of Saskatchewan put forward a motion saying they 

had lost confidence in the previous government and wanted to 

see an end to the Conservative approach to the economy, to 

everything, including health care. 

 

It has now been nine months since the NDP was given a 

mandate to take the wraps off its plans for health care, for the 

energy institute, for government reform. 

 

People realize that the incompetent management of the 

province's finances will indeed force us to make decisions 

about the nature of our health care system and every other 

program that we have in Saskatchewan.  It would be wonderful 

to undertake the process of re-evaluating health care, Mr. 

Speaker, without the pressure of onerous debt, but none the less 

the process must happen. 

I hope that the Conservatives will indeed begin to shoulder the 

blame for the fiscal mess that we face in this province; and 

equally so that the NDP will begin to show the leadership that 

it promised during the campaign.  To date I've seen no 

evidence of either and that disappoints me a great deal.  

Listening to the Conservatives continue to scare people about 

rural hospitals and listening to the NDP say nothing to put 

people's minds at ease is the height of irresponsibility on both 

sides of the political fence. 

 

It is truly time that this government either unveiled their 

wellness model or admitted that they simply are stalling for 

time in a desperate attempt to create one.  The people have a 

right to see where this government is taking them.  For in the 

final analysis it will be the health care system of the 

Saskatchewan people which has been changed and 

restructured, not the health care system of the NDP or any 

other government of the day. 

 

I find some irony in the member from Wildwood rising today 

and stating, and I quote: 

 

 . . .recognize the importance of broadening our approach to 

health care and (to) support the introduction of the wellness 

model . . . 

 

With all due respect, I cannot figure out why the Minister of 

Health does not actually introduce the wellness model.  This is 

the equivalent of having Jay Leno introduce Johnny Carson to 

introduce Billy Crystal to introduce the people who will be 

introducing the Academy Award winners. 

 

People in Saskatchewan have been watching and waiting for 

the NDP to unveil its plans for health and energy and 

agriculture.  And they are getting tired of the endless 

vagueness, tired of committees struck to study the reports that 

have already been produced.  What the people are saying -- 

since the 55 members of the government side appear not to be 

hearing them -- is that what they really want to see is the 

wellness model, and a chance to have input and to offer 

constructive criticism. 

 

The member from Rosthern has stated that the people of this 

province should have an opportunity to give input into how 

they want their health care system to be.  In the meantime, this 

government's lack of information is causing fear and 

uncertainty.  People are suffering as the result of cuts made to 

the prescription drug plan and to the de-insuring of optometric 

and chiropractic services.  Seniors are writing to me, fearful 

that they will no longer have safe and affordable care if 

rumoured cuts to nursing homes and level 1 and 2 care are 

made.  Diabetics are fearful that their health has been placed at 

greater risk as the result of irresponsible decisions made 

without consultation. 

 

I appreciate that the member wants to go on record as 

supporting the nebulous wellness model which is about as 

non-committal as saying, I support apple pie and blue skies and 

clean water.  All of us support those things.  All of us support 

quality health care for all of our people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to suggest to the member opposite that I 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

strongly support the introduction of a wellness model so that all 

of us can finally see what the NDP comes up with after nine 

years in opposition and nine months in government.  But as the 

famous athletic equipment supplier says in its commercials: for 

Heaven's sakes, just do it. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I'm very pleased to be able to 

contribute to a debate on the matter of health care.  This is, 

after all, my own particular area of expertise, and it was largely 

because of my desire to take part in a new approach to medical 

care that I agreed to stand in last year's election. 

 

Most of the members will know that I've spent 25 years 

practising medicine in rural Saskatchewan -- the first 10 in a 

single-doctor town and the subsequent 15 in a two-doctor town.  

This has then given me a different view of medicine and 

nursing from that of most physicians, and it is bound to colour 

my views.  Hence I'm particularly interested in the maintenance 

and delivery of health care services in rural areas.  And I would 

like to point out to the hon. member from Rosthern there that 

there are a number of points that I would like to raise regarding 

ambulance service that I've given a lot of thought to but just 

don't have time to in the 10 minutes allotted to me. 

 

I specifically mention health care services, sir, because it is the 

services that matter, much more so than the buildings that they 

are rendered in.  I have visited several of the integrated 

facilities commissioned by the previous administration at 

Lafleche of course and at Maidstone in the Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster constituency and two more at Rockglen 

and Coronach that are still in the process of fitting out at this 

moment. 

 

Sir, these facilities are extremely elegant and well built to such 

an extent that I suspect that the architect must be NDP.  The 

snag is to find doctors and registered nurses to man them.  The 

rural population is contracting.  The demographics of our 

province have changed dramatically since the network of rural 

union hospitals was developed in the '50s and '60s.  Those 

flat-topped shoe boxes that were the latest thing in hospital 

design and equipment at that time have done their turn.  The 

roofs leak and the foundations have cracked, floating on our 

shifting clay soils. 

 

In 1992 they are not only in poor physical shape, their 

equipment is out of date and they do not come up to the 

present-day fire regulations.  None of them has any kind of 

climate control.  New medical and nursing techniques have 

eclipsed them, and the whole concept of the delivery of health 

services has to be thought out again. 

 

(1515) 

 

This province is uniquely situated to do this rethinking.  It was 

this province under Tommy Douglas that introduced the 

revolutionary idea of universal, prepaid and tax-based 

hospitalization in the 1940s.  It was this same province of 

Saskatchewan that under the leadership of Woodrow Lloyd 

introduced universal medicare.  The opposition at that time was 

enormous, as you, sir, know much better than I do.  You were 

here and I had not even heard of Saskatchewan. 

The opposition was incredible.  Yet, sir, within a few short 

years a Liberal federal government had spread the ideas of 

health care to Tory, Liberal, and even Social Credit provincial 

governments from sea to shining sea, as the song goes. 

 

Saskatchewan was right in 1947; it was right again in 1962.  

The first universal hospitalization plan; the first universal 

medicare plan, not only in Canada, sir, but in the whole 

American continent from Arctic Circle to the Antarctic Ocean. 

 

We, or rather you, sir, and the hon. members, have been 

vindicated time after time -- far ahead of the pack and proven 

right, the envy of this continent.  And now, sir, in 1992 we are 

once more ahead of our time with an entirely new vision of 

heath care -- the wellness model. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- As yet, sir, it is not perhaps fleshed out 

completely, but the chassis is there and the driving force.  But 

there are many features not yet included.  We know what we 

want but the details may elude us just now, but they will come. 

 

This requires work and thought and co-operation between all 

parties.  And when I say parties, sir, I mean parties with a small 

"p" -- not political parties.  Health care, sir, should not be a 

partisan matter, nor should education or roads for that matter.  

We need everybody's assistance on both sides of the House to 

design a better vehicle of health care delivery. 

 

We know how to diagnose, sir, and we know how to treat.  We 

even know how to prevent disease.  The problem is that we 

cannot persuade people to do what is sensible and right for 

them to do.  We know that smoking is the major cause of lung 

disease and a serious contributing factor to both heart and 

stomach disease.  We know that poor eating habits lead to high 

cholesterol and high blood pressure, heart attacks, and strokes.  

We know that colon cancer is directly linked to our lousy diet.  

But we have to get the message out. 

 

But, sir, there are other factors which cause disease that are 

preventable, and these are not due to individual culpability.  

These are poverty and its complications.  And the immediate 

complication of poverty, sir, is hunger. 

 

To help alleviate poverty we've already increased funding to 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan by $28 million.  We have 

introduced the community employment program to try and 

create a thousand new jobs.  We have also increased funding 

for child hunger programs by 35 per cent.  The Saskatchewan 

child tax reduction for low income families has been increased 

by 25 per cent to $250 annually.  In themselves, sir, they are 

not earth-shaking but they are indicative in the way we intend 

to move. 

 

As a consequence of increased industrialization, our 

environment is being more and more polluted.  The air, our 

water, and the land itself are being degraded by gaseous 

emissions, liquid and solid effluent, and 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

chemicals we are using deliberately on our land.  We are now 

recognizing the harmful secondary effects of our fertilizers, 

insecticides, and herbicides.  And it is to counteract some of 

these that the Charter of Environmental Rights and 

Responsibilities has been introduced. 

 

Occupational health, sir, has long been recognized as important 

to the employees of factories, mines, and quarries.  We are now 

realizing how many accidents are occurring on farms and 

causing severe disability.  One of the major problems with farm 

accidents is they occur to farmers working alone, often miles 

away from assistance.  These problems need to be addressed 

seriously. 

 

What we have done in our area is to band together into a group 

that we have called the central six -- Gravelbourg, Lafleche, 

Kincaid, Mankota, Ponteix, and Vanguard.  The hospitals have 

agreed to one set of common bylaws and every physician has 

admitting privileges in each of the six hospitals.  One member 

from each hospital board meet as a sort of super-board to 

co-ordinate services in the area, and we are actively recruiting a 

physiotherapist who will spend one day a week at each 

hospital.  No hospital alone can afford such a service but six of 

us together can. 

 

If this proves a success, we hope to recruit a dietician or 

perhaps a mental health nurse.  We are working on integration 

of public health and home care services. 

 

But here again, we are bedevilled by problems of overlapping 

boundaries.  All of us are anxious to get going on a system of 

delivering preventative services, using the buildings we already 

have but being flexible as to how we use them. 

 

Our population is gradually getting older.  Our children are 

leaving the province, leaving fewer people to look after the 

elderly and infirm.  There's a smaller tax base.  We cannot 

abandon our pioneers after all the years and work they have 

given to us.  The time passes and they will need more, not less 

services.  We have to devise ways of delivering these services 

at lesser cost if taxes are not to rise even higher. 

 

One way of attempting to do this is by increased accent on 

home care.  We want to keep those who would now be 

admitted to level 2 homes in their own homes as long as 

possible.  But they cannot do yard work or major cleaning; 

therefore these services will have to be provided for more and 

more people. 

 

Twenty-five years ago, centennial homes were built in many 

small towns as low rental for the elderly.  Many of the widows 

-- and they are largely widows -- that moved in in 1967 are still 

there, a quarter of a century later.  I've watched so many of 

them grow more and more frail; many have died and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure to speak 

to the amendment moved by the member from Rosthern, an 

amendment which so accurately outlines 

the NDP government's attack on our health care system -- 

actions forced on the people unilaterally in the NDP budget 

without any consultation whatsoever, actions opposed 

vehemently by not only the residents of Saskatchewan, but also 

by the health care providers affected. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP betrayal continues.  We, the 

official opposition, were provided with a copy of the NDP 

government's new health care proposal, a proposal known as 

the wellness model.  As we've become accustomed to, this 

NDP health model does not even come close to what the NDP 

continually promised the people of Saskatchewan while they 

were in opposition and during the election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have always claimed to be the only 

political party who could save the health care system as we 

know it in this province.  A party well known for their use of 

the mediscare tactics in the past, they claim to now have a new 

program, the wellness model for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

They are going to give birth to the wellness model. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan that they 

are not going to give birth to a new model.  They are going to 

abort hospitals all over this province; 66 hospitals are on the 

list of hospitals that they have presented in their wellness 

model of hospitals which will be closed or converted in this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  A new definition of the wellness model 

-- closing hospitals, aborting hospitals all over this province. 

 

Now that they're in government they have changed their tune 

from when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP's 

secret plan for health care states that up to 66 hospitals are 

going to be closed in Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, they 

are supported by the Liberal leader, the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, in the number of closures that they want 

to see in this province. 

 

The Liberal candidate during the last election in Kindersley 

said that the people of Eatonia, Saskatchewan, should not be 

allowed to have a hospital, that the hospital in Eatonia should 

never open.  That's the same type of thing that we're hearing 

from this government opposite now, Mr. Speaker.  They want 

to close also that hospital in Eatonia. 

 

And I'd like to tell all members of this Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Eatonia raised $1 million -- $1 million 

for the construction of that hospital in Eatonia, Mr. Speaker.  

They raised it in the town of Eatonia and surrounding 

municipalities and put that $1 million towards the construction 

of that hospital.  And now those members opposite that are 

now in government, who claim to be the defenders of medicare 

and claim to be the defenders of the health care system, want to 

close it, and they have the support of the Liberal leader, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That's the type of thing that the people of Saskatchewan are 

concerned about, the health care system in this province now, 

Mr. Speaker.  And ironically, ironically, Mr. Speaker, two days 

ago I received an invitation to attend the opening, the official 

opening, of the hospital in Eatonia, the same hospital that these 

members now want 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

to close.  It's going to open August 5.  The official opening of 

that hospital is August 5.  And the Liberals and the NDP feel 

that that hospital should never be opened, even though the 

people of that community and surrounding area contributed $1 

million to the construction of that hospital. 

 

Last fall, Mr. Speaker, they had a sod-turning.  They had a 

sod-turning for that hospital, for the construction of that 

hospital.  And I was proud as a candidate to be able to attend 

that sod-turning ceremony, Mr. Speaker.  And what happened?  

I'll tell the members opposite.  The entire community turned 

out.  The entire community turned out.  They closed down the 

school for the afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and every school 

children and every person in that community attended that 

celebration of the sod-turning event for the construction of that 

hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this now we see in the NDP's wellness model, they want to 

close that hospital, Mr. Speaker.  That's what you people want 

to do; you want to close that hospital in Eatonia.  They claim to 

support the health care system and are the great defenders of 

that system, Mr. Speaker, but the people of Eatonia, now they 

know what the government's agenda is.  They know what the 

government wants to do, and they know that the Liberal leader 

supports them in the closure of their hospital. 

 

But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Kindersley 

-- myself -- and all of the people in the constituency of 

Kindersley and all of the people of Saskatchewan oppose, 

oppose the closure of hospitals like that one in Eatonia, the 

type of closure that they want to do. 

 

This doesn't sound like something the provincial government 

would propose to its constituents.  No, Mr. Speaker, but their 

report is legitimate, a fact confirmed by the Minister of Health 

herself.  She claims it is a month or two old, this report, and has 

been changed considerably.  Yet she continues to refuse to 

table the newest version of this plan which could devastate 

many rural communities by the loss of their health care 

facilities and the jobs associated with them, Mr. Speaker.  The 

secret plan remains secret. 

 

The NDP proposal, if implemented, would not only close rural 

hospitals, it would also radically change rural health care 

boards, Mr. Speaker.  All existing boards would be fired, and 

seven huge health planning areas would be created and 

appointed personally -- personally appointed by the Minister of 

Health.  It is wrong for one person to take that kind of control 

over local health governing the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at least previous boards included the election of 

regional boards.  But the NDP government will have no part of 

democratic elections in the health care system, Mr. Speaker.  I 

ask why can people in this province elect school boards, but 

not hospital boards?  Do we really want in this province one 

cabinet minister to rule the entire province?  When that 

happens, we are likely to see a lot more closures of rural 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker.  What hospital in your constituency, I 

ask each member, will be next?  Which one will be next? 

In my constituency, two hospitals have been identified, Mr. 

Speaker, so far -- the hospital in Eatonia that I spoke of a few 

moments ago and the hospital in Dodsland.  Those two have 

been identified so far, Mr. Speaker.  Which one will be next?  

Eston is just over the limit -- the 10 acute care bed limit that 

they have imposed -- just barely over the limit.  So I say now to 

the people of Eston, they better be careful because their 

hospital may be the next one on the list, on the NDP's wellness 

model list, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

It is so blatantly obvious that if the NDP health plan was not 

leaked to us that the NDP government simply would have 

imposed it without any public consultation, Mr. Speaker.  This 

would certainly be in keeping with all the other of their budget 

decisions, Mr. Speaker -- decisions unilaterally imposed on us. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, user fees for cancer patients; user 

fees on chiropractic and optometric services; increased 

deductible for prescription drug plan from 125 to $380, Mr. 

Speaker; the removal of diabetic care from the drug plan, Mr. 

Speaker; and a freeze on all health care projects. 

 

This doesn't sound like the type of thing that the NDP, the great 

defenders of medicare, would be doing, Mr. Speaker, but that is 

exactly what they're doing.  The last budget promoted all of 

those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of things like user 

fees on chiropractic and optometric services, Mr. Speaker.  

Diabetics now pay huge increases in insulin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this all comes from the great defenders of medicare -- the 

great defenders of medicare sitting opposite, who like to stand 

in their place and say that the only party in this province that 

can possibly defend the medicare system is themselves. 

 

And what are they doing, Mr. Speaker?  Piece by piece by 

piece, they're tearing down this system that's been built up over 

the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've not even mentioned the detrimental, purely 

budgetary-driven decisions that the NDP government will soon 

be forcing on our province's senior citizens through legislation 

-- through legislation without consultation, Mr. Speaker.  

Perhaps they should have even . . . perhaps that should have 

been the NDP's government slogan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the member from Shaunavon pipes up there 

now, Mr. Speaker.  I find that amazing.  How many hospitals in 

the wellness plan, Mr. Speaker, will be closed in his 

constituency . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting to 

me that the Leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

can't recognize that the Government of Saskatchewan is doing 

it today, and talking with people and consulting every step 

along the way. 

 

It's also very interesting to me that someone would base their 

whole speech on the closure of Eatonia hospital when the 

member from Biggar for the government will be opening that 

centre -- community health centre and hospital facility that is 

basing their programs and delivery service on the wellness 

model in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so we have members opposite who indeed are taking to 

new levels the scare tactics for the people of Saskatchewan, 

rather than wanting to join with us once again in taking out an 

exciting vision for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to support and discuss a holistic 

and a broad-based approach to health care, something that 

neither of the members opposite perhaps can recognize.  And I 

can tell you that many people in Saskatchewan are looking at 

this as an exciting opportunity, a time for closer relationships 

with the government and much ongoing consultation when we 

try to look at the conversion of some institutions in the 

province of Saskatchewan and also talk about the possibilities 

of what good quality care will mean to all people in the 

province. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are ready to vision and to move in this 

area.  As we've heard, the constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is moving and the Eatonia facility and 

we talk about . . . my members from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

and those in Redberry who have worked to develop papers and 

to present their ideas of wellness to the wellness group in 

Saskatchewan.  And my own constituency of Wascana Plains 

has done some visioning. 

 

Those are just to name a few of the constituencies who've 

already begun to take this principle and to run with it and to say 

wellness means whatever it can for each community in 

consultation with their idea of what good quality health care 

can mean to their areas of the province. 

 

We brought people together who had experience and an interest 

in the area of health to develop a working paper which was 

presented to the Minister of Health and the wellness team.  So 

today I'd like to speak in three areas. 

 

First, I'd like to look back and compare speeches that the 

minister has made recently, not only in this Chamber but 

outside the Chamber, to what we said prior to October 21, and 

to expand on what we've done in our own constituency with 

regard to wellness. 

 

I would ask the members opposite to join with our constituency 

and develop the same process so that they can be a positive 

force in the wellness model and in the development of a model 

for their constituency.  Or they may lose that opportunity 

because their people are ready to discuss the wellness 

approach. 

 

The minister has said that the model stresses the need for 

public input and community co-operation in designing 

the health care policy based on community needs, for the 

public health care needs in the community and the preventative 

care approach, and refocuses health care away from the 

reactive to preventative approach. 

 

Programs emphasizing prevention are the key to lowering 

health costs in the future.  For example, good pre-natal care 

dramatically lowers both the health risks for the mother and 

child; in turn, lowers future demands on the health care system.  

So that not only are we looking at basic reform in the systems 

when we're talking about trying to handle the numbers of 

line-ups and people who are coming into a curative care mode, 

but we're trying to stop the numbers of people in that line-up by 

looking at the prevention model. 

 

And you can ask any municipality across this province, 

because their mandate is the preventative approach and they 

can tell you clearly that the wellness model will work and work 

well for Saskatchewan. 

 

This new direction is required to improve care and raise the 

effectiveness of health services.  Between 1987 and 1991 

health care spending increased by 34.7 per cent -- a total of 

$410 million increase. 

 

Problems in the health care sector continue to grow and worsen 

as the members opposite tinkered around the edges and did not 

know what to begin to do to approach the second generation of 

health care as contemplated by Tommy and others.  A shift is 

required now.  We have to view and manage the health care 

system in the future.  Changing life-styles, social conditions, 

and our physical environment is the key to better health for 

Saskatchewan people.  Studies show that 90 per cent of health 

problems are related to these three factors.  Many of the 

leading causes of death are cancer, heart disease, accidents, and 

suicide.  All can be reduced or prevented through preventative 

models in place. 

 

Health care strategies have been predominantly aimed at 

treating illness.  We're going to shift the emphasis away from 

treating illness to promoting health.  This concept is based on 

the view that the natural human condition is one of health and 

independence, and it's the function of the health system to 

maintain its natural state of wellness. 

 

So our minister acknowledges that the birthplace of medicare is 

the leader in the field of health care.  We are carrying on that 

legacy by taking the next step: a health system based on 

wellness.  What the model also acknowledges is the challenges 

of poverty, alienation, stress, and family and community 

disintegration that are creating problems for our health care 

system.  These are critical factors influencing health and 

well-being of our individuals.  And the sources are social, but 

their treatment is often medicalized. 

 

Our new health system will incorporate the fundamental 

principles that they were based upon, the five principles of 

comprehensiveness, universality, portability, accessibility, and 

public health administration.  Saskatchewan is committed to a 

high level of health care in the province.  To have that, we need 

a health system which provides co-ordinated and integrated 

services and which is based upon the needs of the people and 

of the 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

community.  That's what the minister has been saying inside 

this Chamber and outside this Chamber when we've been 

talking about the wellness model. 

 

But prior to October 21, 1991, we as a party expressed our 

commitment to address the basic social, economic, and 

environmental conditions that cause health care problems.  Our 

goal is not only to protect and sustain life, but also to enhance 

the quality of life.  And as we said during the election time, we 

were going to look at all the factors in the community that had 

a bearing upon that; income security, employment, education, 

housing are to name just a few. 

 

When we look at what the Minister of Social Services has 

presented to us, we've increased funding for feeding programs 

by 35 per cent.  We've created a committee employment 

program which created about 500 jobs so far.  And by March 8, 

1993 there will be about a thousand jobs created.  We have 

increased SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) rates to $25 per 

person in the North as a way of reinstating the food subsidies 

that were cancelled by the members opposite. 

 

With respect to Saskatchewan Housing initiatives, six regional 

co-ordinators have been established to co-ordinate and deliver 

extended services to people in seniors' housing projects.  For 

example, health services, leisure services, and home care 

services will be provided.  As well there is $4 million each year 

for two years in providing new and improved water and sewer 

services toward northern communities -- all part of a wellness 

approach because wellness, after all, is talking about healthy 

public policy. 

 

We talked about expanded role in the communities for health 

centres that would be similar to the community-based, 

community-controlled organizations that we have in place, and 

a few in the models that we have in Regina and Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert. 

 

Now there's the community clinic.  It's a model for achieving 

our goal of a community-managed health care system in the 

cost-conscious environment of the 1990s.  It's not the big bang, 

regional theory that was contemplated in the Murray approach.  

It talks about district-sized home care, district sizes of change 

that will look at continuing the health costs in the future and 

talking with people in those districts as we're going about that 

job to provide a seamless approach so that people will feel that 

they're part of the process and they're addressing what they 

need when they're talking about health care. 

 

Not everyone can be handled in a preventative mode and we 

know that there are people, through no fault of their own, that 

will also be wanting to be treated in an emergency situation or 

in a situation where you want to have hospital care that meets 

the needs of some of the illnesses that would be looked at such 

as heart, long-term illness, and care. 

 

But we're also talking about working with those communities 

to say how we can best deliver that, either through trauma 

teams, through conversion of their centres, and looking at what 

care we can provide in a 

regional system that would be good quality care when they do 

go into a hospital. 

 

New Democrats, during the election campaign when we talked 

about all of those, we also talked about a commitment to 

promoting and assisting the development of community health 

centres and similar types of community-sponsored health 

service organizations that will provide permanent, improved 

systems of funding and will provide permanent and improved 

systems of funding for those organizations.  Those were all part 

of speeches that were made during the election campaign and 

that we are now carrying forward. 

 

When you talk about wellness, you talk about healthy public 

policy; you talk about reform to the system as it now exists.  

And when you talk about wellness, you talk about talking with 

communities.  And that's exactly what our constituency has 

done. 

 

In our approach we began with a quote from Dawna Markova 

that said: 

 

 For the woman who found a chicken and lifted it up to the 

sky; 

 For the child who believed it really was an eagle; 

 For those who are willing to risk believing they can fly 

 beyond their beliefs 

 that they can't fly. 

 

And that's exactly what the people of Saskatchewan are talking 

about -- changing their beliefs from a curative and an illness 

approach to a wellness approach that maintains universality of 

medicare, but also gives good access to health services, but 

also considering full employment for people, adequate housing, 

social well-being, and recognizing values. 

 

And as we in our constituency talked about that, we wanted to 

recognize the five pillars -- that medicare system of 

comprehensiveness, universality, portability, accessibility, and 

public administration -- because they were essential principles 

to medicare when it was founded.  But there are other guiding 

principles of today that are equally important when we talk 

about wellness. 

 

Our discussions centred around also the idea and the principle . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make a few comments regarding the motion that's been 

brought forward and also the amendment brought forward by 

my colleague, the member from Rosthern. 

 

First of all I would just like to remind the government of a 

number of the initiatives they talk about, and they indicate that 

they brought forward, or that their wellness model is 

addressing. 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Number one, I look at the constituency I represent, and I look 

at a number of initiatives that were talked about and were 

worked at and yet were not imposed, but we encouraged boards 

to take a very serious look at the fact that we must amalgamate 

or look at bringing boards together.  And every one of the 

communities that I represent, the hospital and the care home 

boards have effectively over the last four years amalgamated 

into one board.  And they've included the ambulance board. 

 

The one board that we're still working together with is trying to 

bring the home care boards in line and creating an avenue that 

would allow them to work together with the hospital and care 

home boards.  The problem we have there is the board districts, 

or the districts that have been set up don't quite line up so it 

creates a little more difficulty. 

 

But when we talk about a wellness model, I would suggest over 

the past number of years, during the '80s specifically, the 

government of the day was certainly looking at ways of 

creating an atmosphere and an avenue through which 

preventive medicine could be instituted and brought forward 

and enhanced. 

 

Certainly we can look back over the late 1980s and the 

government of the day introduced the breast screening 

program, a program that I think, Mr. Speaker, many women 

across this province appreciate.  And I will acknowledge the 

fact that the government have expanded that program, but I 

must also remind people that it was the initiative taken by the 

former government that introduced the program to enhance the 

well-being of women across our province. 

 

I think we should also be reminded of the fact that in the home 

care area, the home care field, the former government created a 

number of initiatives to enhance the ability of men and women 

to remain in their own homes, as that was one of the things that 

seniors talked about and brought to my colleagues and brought 

to my attention: the fact that they would prefer to remain in 

their own homes as long as it was physically possible, and 

asked the government of the day to encourage and look at the 

home care program, first of all, in the way of enhancing the 

program so that it would meet the physical needs that they face 

while remaining at home. 

 

(1545) 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the '80s, there were 

substantial increases put into home care.  Even though the 

government today talks about increasing funding for home 

care, I want to remind the members, as I did the minister the 

other evening, the fact that the 19.5 or 21 per cent increase that 

the Minister of Health has talked about, many home care 

boards have all of a sudden found that even though they 

budgeted on a 19.5 per cent increase, the actual dollar value 

that has come to their specific board . . . and one particular 

board I'm thinking of turned out to be 5 per cent, a 5 per cent 

increase which is 14 per cent less than what they had 

anticipated, the result being their board is overbudgeted by 

$50,000.  Now they have to go back and review their budget 

process. 

 

And I would think that it would be appropriate for the 

minister and for the government to indeed let boards know 

exactly where they stand and what they can expect and where 

the major increases are coming from, rather than to lay out a 

broad statement that so much funding is going to be available 

and that that is part of their wellness model, when indeed it 

may not be the actual figures that we've seen thrown out. 

 

And I think it would be appropriate for the minister to address 

and to consult with people, let people know where they stand. 

 

As my colleague from Kindersley mentioned, talking about 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there are a couple of 

communities that are going to be faced with the possibilities of 

hospital closures, and certainly it's been raised and brought to 

my attention already. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, I think if you sat down and talked to 

the people of those communities, talked to the people of small 

communities around this province you would find, Mr. 

Speaker, that many of these people realize that we cannot . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed.  

As agreed to under the new rules, the question and answer 

period . . . a 10-minute question and answer period will begin 

right now. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the 

member who has just spoken, the member from Moosomin, or 

perhaps one of the other members would like to answer, and 

perhaps the member from Wildwood might want to make her 

comment on this as well -- this is with respect to the former 

government's planning or lack of planning when they put into . 

. . when they ordered and authorized the building of St. Paul's 

Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

Did you have a plan in terms of how much money you were 

going to spend on that hospital?  And did you come on . . . Was 

the cost projected and was it built according to cost?  We know 

we're in a position where we're way overbudgeted in health in 

government.  And could you comment on that, please? 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member answers that question, I 

really think that that question was not appropriate.  No one 

mentioned St. Paul's Hospital on this side, and in our rules we 

had agreed that we would . . . the questions should pertain to 

the discussion that we have held.  And it's really unfair to direct 

that question to the member from Moosomin.  But if he wishes 

to answer it, I certainly will allow him to answer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to just answer him this way.  First of all I wouldn't, as has 

been indicated, have the direct numbers involved at my 

disposal at this time.  But I would like to indicate that the 

former government made a commitment to people in 

Saskatchewan to create a healthy and vibrant health care 

system, and made a commitment to the people of Saskatoon to 

upgrade the facilities that they felt were very appropriate in 

their community and in their city.  And I believe over the years 

you saw the commitment that the former government had 

towards 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

health care facilities, not only in Saskatoon, but in Regina and 

across this province. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My understanding 

is that the project at St. Paul's Hospital was originally thought 

to have come in at around 20 million or less.  Now again I'm 

going from hearsay discussions that I recall from various health 

care professionals at the time, but that the project actually came 

in at $53 million -- a factor of about two and a half times what 

had originally been thought that the project may cost.  And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, many of those beds have not been fully 

staffed or fully utilized since that time because there have been 

major changes in health care in this province and indeed all 

across the country. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question to 

the member from Saskatoon Wildwood.  In her opening 

comments she referred to the change in governance that will 

occur in Saskatchewan with the wellness model.  And I would 

simply ask her: do you feel it is appropriate that St. Paul's in 

Saskatoon, which is an affiliated Catholic institution, should 

maintain governance in the new format when the Catholic 

hospital in Moose Jaw -- which in combination with the St. 

Anthony's Home project will be a leading-edge type of 

institution -- is being told that the Sisters of Providence should 

not have any governance in the new health model? 

 

And I'm wondering if you consider it fair for your city for a 

Catholic hospital to have governance, while we don't have 

governance in Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member again . . . I would, as I did 

with the member from Prince Albert-Carlton, that question 

really is unfair.  We are on the wellness model.  And I know 

what members are attempting to do, but really we should stay 

within the spirit of the rules that we have established.  If the 

member from Wildwood again would like to comment, fair 

enough.  Otherwise we'll go to another question. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

comment because I think that the very way that the member 

opposite has put his question, he's seeking to create an 

argument and a fight where in fact there is none. 

 

I am aware that there are discussions with the sisters in 

Saskatoon, just as there are discussions with the sisters in 

Moose Jaw.  There are negotiations, and no one is attempting 

to push any group out at all.  What is happening is that this, the 

wellness model, will be a true community consultation project.  

And if the Sisters of Providence want to leave, quit ownership 

of their hospital and go on to different things, then the 

government is willing to entertain those kinds of discussions.  

If they want to see a changing role, the government is willing 

to entertain those kinds of discussions as well. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

question for my colleagues in the opposition, since we are 

talking about wellness.  As my colleagues probably know, that 

if one acquires HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and 

AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and you 

develop full-blown AIDS, 

you probably will cost the taxpayers, in terms of medical care 

costs, in the neighbourhood of over $70,000 per year. 

 

There's a group of people in this province that are concerned 

that IV (intravenous) drug users -- and there are IV drug users 

in this province -- should the HIV or AIDS virus get into the IV 

drug user population, that in fact we could have over 500 

citizens in this province that would develop AIDS.  This group 

of people is pressing the government . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- This group of people is pressing the 

government for a needle exchange program so that IV drug 

users don't use the the same needle and therefore could acquire 

HIV.  And I'm wondering if the opposition would approve of a 

needle exchange program in terms of the wellness model. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the comments made by 

the member, but I would also like to indicate, I think when it 

comes to drug abuse and when it comes to the problems that 

our society and certainly society in general is facing with 

AIDS, no one will argue the fact that the use of separate 

needles is appropriate. 

 

I think one of the major things that we should be talking about 

though is educating our teenagers, educating our children to the 

problems that they face by abusively . . . or abusing their 

bodies by using drugs.  And I think a lot of times we face . . . 

sometimes when we try to address the problems we face out 

there, we tend to, rather than addressing the long-term goal, we 

look at just the immediate.  And whether we just throw more 

needles on the market isn't going to address the long-term 

problems that the member is talking about. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to address my 

question to the member from Saskatoon Wildwood.  I was 

going to ask the member, in your wellness program, how do 

you convince the people of Macklin that stopping construction 

of a hospital that would replace a hospital that's been there 

since 1922, how does that square with your wellness program?  

How are you going to convince the people there that that's 

really a wellness program? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, under the wellness 

model, what we have to do is to have people in communities, 

people in regions take a look at the total amount of money 

that's being spent on health care in all its various forms in their 

particular region or particular community and then ask the 

people themselves how they would like to see that money best 

spent to enhance the well-being of all citizens in that 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the same 

member.  How do you square what you said when you 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

look at the facts?  This hospital predates medicare by 41 years.  

It's been there since 1922.  The people of the district . . . It's run 

by the Grey Nuns; they run that hospital for many, many years 

before you ever thought of wellness. 

 

Now you're suggesting that they can close that, and they even 

agreed to down-size from 25 beds to 17.  They've spent 

$200,000 already.  And how do you square that with a wellness 

program?  How do you square that by saying those people will 

be better off with a wellness program that closes their hospital 

that's been the hub of the district for 41 years before medicare 

was thought of? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Well I would say first of all that we have to 

recognize that there are changing demographics in this 

province and there are also changing health care needs in this 

province.  As I said in my remarks, bricks and beds don't heal 

people.  It's people that heal people, and we have to recognize 

that our health care system is more than simply institutional 

based. 

 

I would suggest to the member opposite that what we need to 

be looking at is enhanced home care services, enhanced 

community education, and community development services.  

And I think the people of Macklin will be well served by 

asking themselves what kinds of real health care needs do they 

have and what kinds of real services do they want. 

 

The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Economic Development in Tourism and Housing 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

afternoon to move a motion at the end of my remarks as 

follows: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the Saskatchewan 

government's early initiatives in re-establishing a stable 

provincial financial climate which is strengthening our 

economy and is encouraging economic development, 

especially in the areas of tourism and housing. 

 

Hon. members, and Mr. Speaker, I have attempted over the last 

number of weeks to get this motion on the floor.  I want to just 

point out that there was an opportunity for me to speak on this 

motion I believe Tuesday last, if I had universal agreement 

from the members of this House.  And I want to just remind 

members that I was a bit disappointed because the members of 

the opposition did not allow me to speak on this motion.  So I 

plan to perhaps talk about a number of things that will 

encourage them to . . . next time they have the opportunity to 

meet, to speak, they will certainly comply with that most 

willingly and most co-operatively. 

 

I note it is about 4 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, and I just want to 

remind the members that the motion talks about economic 

initiatives.  I would most happily like to commence my 

remarks by going over the litany of achievements of this 

government in a very short time that 

we've been in power, but I think what's more appropriate at this 

point -- I'll get to that shortly -- but what's more appropriate at 

this point is that we talk about what happened prior to us 

becoming government and what has transpired in the short 

period thereafter the election. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to just say to members that prior to the 1991 

election, Saskatchewan was very, very unusual in terms of its 

government's practices and initiatives.  As a matter of fact, 

people now ask -- things may be difficult in our economy now; 

they're getting better -- but what was it like prior to the 1991 

election? 

 

And of course people do not need to be reminded about what it 

was like, but for the record, Mr. Speaker, we can recall the 

privatizations which occurred in this province.  We can talk 

about how Saskoil was privatized, how 35 per cent of the 

equity of the Saskoil Corporation was given away without one 

nickel in return for its 35 per cent controlling equity.  And 

members will recall that 40 per cent of the corporation was sold 

for $75 million. 

 

Members will recall that the government's equity fell from 60 

per cent down to 25 per cent through the issuing of new 

treasury stock without giving the taxpayers one penny for that 

35 per cent equity.  If anybody's ever followed the stock 

market, or anybody's ever been involved with holding shares in 

companies traded on the stock market, they will know full well 

that any company that gives up a controlling interest to another 

group usually gets a premium for the stock.  They don't 

normally give it away for nothing.  They normally have to pay 

a premium of about 150 to 200 per cent on the stock. 

 

But not the former government.  The former government 

indeed didn't take a premium on the 35 per cent they gave 

away.  They didn't even take dollar-for-dollar value the stock 

was traded on the market.  What the government did, what the 

Conservative government did at that time is they gave away 35 

per cent and controlling interest of a major, successful oil 

corporation that belonged to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

That was one example of their privatization.  And of course 

that was one of many examples.  We can talk about how Sask 

Minerals was given away.  We can recall in the economy of the 

Conservative government prior to the 1991 election, the 

privatization of the Saskatchewan Mining and Development 

Corporation, how that cost the taxpayers hundreds of millions 

of dollars.  We can talk about the privatization of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan which cost the taxpayers of this 

province about $490 million all told. 

 

These are significant economic decisions by the former 

Conservative government which they would like us all to 

forget.  But this was part of the decision-making process of the 

former government that got us into this serious economic 

position that we were in in the fall of 1991 and that we're now 

trying to address through a number of New Democratic Party 

government economic initiatives. 

 

Of course in these privatizations, they weren't just numbers on 

paper, Mr. Speaker. These privatizations cost 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

the taxpayers significant amounts of money.  They in essence 

passed on control of the corporations to private hands, in most 

cases private hands outside of the province of Saskatchewan.  

We've seen in our review, and I'll get to that in a moment, of 

our current financial situation, that not only have we passed the 

control out of our hands with no reimbursing value, but we've 

also lost revenues to our treasury. 

 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, because prior to the 1982 election, 

Crown corporations use to give about 50 per cent of their profit 

to the treasury of Saskatchewan.  That profit sharing enabled 

the governments of the day to keep the tax levels relatively 

competitive, relatively low, and in fact they were the lowest in 

all of Canada in this province, because of the major 

contribution in the Crown corporations.  Many of them making 

profits not in Saskatchewan from Saskatchewan people but 

making profits on international markets in the mining areas and 

in the oil business as well. 

 

So we lost money; we lost control.  We've lost and will 

continue to lose significant revenues to this province.  And of 

course the bottom line also you can compare in almost every 

case of the privatizations -- not all but almost every case -- we 

also had fewer jobs in the province of Saskatchewan.  So that 

was the privatization economic atmosphere of the former 

government in the later days of its reign. 

 

We also witnessed many secret deals.  The government was 

very secretive.  We've seen in this House, the Leader of the 

Opposition stand and talk about loss of freedom and talk about 

a government that does not allow debate and discussion on 

issues that are important to the taxpayers in this province.  

We've heard them time after time rail on about the lack of 

democracy under the NDP government.  Well that, Mr. 

Speaker, is so far from the truth that it makes people laugh if it 

wasn't so serious. 

 

What we saw under that former government were secretive 

deals.  We saw them letting tenders in unfair way through 

bribes and through corrupt practices.  We saw them in example 

after example, literally thousands of people appointed to the 

public services through patronage appointments.  We saw the 

massive waste of taxpayers' money and the total government 

mismanagement.  We saw the Conservative premier from 

Estevan travelling around the world in 80 days a number of 

times every year on the taxpayers' expense.  We saw the 

population of this province, Mr. Speaker, decline year after 

year after year.  We saw record bankruptcies from 1982 to 

1991.  Every year they increased to Saskatchewan provincial 

records under the former government. 

 

In terms of economic development, it was a disaster.  We saw 

the out-migration have very major effects on our province, and 

as a result some very severe economic hardship for our 

businesses and for our people. 

 

But on October 21, nine days . . . or nine months I should say, 

prior to today -- today is the nine-month anniversary of the last 

provincial election in this province -- but nine months to the 

day today, Mr. Speaker, nine months ago, we saw the New 

Democratic Party get elected on the basis that we were going to 

open the books, that we're 

going to get our financial house in order; that we're going to 

end the waste and mismanagement; restore open, honest, 

accurate, and accountable government; and renew 

Saskatchewan's fundamental values of compassion, fairness, 

and co-operation. 

 

And in nine months, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you about 

some of the major things we've undertaken to get our economy 

back on track and to create an economic atmosphere in which 

businesses and individuals can govern themselves unhindered 

and freely without the government on its doorstep every day. 

 

In the election campaign we talked about a number of things.  

And I have here -- I'll share with the members later -- some of 

our election planks.  When we took office, Mr. Speaker, simply 

put, we were faced with an economy which was in a shambles 

and a government that was in total disorganized disarray.  After 

nine years of an absence of leadership, after nine years of waste 

and mismanagement, patronage and corruption, Saskatchewan 

and many of its businesses were virtually on the verge of 

bankruptcy. 

 

What steps did the Premier of this province and the NDP 

government take to address this financial disaster?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we took a number of steps, and I wish to share those 

steps with you today.  We took some major steps in terms of 

financial management, responsibility, accountability, and in 

terms of the economy. 

 

Our first objective was to get the House of the government in 

order.  That was our first objective, Mr. Speaker.  We wanted 

to re-establish a sense of order in government and in the 

province so that we could commence the rebuilding of our 

economy because we were burdened with an incredible amount 

of debt, which I'll get to shortly. 

 

And our major purpose and any government's major purpose 

when it deals with business or the economy is primarily to 

establish confidence in a government and confidence in a 

government's economic program and other taxation programs 

so that business know where the government's going.  The 

purpose is to ensure there's an atmosphere that is not full of 

surprises, as the previous government often had.  And basically 

if those kind of criteria are established, we are faced, Mr. 

Speaker, with opportunities for business to do business in the 

province to the benefit of all the people in this province. 

 

Our early initiatives, Mr. Speaker.  We took office November 

1, but in November and December we took 12 basic decisions 

with respect to our economy, which in my view sent the signal 

out to the taxpayers and the business community that our 

economic initiatives were going to be consistent, were going to 

be predictable, and were going to be accountable. 

 

We appointed the smallest cabinet in Saskatchewan's history -- 

11 members -- saving about $100,000 a month.  We appointed 

a Financial Management Review Commission, called the Gass 

Commission, which was to report back to us in February.  We 

repealed the new expanded portion of the 7 per cent provincial 

sales tax, saving about 7,500 jobs in this province over the first 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

three years. 

 

We ended unconscionable severance packages which were 

more than double the industry standard and were abused time 

after time by the former administration.  We passed a law 

requiring by-elections to be held within six months of any 

vacancy.  We started regular and open consultations with 

business community and with stakeholders in the economy. 

 

We eliminated $8,000 a year salaries for legislative secretaries.  

The former government had 12 of them -- at least 12 -- plus all 

the expenses that they could accumulate on the taxpayers.  We 

closed the Premier's office in Prince Albert at a cost saving to 

the taxpayers of about $150,000. 

 

We started doing very sensible, administratively responsible 

things that were . . . in hindsight and actually in foresight were 

quite simple to do.  For example, we mailed SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy bills in the same envelope, at a cost saving of 

$725,000 a year.  We cancelled Fair Share, which saved about 

$15 million initially and probably about that much each year.  

We undertook spending cuts on advertising and travel and 

other supplies, saving about $28 million a year.  We closed the 

trade offices in Hong Kong and Zürich and Minneapolis, 

saving about $2 million a year. 

 

And when you look at these 12 things we undertook, Mr. 

Speaker, in the first legislative session of the first six weeks of 

our government, we saved about $52 million.  That's $52 per 

man, woman, and child in this province -- about $208 for a 

family of four -- of taxpayers' money that we didn't have to 

spend on many of the things the former government spent on, 

which produced nothing in terms of value to the people of this 

province. 

 

Our second step, Mr. Speaker, was to get our economy back on 

track.  And we started doing this by reviewing again some of 

the practices of the administration so that we could make them 

better, make them more efficient, make them less costly to the 

taxpayers, make them more accountable and more open. 

 

One of the first things we did is that we called the Crown 

Corporations Committee. This sounds like something that may 

not be too important to many people. But as chair of the Crown 

Corporations Committee and as a member of the committee for 

many years, I can tell you that this was the first time we had 

called the committee together because the previous government 

wouldn't do it for about, oh, I would say 14 or 15 months.  The 

year 1991 was the first year in 43 years in this province that the 

government failed to call the Crown Corporations Committee 

to meet.  It had to be the new NDP government elected to make 

this initiative responsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we met, Mr. Speaker, in January and we met a number of 

times in January, February, and March, and we found a number 

of examples of PC government waste and mismanagement and 

all the things I just talked to you about that the Conservatives 

opposite wish us not to talk about because they're getting 

boring to them, they're getting boring to them. Some of the 

people think that 

perhaps we should not talk about them, but we found a number 

of things in Crown Corporations Committee and our review of 

the Crown corporations that I must share with the taxpayers of 

this province. 

 

Many people may not know this, but the Crown Corporations 

Committee is one of two public accountability committees of 

the Legislative Assembly.  The Public Accounts Committee 

deals with the Public Accounts of the government, agencies, 

and departments and commissions.  The Crown Corporations 

Committee deals with the expenditures of the Crown 

corporations which constitutes about 50 per cent of government 

expenditure. 

 

But we found, Mr. Speaker, a number of things which I will 

share with you but which in my view were quite incredible.  

The Crown Management Board in our review reported that 

they spent $322,000 to pay the salary and severance of one 

Otto Cutts who was the former president of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation.  Now that may sound like a 

lot of money.  It is a lot of money.  But what is even more 

incredible is that this Mr. Cutts was president for one year.  He 

was president of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation for one year at a salary of about $120,000 a year. 

 

(1615) 

 

He was given about a year's severance package, $120,000, 

which made it 240,000.  And the other $80,000 was spent on 

things like, oh, $30,000 out-of-pocket expenses with little or no 

documentation attached to the expense account; $45,000 of that 

was used to move him to Ottawa.  I'm not sure if he picked up 

his house and had somebody physically move the house, but to 

spend $45,000 to make one move to Ottawa sounds to me to be 

quite exorbitant.  But perhaps that was contracted out to one of 

the Conservative friends and they looked after him. 

 

The Crown Management Board, Mr. Speaker, spent $705,000 

-- do you think the first figure was incredible -- $705,000 was 

spent to pay Wolfgang Wolff, the president of the board of 

directors of the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) . . . I'm sorry, I'm sorry; I've missed a line here.  

We paid Mr. Wolff $401,000 with a severance package of 

$236,000.  I'm sure everybody who works in the insurance 

business in this city, everyone who works in the retail business, 

and who works at IPSCO, and those who are carpenters and 

painters can relate to a severance package of $236,000 to 

somebody who is merely a chairman of the board of directors 

who kind of had meetings from time to time and didn't have 

any responsibility but collect a pay cheque. 

 

One thing the Tories could do when they were appointed, one 

thing the Tories had incredible amount of skill, which I 

commend them on, they had the great skill and the great ability 

to sign their names on the back of these huge cheques and 

deposit them in their bank accounts.  They did that very well.  

They did it very, very well and I commend them on that.  That's 

very little I can commend them on. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

And the member from Morse . . . I'm waiting for him to get into 

this debate because everybody knows in this province that 

there's only two things wrong with the Conservatives and the 

Conservative Party, and that's things that they do and things 

that they say.  That's the only things wrong with you guys.  But 

everyone knows that and we'll wait for you to get into the 

debate because I think you'll have a great amount to contribute.  

And the member from Morse, as we all know, was a minister 

of many of these Crowns that abused the taxpayers.  And I 

have a great deal of empathy for him whining in his chair 

because he's hurting a great deal over this. 

 

The $705,000 that was spent by the Crown Management Board 

was paid to a British firm, N.M. Rothschild & Sons, for general 

advice on privatization.  And I underline the word general, 

because the advice on privatization was pretty general to them.  

But I mention this because about $500,000 of this $705,000 

price tag was for expenses, much of which were not 

documented or receipts provided therefor.  And everyone 

knows that that is something that is just unconscionable in any 

business.  If you're going to claim expenses, you should at least 

have a receipt to provide to the accountant so you can issue the 

cheque. 

 

And of course we have the $29,000 spent by the Crown 

Management Board on its legal counsel, Mr. Terry Leier, to 

spend eights weeks in Stanford University to take a course.  

Now this is done in 1990, I believe, which was after many 

privatizations, but he was taking a business administration 

course on how to manage corporations.  Unfortunately he was 

employed by the Crown Management Board for much of the 

GigaText affair and I think he had a lot to do with the decisions 

that were taken with respect to GigaText which cost the 

taxpayers over $5 million. 

 

I could go on and on and on about some of the numbers we've 

got here.  But, Mr. Speaker, the point is, in my view, well 

made.  We have, in review of the Crown Corporations 

Committee, uncovered example after example of hundreds of 

thousands of dollars that the former government spent without 

authority, without authorization, and without public 

accountability and responsibility. 

 

And this affects our economy.  It affects the fact that this kind 

of money is spent not on encouraging economic development 

or getting businesses to invest in their province, but it 

discourages them from doing that because it drives up the tax 

rate and of course the tax burden is spread out to the individual 

taxpayers as well as business taxpayers in this province. 

 

The next step we took was we had the Gass Commission report 

to us.  And they basically opened the books and reviewed a 

number of issues including those in the Crown corporations 

sector.  But I want to just quote from a paper that I have here, 

and I'd be happy to provide it to the members if they wish.  It's 

an analysis of the Saskatchewan Financial Management 

Review Commission prepared in March of '92. 

 

 The Gass Commission report documents the actions of an 

administration (under the former 

premier, under the former government) gone wild.  The PCs 

abused their power and bent rules to maximize their own 

interests.  They did not have standard procedures that they 

followed (and if they did they broke them).  Decisions to 

spend money were made in a haphazard, random approach, 

dependent often on the whims of the minister.  Rules were 

used to justify actions that were irresponsible. 

 

The accounting methods the Gass Commission reported on of 

the former government as such: 

 

 The Conservatives used outdated, inappropriate or inadequate 

accounting methods.  This resulted in misleading information 

to the public about the financial situation and government 

expenditures.  The Tories may claim that they were just using 

the same methods used by the Blakeney administration, but 

the fact is that they were in power for almost 10 years . . . 

 

And they changed some of them but only to their own 

advantage. 

 

The accumulated operating deficit was confirmed in this 

review to be as of March 31, 1991, about $7.5 million, not as 

3.7 billion as the former minister had reported.  He may have 

got his numbers mixed up when they were punching them out 

on the computer.  Instead of 7.5, he reversed them and made 

them 3.7. 

 

The province's total public debt stood at $12.7 billion as of 

March 31.  This was uncovered and confirmed by the Gass 

Commission.  And of course the annual budgetary deficit of 

that year 1991-92, was $975 million, not the $360 million the 

former government had stated. 

 

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that the former government 

played tricks, they played games with numbers.  They 

misinformed, they hid numbers, they were secretive about what 

the real picture was financially.  And in fact what they did was 

injure the economy of this province. 

 

Yes, they injured the taxpayers and they will have injured them 

for the next 25 years because of this dead-weight debt they 

built over 10 years.  But they also injured -- not crippling, but 

almost so -- the economy and the business community in this 

province.  Because they know that taxes come from taxpayers, 

and if you're an individual working or if you're a business 

person working, you pay taxes. 

 

But if you've run up this debt in a very irresponsible manner 

that the member from I believe it's -- not Kindersley, but 

Souris-Cannington . . . No, no, it's not Souris-Cannington.  No.  

What's the member from that . . . beside D'Autremont there? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Oh, the member from Maple Creek, right.  

He's the new member -- new member from Maple Creek.  He 

does not remember all of these things.  And I see that he's 

being very attentive with my remarks and I 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

commend him for that.  He's getting a very good education here 

with respect to some of the numbers.  And I hope that he has a 

little meeting with his colleagues when the session . . . the 

House adjourns at 5 and asks some more detailed questions 

about some of the practices of the former government. 

 

The Gass Commission uncovered a number of things, Mr. 

Speaker, including the debt guarantees which totalled about 

$1.7 billion. 

 

 The . . . report shows that in light of the provincial financial 

situation, most of these loan guarantees were irresponsible.  

Combined with the remaining accumulated deficit, this kind 

of financial risk has a serious, negative effect on the ability of 

the province to borrow sufficient funds to meet ongoing 

financial requirements.  Decisions to increase the exposure to 

the taxpayers were made at a time when it would not be 

possible to raise revenue through taxation.  These decisions 

(these decisions of the former government) were also made 

without review by the Legislature (where they could have 

been held accountable and responsible). 

 

The highlights of the findings are many and we've heard a 

litany of the findings.  But in essence the province did not 

receive any payments from the privatization of PAPCO (Prince 

Albert Pulp Company). 

 

 The commission uncovered several examples where the 

former government entered into transactions or financial 

commitments without doing a full and complete financial 

analysis of the deal. 

 

And we can talk about the GigaTexts and the Cargills, how 

these have cost us literally millions and millions of dollars. 

 

 The province's cost share of the Rafferty-Alameda dam 

project has ballooned from . . . $42 million to more than 155 

million, a cost overrun of a mere 200 per cent. 

 

And that of course . . . in their accounting practice, anything 

within 200 per cent was usually pretty close, as close as they 

ever got.  Unfortunately for their lack of attention to the details, 

the taxpayers of this province are paying a large amount of 

their money towards the interest on the debt that they 

accumulated. 

 

And I can go on about the highlights of the findings of the Gass 

Commission, but in essence they talked about a number of 

severe major problems that the government inflicted upon the 

business community and the economy and the taxpayers of this 

province, which make governing in terms of economic 

influence very, very difficult. 

 

But they did make some recommendations with respect to bad 

management practices, and the government is now reviewing 

many of these and would likely be in a very short order 

adopting many of them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see the key recommendations 

coming out of the Gass Commission which will impact on our 

economy and impact on the business community of this 

province.  And many key recommendations including the . . .  

the budget should include a solid plan and strategy for reducing 

the deficit.  And we've indicated to the people of this province 

in our budget that we're doing that. 

 

Tendering and leasing policies should be reviewed. That is 

being done.  The mandate and role of various agencies 

involved in economic development and diversification should 

be reviewed. That is and has been done.  The operations of 

SEDCO should be reviewed. That is being done.  And we can 

go on about some of the recommendations they've made to our 

government, which in essence would make the government 

more responsible and more accountable to the taxpayers of this 

province, and provide an atmosphere for business and others to 

do their business to make decisions based on no surprises from 

their own government which would injure their financial 

decisions. 

 

So the Gass report in summary, Mr. Speaker, shows that the 

previous administration were "extremely incompetent 

financially."  This is words right out of the report. 

 

 The report also indicates how, frequently, their incompetency 

was tainted (if not smeared) with corruption.  It is almost 

impossible to tell which mistakes resulted from stupidity and 

which from greed. 

 

And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, both of those are I think in the 

majority when it comes to characteristics of the former 

government's, including their premier and the member who was 

a minister in their government, from Morse. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we had a provincial auditor's report 

which came down.  This contributed to our financial position.  

And we also had a budget which we brought down, Mr. 

Speaker, in early May.  And the budget made some very, very 

important announcements and it sent the message to the 

business community that the NDP government is prepared to 

work with them in terms of economic development and in 

terms of a fair taxation policy.  It also sent the message out, 

Mr. Speaker, that we have a very significant debt that we have 

to address. 

 

And I could get into some of the very major, major programs of 

our budget, but I won't do that, other than to perhaps highlight 

one or two points that we introduced. 

 

For example, the deficit goes from $975 million of the previous 

administration on an annual basis down to $517 million.  And 

of course we see as well the budget paying about $760 million 

in interest payments on the Tory debt.  And if you exclude that 

interest payments that they ran up we would have had a surplus 

budget of about $243 million. 

 

But the budget, Mr. Speaker, sent the message to the business 

community that they should proceed and do business based on 

decisions which affect their business, not to worry about a 

government that would be 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

nationalizing things or giving the taxpayers huge debts to 

consider to be paying in the future, but a government that is 

responsible.  That is the message we sent out, and that we're 

prepared to work with the business community.  And we have 

been doing so, Mr. Speaker, in many ways, and I'll get to that 

very shortly. 

 

But in the budget we decreased our expenditures by 3 per cent.  

The average for the past 10 years was a 6 per cent increase.  

We felt that was, under the circumstance, the best we could do.  

We, as I talked about earlier, slashed advertising and 

communications budgets by 29 per cent.  We dissolved 40 

boards and commissions, and others are being reduced, which 

would eliminate 500 government appointments.  And on it 

goes. 

 

We talked about . . . we undertook to cut cabinet salaries by 5 

per cent, Mr. Speaker.  We cut MLA communication 

allowances by 25 per cent.  We froze out-of-scope management 

salaries and reduced Crown corporation executive benefits 

quite substantially, as well as reduced their salaries of the 

management at the upper level.  And MLA salaries are frozen 

for a third year. 

 

(1630) 

 

So we've undertaken to do not only, in my view, very 

cost-effective things like saving $52 million in the first eight 

weeks of our government with respect to waste and 

mismanagement, but also doing some things which were, in my 

view, very symbolic that in terms of a message that the 

business community have received and have responded in a 

very positive way. 

 

Well we've undertaken to do all of these things, Mr. Speaker, 

and I've just gone over them for the past half hour.  And now I 

want to take some time, if I can, to talk about the results of our 

actions, the good news emanating from the decisions of the 

NDP government 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Good news. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Well there's a lot of good news, and I'll just 

touch on a few of them because the members opposite, in my 

view, would perhaps like to get in the debate. 

 

But for example, after eight years of regular decline in terms of 

our credit rating, Moody's bond-rating agency for the first time 

in eight years didn't downgrade our credit rating.  Now that 

may not sound like a big deal to a lot of people, but that was 

very important to the taxpayers because every time our credit 

rating is downgraded it affects the business community.  It 

affects the taxation rates that people have to pay to sustain a 

higher interest debt.  That results in a lower credit rating. 

 

Also Standard and Poor's took us off credit watch, which is an 

indication from them that we're prepared to listen to the 

government.  As a matter of fact, they commented during one 

of the meetings that they weren't quite sure whether they could 

believe the financial report of this NDP government.  And the 

question was, well why would you question us?  Here are the 

documents; they're all in writing. 

And they said, well the former government would come here 

every year and they'd lie to us.  They would mislead us in terms 

of the information.  And this, Mr. Speaker, was something that 

was quite revealing, that they in essence said, well we're going 

to believe you because you're a new government, and we're 

going to trust you to do what you say you're going to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our government is going to do what we said 

we're going to do, and that is to be an open and accountable 

government, to create a business environment in which 

business people can take decisions based on their business, not 

just taking decisions based on the business of this House. 

 

Confidence, Mr. Speaker, breeds optimism.  Optimism spreads, 

and growth follows.  That's been our priority purpose regarding 

the economy.  And there is good news.  There are many signs 

of optimism, indications that things are beginning to turn 

around. 

 

And my first example, after the Standard and Poor's example of 

course, is the population.  We've seen the population numbers 

increase in the 1970s to a very significant amount.  And we've 

had two periods of substantial depopulation in Saskatchewan.  

From 1969 to 1973 we had a substantial amount of 

depopulation.  We reversed that trend and increased the 

population from '73 to about '86. 

 

From 1987 to about 1991 the population of this province 

declined quite dramatically.  For example, in 1990 

Saskatchewan's population shrunk by about 6,600 people.  But 

in 1991 we went down by only about 187 people.  And here's 

the interesting part.  In the last three months of 1991, 

Saskatchewan's population actually grew by about 250 people. 

 

Now some could say this might be a coincidence with the 

election, with all of the people coming into this province as a 

result of the government, but figures into 1992 show that this 

increase is being sustained.  So in essence, there is some 

confidence in our government.  There is some confidence in the 

fact that there's optimism here that there are some jobs. 

 

And the theory is -- and I choose to believe it, Mr. Speaker -- 

that people don't necessarily come to where the jobs are.  

People come to where they think jobs will be.  And since the 

election campaign, people have had confidence that there will 

be jobs here.  In fact the statistics show very clearly that the 

number of jobs have increased quite significantly in this 

province. 

 

Another sign of optimism -- people are showing an increasing 

interest in visiting Saskatchewan.  And during the month of 

April we've had a number of inquiries in our Department of 

Tourism.  And the numbers of inquiries have more than 

doubled.  Inquiries from the United States have more than 

tripled.  And inquires from Saskatchewan have increased by 

400 per cent.  And my colleague, the member from Meadow 

Lake, will share some of those numbers with you. 

 

Another significant sign of optimism, Mr. Speaker . . . and my 

colleague, the member from Meadow Lake, is very 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

anxious to speak on this motion, and I will allow him to speak 

right after I'm done here, which will be very shortly.  And I can 

hardly wait to hear what he has to say about the economic 

situation of our province, in particular his fine constituency of 

Meadow Lake. 

 

But there's another significant sign of optimism, Mr. Speaker, 

in this province.  And the good news is that housing starts are 

on the rise.  We talked about a few moments ago the number of 

bankruptcies that increased year after year under the former 

administration, record numbers every year, each year breaking 

the record of the previous year.  Well the record they also 

broke every year as government was that every year they had 

fewer and fewer housing starts.  They had the record lows.  

They had fewer houses built in this province.  They created an 

economy where the fewest houses were built in this province -- 

year after year, breaking records that had been set in the 1930s 

when people were moving out by the thousands. 

 

And we have some good news in respect to report on housing 

starts.  The Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association recently 

put out a news release which reported that Saskatchewan was 

the most improved province in the housing market.  In the first 

five months of 1992, housing starts in urban centres were up by 

123 per cent over last year. So things are happening. 

 

We also have some newspaper reports.  The Star-Phoenix, July 

7: "Home prices rebounding": 

 

 Buyer confidence is nudging Saskatoon house prices higher . 

. . The survey shows improvement in house prices in all parts 

of the city (of Saskatoon). 

 

 Prices are also rising in Prince Albert and North Battleford. 

 

And we heard about the good news from Meadow Lake earlier 

today, and I think the member from Meadow Lake will share 

with us in more detail some of the good news from his 

constituency with respect to housing starts. 

 

So the increases for all types of houses, even in Prince Albert, 

are on the rise, Mr. Speaker.  This is a significant economic 

development in our province. 

 

We see in another article, the Star-Phoenix, dated July 7 that 

housing starts in Saskatoon rose 40 per cent in the first six 

months of 1992 and pumped an extra $17 million in the local 

economy, according to CMHC (Canadian Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation).  And of course, provincially the number 

of starts has more than doubled to 569 units from last year's 

238.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very significant factor as well 

in determining an economic trend and reflecting confidence in 

the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

In Regina, my home town, the constituency I represent is 

Regina North West, Mr. Speaker.  And there's good news to 

report here in this city as well.  We have here the citizens of 

Regina, according to this report of the Leader-Post, July 2, are 

staying put.  They're not moving out of the city like they were 

under the former regime. 

And the moving companies are saying that business is very, 

very good. 

 

We have real estate home sales in Regina are up almost 25 per 

cent from a year earlier; that's for the month of May.  And 

they're up 38 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over the first five months 

of 1991 compared to the first five months of this year.  As well 

the price of the homes have increased by 7.2 per cent. 

 

So the signals, Mr. Speaker, are out.  We are an open and 

accountable government with a number of advantages going 

for us at this point.  We've undertaken to introduce a 

responsible budget -- one that's open and accountable.  We've 

undertaken to set up financial management reviews which are 

making our government more efficient and making us a great 

deal more productive. 

 

And I want to get into a couple of final things before I sit 

down.  We want to just go over some key economic indicators 

and that is another indication of how well our economy is 

doing. 

 

For example, employment compared to Alberta and Manitoba 

is, I guess, 10 times greater than Alberta in terms of job 

creation on a per capita . . . or on a percentage basis.  Our retail 

sales are at 4.4 per cent increase over the previous year 

compared to declines in both Alberta and Manitoba.  The 

Canada average is 1.6 but ours is 4.4. 

 

Urban housing starts were way up over the other provinces, 10 

per cent in Canada, and we're at 121 per cent increase year over 

year.  Consumer prices as well have only risen four-tenths of 1 

per cent compared to Alberta at 1.3 per cent and Manitoba at 

1.2 per cent, and a national average, 1.3 per cent.  So in spite of 

the economic activity that is transpiring, we're getting some 

very good responses in our economic indicators. 

 

And I want to just maybe get into a couple of other items 

before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, and that is the economic 

track-record.  We have seen a leading agricultural 

bio-technology company announcing its location of a Canadian 

research and development facility in Saskatoon.  Plans for the 

facility were announced by the president of Plant Genetic 

Systems Canada Inc., which is out of Belgium.   And the 

company specializes in crop quality improvement, 

pharmaceutical proteins and hybrid seed, and will be located in 

SEDCO's (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 

building in Saskatoon.  And there's an opportunity here.  At the 

moment the company will employ 10 people, but the operation 

will become the central office for their canola seed sales in the 

North American market.  And there are new job possibilities 

there. 

 

We have seen, Mr. Speaker, the mining company, the Total 

Minatco Ltd. relocate from Calgary to Saskatoon moving its 

head office there.  We've seen Fort Storage and Burnham 

International building a series of farm chemical facilities in 

Saskatoon at a cost of about $11 million.  And the Speaker and 

the members from Saskatoon would be appreciative of this 

fact, that the industry would eventually create hundreds of jobs 

and projects worth up to $50 million. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

We've seen other indications, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan 

savings bonds sale netted for the government about $565 

million.  And this is a reflection of the confidence not only of 

the business community, but of individual taxpayers in our 

province.  The savings bonds program keeps the money in 

Saskatchewan; it lets the government borrow at a reduced cost, 

saving about, I believe, 5 or $6 million; the Associate Minister 

of Finance might correct me on that.  It also provides for 

interest payments to remain in this province. 

 

The economists of the country will tell you that when 

government spends a dollar, it generates three more dollars in 

the economy.  So if we're spending this money in 

Saskatchewan, we're generating three times that in terms of 

economic activity.  If we're spending it in Zürich or New York 

or Toronto, it generates zero economic activity.  As a matter of 

fact it's a negative effect on our economy. 

 

And as well it's shown that through this savings bonds issue 

that Saskatchewan people are recognizing our debt situation 

and helping us in participating in addressing it in a very 

responsible manner. 

 

We've also got some projects to come.  We've got a number of 

co-generation projects that are being reviewed at this point, and 

these co-generation projects will use home-grown resources 

and home-grown talents to provide power to industrial gas 

users and to the Saskatchewan power grid at a savings to the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

We also welcome, and I wish to do this officially as a member 

of the legislature representing the city of Regina, the capital of 

Saskatchewan, the Crown Life employees to this city.  They 

are in the process of moving to our city right now and over the 

next year there will be about a thousand new jobs in our city.  

And we welcome them and look forward to working with them 

in the months and years to come. 

 

And also the same welcome is extended to the employees of 

the Farm Credit Corporation who are moving here from 

Ottawa. 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, things keep happening, slowly but 

surely, in our province.  Debt -- the massive debt that we had, 

the poor economy that we inherited from the former 

administration -- didn't happen in a week or a month or a year.  

It took them 10 years to destroy our economy, to build this debt 

to a massive amount that we can barely administer. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it will take more than a 

day or a month or a year to resolve the debt situation.  But I 

think the good news you heard today with respect to economic 

development clearly indicates that the road that we're on is the 

right road.  It indicates that the road that we're on is one that is 

supported by the business community in many ways right now. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we're on a steady, optimistic, 

positive route with respect to addressing our economy.  We 

have established an environment in which 

business can comfortably make their decisions that affect 

themselves based on business decisions, and less and less on 

crazy, wild-eyed government schemes that the former 

administration cost the taxpayers billions of dollars. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to sum up by saying that I believe that 

the economy of our province is on the road to recovery, slowly 

but surely.  And I would move: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the Saskatchewan 

government's early initiatives in re-establishing a stable 

provincial financial climate which is strengthening our 

economy and is encouraging economic development, 

especially in the areas of tourism and housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the brief time 

left in today's debate, I will be making a number of comments 

and I wish to make an amendment during my remarks. 

 

The amendment, and I'll read it into the record now and be 

moving it later on, is: 

 

 That all words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 Condemns the government for de-stabilizing the provincial 

financial climate by refusing to present an economic 

development plan, increasing taxes contrary to election 

promises, and gutting the agricultural sector, all of which are 

directly responsible for Saskatchewan's massive increases in 

job loss and declining population. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the member 

opposite move his motion that he didn't touch on the areas 

dealing with the motion until about the last five minutes of his 

remarks.  It was that the . . . he was commending his 

government for strengthening our economy in the areas of 

tourism and housing. 

 

And tourism and housing were something that was sadly 

lacking from the member's dissertation for almost an hour.  

And I suspect that they were sadly lacking because the member 

doesn't have a whole lot to crow about -- that any housing starts 

that are occurring, for instance in the city of Regina, are 

directly the result of the former government's initiatives; that 

any developments in tourism, such as Big Valley, the 

Hootinanny in the Hills, various things that have been going on 

in this province that were basically nurtured and brought to 

fruition by the former government, I might say at great cost, 

given the criticism of the members of the New Democratic 

Party in this House over a number of years . . . I never forget 

every time that one of these particular initiatives was talked 

about -- the developments around Lake Diefenbaker, the things 

that would draw tourists to our province, and had the then 

opposition almost universally condemn each one of those 

initiatives today that they like to take credit for. 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

So I suspect that's why housing and tourism didn't enter into 

the member from North West's comments until he was in the 

dying moments of his dissertation.  And basically we had 

another litany of self-serving fiction that New Democrats like 

to talk about in this Assembly -- fiction that the public simply 

doesn't believe any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was all right in opposition, I suppose, to be so roundly 

critical of everything that goes on.  But every four or five years 

in this province, political parties have to sort of put their stock 

on the line and have the folks judge them.  And I'll never 

forget, Mr. Speaker, the stock that the New Democrats put on 

the line in this province.  And unfortunately we have had time, 

as taxpayers and as citizens, to take a look at that stock.  After 

all of the promises, the naysaying, the condemnation of New 

Democrats in this legislature and around the province over 

what the former government did, we then had a whole series of 

promises to the Saskatchewan electorate. 

 

And I think because the member from Regina North West was 

able to take such licence on a motion that originally started out 

on tourism and housing, that it is proper that I respond in kind 

because obviously the hope for a stable provincial financial 

climate is not going to occur.  And it's not going to occur for a 

number of reasons. 

 

And I must go back to the promises of the NDP Party.  And 

we'll see how many of them have been kept and how many of 

them have been broken, and whether those broken promises are 

going to create a stable financial climate in our province.  And 

I won't be able to get through the entire list, I'm sure, in the 

next little while but we'll give it a good shot and see if any of 

the members of the government can remember some of these 

promises that they made to Saskatchewan people, that they said 

would contribute to a stable financial climate.  Well we were 

promised that we would have no new taxes.  As a matter of fact 

we were left with the impression in the last election campaign, 

as were most voters, that even the expanded E&H (education 

and health) . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  What's the member's point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Thunder 

Creek indicated that the New Democratic Party's campaign 

promise was that there would be no new taxes.  And I have the 

campaign document here, and it makes no reference to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That's debate, not a point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously very early on in my 

remarks I have struck a point with the member from Regina 

North West, and I appreciate that it's tough to sit here and listen 

to the truth.  But that is a fact of life in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I said, there were even people in this province that viewed 

the total repeal of the E&H tax as a platform in the New 

Democratic Party because they were just on this no new taxes; 

we can live within $4.5 billion.  People are overtaxed; we 

simply have got to quit taxing away the 

ability of Saskatchewan people to build our economy. 

 

But the sad truth has now come home to us, Mr. Speaker.  We 

have increased phone rates.  We have increased power rates.  

We have increased natural gas rates.  We have increased SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) vehicle insurance.  We 

have an increase of 1 per cent in the E&H tax.  We have a new 

surtax on personal income tax -- 10 per cent.  We have 

increases on fuel tax.  We have increases on tobacco tax.  We 

have increases of 1 per cent corporate income tax.  We have an 

increase of 1 per cent in the corporate capital tax surcharge 

rate.  We have an increase of 25 per cent in the corporation 

capital tax rate.  We have imposed user fees on chiropractic 

services.  We've imposed user fees for optometric services. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, when one takes the sum total of all of 

these tax increases to Saskatchewan people, it's easy to see why 

we aren't going to get a turnaround in our economy. 

 

When one couples that, Mr. Speaker, with some of the almost 

dramatic changes that have occurred in rural Saskatchewan, an 

area of our province that has traditionally had a great deal to do 

with how our economy goes, which supports the urban areas 

that makes things like tourism and housing starts in our larger 

urban areas possible, one can see the further damage that has 

already been done in a short eight-month period. 

 

And I refer to such things, Mr. Speaker, as the elimination of 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, a plan now that is only being 

brought back because of the dissension in the government 

caucus. 

 

Freezing and elimination of health facilities in rural areas.  The 

member from Wilkie talked earlier today about the hospital in 

Wilkie, half completed, being . . . or Macklin, being shut down. 

 

Cancelling of the natural gas distribution network in the 

province.  People that could have taken opportunities on 

economic development or tourism to use natural gas to lower 

their costs to make their services more readily available to 

people simply can't get it now unless it's at great cost. 

 

We have the gutting of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program, after we promised rural people that we were 

going to have cost of production built in; that the GRIP 

program would be improved; that people in rural Saskatchewan 

would be able to have a secure income base from which to 

work and build our province. 

 

Reduced municipal revenue sharing so that our smaller urban 

centres don't have the ability to do the infrastructural things 

that will make their communities appealing.  Now they have to 

go back to their taxpayers and another wave of tax increases in 

order to get the necessary revenue. 

 

We have the threat hanging over the heads of Saskatchewan 

rural municipalities that the minister, by a stroke of the pen, 

will do amalgamations, further cutting the numbers of jobs that 

are available in rural 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

municipalities.  Eliminating Crown lease surface rights fees.  

People in the ranching community relied upon some of these 

lease fees that were accruing to them to support the livestock 

industry.  Breeder fees, up 21, 31 per cent in our pastures.  

Further taxes on some of the basics in our province -- the 

people that produce basic commodities. 

 

Cancellation of the feed grain adjustment program.  We've 

heard in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that we're talking about 

thousands of jobs.  You want to see the housing market in 

places like Moose Jaw and Saskatoon take a tumble?  Just have 

Intercon shut down.  Just have Moose Jaw Packers shut down 

because there is not enough red meat feed stock going into 

these packing plants. 

 

We've had university professors say that there's an impact on 

the provincial economy of $200 million.  This, Mr. Speaker, in 

a short eight months.  And I guess the fear out there is that in 

four years time, when one takes a look at what they've done so 

far, that in four years time there'll be absolute economic 

devastation wreaked upon this province. 

 

Increased pasture rental fees, cancelled all cash advance 

programs, cap fuel rebate for farmers.  I'll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite likes to talk about some of the 

economic initiatives of the former government, but places like 

the replacing of PAPCO and some of the large Crown 

corporations that were into our industrial sector by 

privatizations have wreaked havoc on our province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say the jury is still out, that time will tell 

whether Saskferco is going to pay back the taxpayers of this 

province in the two years that was predicted.  They haven't 

produced a pound of product yet.  Time will tell how our forest 

industry in 10 years from now looks in comparison to their 

competitors around the world. 

 

Time will tell in 10 years of whether the taxpayer was better 

served, better served owning all of the natural gas distribution 

pipelines in this province, or if that were better done by the 

private sector. 

 

Those things, Mr. Speaker, are down the road.  But what we're 

seeing here today in this province in the short eight months is 

for sure, and that is massive tax increases -- massive tax 

increases in all sectors.  It is devastation in rural Saskatchewan.  

It is devastation to 60,000 men and women who produce many, 

many of the basic commodities that this province exports for a 

living. 

 

Those things are true, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why I think it 

was very prudent of the member from Regina North West to 

simply fall back on the litany that we so often heard in this 

legislature over years and years and years, the old socialist line 

about how wonderful back in the 1970s when we had all these 

extra dollars from resources and we could spend it foolishly, 

nationalizing and buying up farm land and all those sorts of 

things. 

 

And I know why the member from Regina North West did not 

want to talk about, did not want to talk about the economic 

agenda of this government.  I mean, why didn't he talk about 

the 700 companies that the government brags about coming to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Those 700 companies, I'm sure 

would be buying houses.  They would be creating economic 

development on the tourism side. 

 

But no, we didn't hear about those 700 companies that they 

brag about because I suspect that there's nothing happening.  

The Minister of Economic Development goes off to the 

Democratic convention in New York City, supposedly talking 

to people on the side, and yet we see no positive proof, Mr. 

Speaker, in this legislature that anything is happening at all.  

And that's why I think it's absolutely incumbent, Mr. Speaker, 

that there be an amendment to the motion from the member for 

Regina North West.  And I will move, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 That the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

 Condemns the government for de-stabilizing the provincial 

financial climate by refusing to present an economic 

development plan, increasing taxes contrary to election 

promises, and gutting the agricultural sector, all of which are 

directly responsible for Saskatchewan's massive increase in 

job loss and decline in population. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we now adjourn debate 

on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


