




















































Hansard: May 28, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 697 

 May 28, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7), and it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to allow the 

1991 GRIP program to stand, and to begin working with the 

federal government and farmers to design a new program. 

 

And according to order, I am also reporting on, according to 

rule 11(7), on the following petitions for private Bills that are 

hereby read and received: 

 

 By Mr. Kowalsky of the Ukrainian Catholic Council for the 

Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of Saskatoon in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, praying for an Act respecting the 

incorporation of the Ukrainian Catholic parishes within the 

Province of Saskatchewan; and 

 

 By Ms. Hamilton of the Regina Exhibition Association 

Limited of the city of Regina in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amend an Act respecting 

The Regina Exhibition Association Limited. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Solomon, chairperson of the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations, presents the first report of 

the said committee, which is hereby tabled. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As chairman of the 

Crown Corporations Committee, I will say a few words about 

our report, and at the end of my remarks I'll be moving a 

motion of concurrence. 

 

Before my remarks, I wish to acknowledge the efforts and 

co-operation of all members of the Crown Corporations 

Committee over the past five months.  Their contributions were 

very important in the efficient operation of our committee, and 

I wish to thank them for their co-operation and their 

participation over the last number of months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

is one of two public accountability committees of the 

legislature.  The Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

reviews the annual reports of all of the Crowns in the province, 

29 in all.  Almost one-half of all government expenditures in 

1989 and '90 were made by the Crown sector. 

On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and this legislature, 

our job is to review the expenditures of these corporations and 

to ensure their actions have been responsible and accountable.  

Our duty, simply put, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that the public 

interest is paramount in the decisions and activities undertaken 

by the Crowns. 

 

In order for your committee to fulfil our duty, during the 

review of the annual reports, we depend upon the ministers to 

be forthcoming, responsive, and honest.  I regret to inform the 

Assembly that I must report that this has not been the practice 

under the previous administration's ministers.  In fact your 

committee was obstructed from performing its duty by the 

former administration for a period of 13 months. 

 

How were we obstructed from performing our duty, Mr. 

Speaker?  Your committee simply was not called to meet to 

deliberate on the Crown annual reports for the entire last year 

of the former government's term.  This was the first time since 

1947, the first time in 43 years, members, that the Crown 

Corporation Committee has not been called to undertake to 

fulfil its duty. 

 

The former government was negligent in its duty to allow the 

Corporations Committee to meet to hold the Crown sector 

accountable.  The former government was secretive in its 

operations of the Crown sector, and even when the committee 

last met in 1990, the former government was substantially less 

than forthcoming and certainly unco-operative in providing 

information requested.  In fact, requests for information made 

two years previously were never answered. 

 

We now see the results of this deliberate move of secrecy and 

avoidance of accountability: huge deficits, gross 

mismanagement, and a waste of taxpayers' dollars, high taxes, 

a reduction in public services, and a significant loss of control 

in our ability to run our own economy. 

 

As a result of the former government's action, Mr. Speaker, 

your Standing Committee on Crown Corporations addressed 

the need for changes in accountability procedures for the 

Crown sector under the guise of democratic form but with the 

main objective of protecting the public interests. 

 

We instructed our staff, under the direction of Mr. Greg Putz, 

to contact other jurisdictions in Canada to gather information 

on how they held their Crown sectors accountable.  It was a 

comprehensive project ably and competently completed by Mr. 

Putz and I wish to acknowledge on behalf of the committee his 

fine efforts today. 

 

We then considered his report in hearings in our committee.  

The committee then considered a number of recommendations 

concerning our terms of reference, our procedures and 

practices, and other issues. 

 

In addition we invited the Provincial Auditor, the Legislative 

Library, and Crown Management Board officials to participate 

in our deliberations. 

 

We considered a number of issues including the 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

committee's effectiveness; a change to our terms of reference; 

more involvement by the Provincial Auditor and his officials; 

whether the committee should initiate studies on its own; and a 

number of other matters which were pertinent to our operation. 

 

Our deliberations over the past four months were important to 

the people of this province, to our committee members, and to 

this legislature, because we concluded that some reforms and 

changes were needed to improve our effectiveness. 

 

The most important and most refreshing change in the 

operation of your committee is that the ministers of the present 

government indeed answered the questions put to them by 

members during our deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- This was refreshing not only in the fact that 

they were answered, but that the members and the ministers 

were genuinely interested in responding to our committee on 

matters that they could respond to.  This of course did not 

happen too often during the past nine years under the former 

administration. 

 

We recommended, Mr. Speaker, that the government table their 

annual reports in a timely fashion.  Previously this legislative 

requirement was often ignored, and indeed the call for timely 

tabling of annual reports and consideration of same was 

recommended by others. 

 

I might add that the tabling of documents are now on schedule 

in this Assembly with respect to Crown corporation annual 

reports. 

 

We have also changed, Mr. Speaker, some practices of our 

committee.  Our committee will work more closely with the 

Provincial Auditor and his officials and with the Crown 

Management Board and their officials.  As well some 

additional co-ordination will be undertaken with the Public 

Accounts Committee to avoid duplication. 

 

Your committee has also agreed to work more closely with the 

opposition in bringing forward business to the committee.  

During the proceedings of the Crown Corporations Committee, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister present and responsible may provide 

the opportunity for officials of the corporation to address the 

committee directly.  This significant change in procedure will 

save time in committee and provide administrative and public 

financial information in a more timely, cost-effective basis.  

This is quite similar to the procedures of the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the aforementioned recommendations have been 

incorporated or addressed by your committee.  However, your 

committee makes one recommendation for consideration by the 

Assembly: the committee recommends to the Assembly that 

provisions be amended to allow members of the Legislative 

Assembly to be appointed to the boards of Crown corporations. 

 

The rationale for this recommendation is as follows:  the 

presence of an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) on 

a board would add a new dimension to the 

discussions and decisions taken by a Crown.  MLAs are usually 

quite informed and knowledgeable about issues which affect 

their communities by the nature of their having access to 

meeting many people in organizations on a continual basis.  As 

well as having varied life experiences, MLAs keep in touch 

with community opinion and can offer this expertise to Crowns 

in this regard. 

 

MLAs are also on the front line of accountability.  Whether 

MLAs remain MLAs depends upon the support of the public.  

Our jobs are up for review every four years.  People hold all 

MLAs in government accountable for the actions of 

government even though we are not ministers. 

 

This recommendation would expand the role of a private 

member who has to meet the voters daily and gives the MLA 

another opportunity to participate in government decisions.  It 

would also, in our view, Mr. Speaker, provide another 

accountability stream into decisions. 

 

It was noted as well that private members could assist the 

minister in charge in his or her duties as they relate to the 

Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for bearing with me and I therefore 

move: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

join with the member from Regina North West who has 

presented the report today.  However, I'd just like to make a 

couple of comments regarding the report as it's presented.  I 

would like to comment on the fact that, yes, it did seem the 

ministers were more than willing, and very open to . . . and 

very quick to present answers and respond to questions from 

the committee this time around.  And we're trusting and we 

hope that indeed in the future we will see the same kind of 

co-operation and forthrightness coming from the ministers. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was very interesting to note in 

committee -- and it almost appeared almost a little comical -- it 

appeared at times that possibly maybe the minister was already 

aware of the question as the response seemed to be coming 

ahead of the question.  And so, like I say, there seemed to be a 

fair bit of co-operation and willingness on the part of the 

ministers to respond to the committees and to the questions that 

were being presented by the committee.  And as I indicated we 

look forward to the same type of co-operation on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly the committee has made a number of 

recommendations regarding just a couple of points.  One of the 

points I would like to just mention, certainly the 

recommendations that were made were not totally unanimous 

and all committee members certainly took part in the 

information, expressing their views and opinions. 

 

I would just like to mention to the Assembly today the fact 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

of making a recommendation that MLAs be involved on Crown 

corporation boards, the suggestion was made and certainly on 

the part of the opposition members, that opposition members 

be allowed to be part of the boards as well, to provide for a 

greater accountability on the Crowns, Mr. Speaker.  The 

suggestion was also raised about the fact that maybe Crown 

corporations committees should be a committee chaired by an 

opposition member. 

 

Now these are a number of views that were expressed and 

brought forward and, Mr. Speaker, as we enter into more open 

debate on Crown corporation committees, we certainly do look 

forward to a commitment on the part of the government for 

more openness, more accountability, and certainly members of 

the committee will be keeping the government . . . bringing 

them to task regarding the operations of the Crowns in each of 

the Crown sectors.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that on Wednesday I will ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to reduce heritage grant coverage and 

to eliminate the grant outright for low income seniors living 

in subsidized housing: (1) Did the minister consult with any 

groups or persons prior to the decision being taken; and (2) If 

so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; and (c) what was the content of 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give 

notice that on Wednesday I will ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to eliminate the FeedGAP program: 

(1) did the Minister of Agriculture consult with any groups or 

persons prior to eliminating the program? (2) If so, (a) what 

are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) and what was the content of 

representations made to the minister? 

 

(1345) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Wednesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to eliminate the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan: (1) Did the minister responsible consult with 

any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken?  (2) 

If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved in 

the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) what was the content of 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Wednesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to impose increases on the handling 

and deposit fees on soda pop and other beverages: (1) Did the 

Minister of the Environment consult with any groups or 

persons prior to the decision being taken?  (2) If so, (a) what 

are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) what was the content of the 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to cancel the agreement with the 

federal government and AECL: (1) Did the minister 

responsible consult with any group or persons prior to the 

decision being taken?  (2) If so, (a) what are the names of the 

individuals involved in the consultation; (b) on what dates 

and at what locations did the consultations occur; (c) what 

was the content of representation made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the changes to the prescription drug plan as they 

affect diabetics: (1) Did the Minister of Health consult with 

the Saskatchewan Diabetic Association prior to the 

imposition of these changes?  (a) If so, on what dates and 

where did the consultations take place; (b) what was the 

content of representations made to the minister; (c) what are 

the names of the individuals consulted? (2) Did the Minister 

of Health consult with any other organization or persons 

regarding the changes? (a) If so, on what dates and where did 

the consultations take place; (b) what was the content on 

representations made to the minister; (c) what are the names 

of the individuals consulted? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Wednesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to pull the province out of the 

national standardized tests: (1) Did the Minister of Education 

consult with any groups or persons prior to the decision being 

taken?  (2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals 

involved in consultations; (b) on what dates and at what 

locations did the consultations occur; (c) what was the 

content of the representations made to the minister? 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Wednesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to eliminate the livestock cash 

advance: (1) Did the Minister of Agriculture consult with any 

groups or persons prior to the decision being taken? (2) If so, 

(a) what are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) and what was the content of 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Wednesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to retroactively apply regulations 

pursuant to The Saskatchewan Crown Minerals Act from 

January 1, 1974 as if those regulations had been in place ever 

since that date: (1) Did the Minister of Energy and Mines 

consult with any groups or persons prior to the decision being 

taken?  (2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals 

involved in the consultations; (b) on what dates and at what 

locations did the consultations occur; (c) what was the 

content of representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Wednesday ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to give the Minister of Social 

Services the power to unilaterally decide whether or not to 

release personal family information in any form the minister 

chooses under The Adoption Act and The Child and Family 

Services Act: (1) Did the Minister of Social Services consult 

with any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken?  

(2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved 

in the consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations 

did the consultations occur; (c) what was the content of the 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to give government employees power 

to forcibly enter premises without a warrant or other approval 

of the courts under The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act: (1) Did the Minister of Environment consult 

with any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken?  

(2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved 

in the consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations 

did the consultations occur; (c) what was the content of the 

representations made to the minister? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind members of a 

ruling made in this legislature on May 16, 1991, in regards to 

notice of motions.  At that time the Speaker made it very clear 

that it's only a courtesy to members that oral notice can be 

given, or shall be given.  If it is used as a tactic of obstruction, 

then it is not permitted.  Beauchesne is absolutely very clear on 

that.  It's only a courtesy to members to give oral notice.  You 

can table notices, but I just want to warn the members that if 

this continues very much longer I shall call it out of order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to impose user fees on chiropractic 

patients: (1) Did the Minister of Health consult with any 

groups or persons prior to the decision being taken? (2) If so 

(a) what are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultation; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) what was the content of the 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Deference to you, Mr. Speaker, I'll deal with the next one 

immediately afterwards. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next, Mr. Speaker, ask 

the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to de-insure optometric services: (1) 

Did the Minister of Health consult with any groups or 

persons prior to the decision being taken? (2) If so, (a) what 

are the names of the individuals involved in the 

consultations; (b) on what dates and at what locations did the 

consultations occur; (c) what was the content of the 

representations made to the minister? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I do have two notices here.  I'll just 

present the one and present the other one right in.  Mr. Speaker, 

I give notice that I shall on Wednesday ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to close hospital beds and lay off 

nurses in Saskatoon: (1) Did the Minister of Health consult 

with any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken? 

(2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved 

in the consultations; (b) on what dates and what locations did 

the consultations occur; (c) what was the content of 

representations made to the minister? 

 

I present. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Wednesday 

I will ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the decision to impose a full fuel taxation scheme 

on farm vehicles: (1) Did the Minister of Agriculture consult 

with any groups or persons prior to the decision being taken?  

(2) If so, (a) what are the names of the individuals involved 

in the consultations; (b) on what dates and what 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

locations did the consultations occur; and (c) what was the 

content of representations made to the minister? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have the 

privilege to stand in for the member from Estevan today and 

introduce from the Midale School 11 grade 10's.  They are 

sitting up in the Speaker's gallery.  Their teachers are Garth 

Holman, and the bus driver is Sandra Holman. 

 

I would like to ask all members to welcome them to the 

Assembly today.  I'll be meeting with them later for pictures 

and drinks.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me on behalf of my colleague from Rosthern to introduce 38 

students, grade 10 students from Waldheim, Saskatchewan.  

They're accompanied today by Mr. Sam Neufeld, Mr. Henry 

Penner.  Chaperons are Darlene Penz, Vi Vogt, and Herman 

Fehr. 

 

I'm going to be meeting with them later on to talk about the 

activities in this Assembly.  I just want to note to the students 

that the member from Rosthern is attending a funeral of his 

mother's brother, and therefore is not able to attend today.  And 

so we will visit with them and talk about what the Assembly is 

doing.  And I'd like all members of the Assembly to join with 

me in welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly, 16 adult 

students from the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) program here in Regina.  They're 

enrolled in a program, English as a second language. 

 

I want all members to join with me in welcoming them here 

today, and I'm sure that they'll enjoy the proceedings here in 

the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I too would like to introduce some guests 

that I have here today from Queen Elizabeth School from my 

constituency. 

 

I will have to apologize to the students that I will not be able to 

meet with you at 2:15 as we had planned.  The activities have 

been taking a little bit longer today. 

 

I do want to welcome the students to the Assembly.  I hope you 

enjoy the activities that are taking place and I especially want 

to welcome Mr. Toles and Miss Terri Tyler.  I hope all students 

will enjoy the activities here and I hope you have a safe trip 

back to Saskatoon. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the students 

from Queen Elizabeth School. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to make a statement on initiatives that were announced in the 

May 7 budget to address the problems in northern 

Saskatchewan.  Housing is a very important component. 

 

To help address northern housing needs, Saskatchewan is 

assuming responsibility for the rural and native housing 

program delivery.  This will allow for greater community 

involvement in the delivery and management of housing units.  

It will facilitate greater levels of household repairs and will 

allow the co-ordination of housing improvements with the 

government's wellness-based health objectives. 

 

Community need and demand studies will be completed by 

June.  Basements and foundations will be completed by late 

fall. 

 

These new initiatives, Mr. Speaker, will provide much needed 

housing in northern Saskatchewan and will also create a large 

number of new jobs.  Provincial delivery of the rural and native 

housing program will allow the province to address the 

northern housing needs directly, both in terms of new and 

existing units.  Community Services housing division plans to 

deliver 76 units in northern Saskatchewan in 1992. 

 

Other initiatives include self-build home ownership options.  

The rural and native housing program has been modified to 

include a self-build home ownership option.  Community 

Services housing division will incorporate the self-build option 

into the northern housing delivery strategy beginning in 1992. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have with me 

a letter today from the Carnduff branch of the Royal Canadian 

Legion concerning an issue of importance to all legionnaires 

and all legions and I'm hoping it will be of importance to the 

members here today. 

 

This issue concerns a Bill before the House of Commons.  It's a 

private members' Bill presented by Ron MacDonald, the MP 

(Member of Parliament) for Dartmouth in Nova Scotia.  It 

concerns Remembrance Day being made a statutory holiday. 

 

I'd like to quote from a letter from the research branch of the 

Library of Parliament, a non-partisan and independent agency, 

about Bill C-289, designed to ensure that Remembrance Day 

continues to be observed at least within the federal public 

service. 

 

 Veterans and groups such as The Royal Canadian Legion are 

dismayed that the observance and non-observance of this 

special day is a question of negotiation between labour and 

management.  It is 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

all too commonly seen as another day off . . . rather than a 

solemn day for remembering the dead and those who fought 

in the two world wars and Korea.  As the participants in the 

wars get older, and the wars recede in memory, it is likely 

that these trends will increase. 

 

 Even if this remains the case in other sectors of the economy, 

it is arguable that the federal government has a special 

responsibility and obligation to observe the holiday.  Bill 

C-289 is intended to ensure, therefore, that federal public 

servants cannot be forced to take a substituted holiday in lieu 

of Remembrance Day except in extraordinary circumstances. 

 

I would encourage all members to contact their MPs about this 

Bill to encourage passage of this Bill before the House of 

Commons.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1400) 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 

comment on the proposed integrated health care facility that 

was promised for the community of Cudworth.  Mr. Speaker, I 

can well appreciate the disappointment of the people in 

Cudworth area as a result of the news that the redevelopment of 

the Cudworth Nursing Home and the St. Michael's Hospital 

will not proceed as planned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the people of Cudworth and area, 

and in particular the individuals who worked so hard on this 

proposal, that they have not been singled out or treated unfairly 

in the province.  For the past number of years, Mr. Speaker, 

there has been a considerable amount of change in the trends in 

health care program delivery, and as well as utilization of 

services.  We're placing much more emphasis on the health 

promotion, illness prevention, and also community-based 

health care.  Mr. Speaker, that's not only in Saskatchewan but 

right across the country in every other province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I want to reassure the people of the 

Cudworth and district that the Government of Saskatchewan, 

the Health department, and myself will be working very closely 

with them to develop some new and innovative solutions for 

delivering health care services that will ensure we meet the 

needs of the community in an effective and efficient manner.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to speak 

on behalf of the young people who have been in contact with 

my constituency office in Saskatoon Greystone, which is in the 

heart of my home city.  I am the member for the largest urban 

constituency in Saskatchewan.  Last week some 2,300 students 

convocated from the University of Saskatchewan, which is on 

the edge of my constituency.  The president of the university 

referred to the recent cuts to education as being so serious as to, 

and I quote him: for ever impact on the future of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Every day my constituency secretary takes resumes from 

bright, enthusiastic young people with physical 

education degrees, engineering degrees, degrees in 

physiotherapy, psychology, veterinary science, and so forth.  

The young people of Saskatoon Greystone, the city of 

Saskatoon entirely, and indeed the young people of 

Saskatchewan, are feeling betrayed and hopeless and lost in 

their quest for a promising future at home with their families 

and friends. 

 

Their parents are very disappointed for them and they're 

worried that their children will leave, never to return.  This is a 

serious . . . and as serious as it gets, Mr. Speaker.  In fact this is 

the worst crisis facing Saskatchewan. 

 

On behalf of all of those who have called or written to me, I 

implore the government to get their strategies for job creation 

on the table before one more talented young person gets 

rejected by an employer, before one more parent puts his son or 

daughter's suitcase in the car and waves goodbye to a lifetime 

of dreams. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I have some 

good news regarding Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  

And I want to refer to the financial statements and the monthly 

customer accounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in October 1991, it took 110 days for STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) to release its 

customer accounts and financial statements to its own 

management.  In May of 1992 it took 20 working days to 

release those same things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- It's remarkable, Mr. Speaker, when we realize 

that in October of 1991, STC was in the process of buying a 

brand-new computer at a cost of $1.6 million.  Instead the 

computer has been internally cleaned up at an estimated cost of 

some 6,000; savings, very nearly $1.6 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, the staff in finance and 

administration at STC deserve special recognition for their very 

long-standing patience with a system that was ignored or very 

poorly managed.  Changes since October 1991 have resulted in 

the remarkable turnaround, Mr. Speaker.  I'm delighted to 

support and congratulate the Minister of Environment, STC 

president Peter Glendinning, and the tremendously dedicated 

staff at Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to pay an 

acknowledgement today to a group of men and women who 

have organized a new association in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and it's called the Saskatchewan High School 

Rodeo Association. 
 

Last fall, with discussions going on with parents who were 

interested in promoting this, they encouraged each other. And 

we have representation on a board of directors from 

Whitewood, Beechy, Regina, Swift Current, Saskatoon, 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

Kennedy, Coronach, Maple Creek, a whole lot of places.  They 

have held five rodeo days already this year.  And they include 

young people, men and women who are grade 9 to grade 12. 

 

I want to point out that this is the third province in Canada that 

has been initiating this program.  B.C. (British Columbia) has 

90 students involved, Alberta has 150, and I'm proud to say that 

Saskatchewan has 117.  And they're very well qualified.  They 

have to maintain their scholastic standard.  They have to have a 

report from the principal of the school regarding that.  They are 

having their final rodeo in Beechy next week on June 5 and 6. 

 

And I want to just indicate, Mr. Speaker, in case people don't 

realize how well these young men and women do, at Maple 

Creek last weekend one young fellow roped a calf in 10.2 

seconds.  And if you take and look at that, that would easily 

qualify in Edmonton's . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Recommendations on Construction Industry Collective 

Bargaining 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment. 

 

Mr. Minister, on Tuesday we saw another example of how your 

government is using heavy-handed tactics to impose your 

political agenda on the people of Saskatchewan.  Your 

announcement that you intend to put in place recommendations 

from your hand-picked advisory committee is tantamount to a 

dictatorship, Mr. Minister.  You intend to give yourself 

sweeping powers to dictate your labour agenda on the 

construction industry.  Employers and even employees will 

have no choice, no options, when it comes to collective 

bargaining, according to your proposals, Mr. Minister. 

 

Why on earth would you want this all-encompassing power, 

Mr. Minister?  How does this my way or highway policy 

square with your open and consultative style of government 

that you have been claiming to have?  Mr. Minister, would you 

respond? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the report that the 

member refers to is actually the Construction Industry 

Advisory Committee that was established a few months ago in 

an attempt to consult with both labour and industry. 

 

And I guess I find it more than passing interest in the fact that 

for about 15 minutes the members introduced questions and 

motions to have . . . find out where the government has 

consulted and urging us to consult.  Now we have a report here 

where we went out and consulted with the building trades and 

contractors.  They have brought back some recommendations.  

And now you're saying that we shouldn't have consulted.  

What's difficult to understand from the members opposite is 

whether they 

want this government to consult or whether we shouldn't 

consult. 

 

But one thing I can guarantee you, that this previous 

government's attempt to divide and conquer using business 

against non-labour and business against workers has come to 

an end.  We are going to be consulting and that's what we've 

done here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Supplementary to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, these proposals, which you say you will 

implement, will give you absolute command over the 

bargaining structure of the construction industry.  There is no 

disputing that.  You will be able to force contractors to form 

organizations and force them to bargain collectively through 

those organizations whether they or their employees want it or 

not. 

 

Mr. Minister, other than giving you the . . . sorry, omnipotence 

that you desire, what possible good for Saskatchewan taxpayers 

will come out of this proposal?  Is this your way of delivering 

the reward for union support during the last election, Mr. 

Minister?  And if your colleagues wish to participate in the 

question period, maybe they would write a few questions for 

me and pass them over and I'll ask them as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that he, first of all, gives some misleading 

information about how this is our policy, and then he jumps 

ahead of himself and now says that we're about to implement 

this policy.  I'd urge the member to wait and be patient, and 

when we bring the legislation before the House he will see it 

then. 

 

But what we're referring to is not a piece of legislation or the 

policy of the government, but some recommendations from, I 

say again, contractors including Ken Holloway of Dominion 

Construction, Don Bell of the Insulation Applicators Ltd.  

Other names:  Ron Thorpe of Thorpe Brothers Ltd. and Sid 

Matthews of Matthews and associates.  These are the people 

who bring forward these recommendations, along with some of 

the building trades. 

 

And so I say to you, be patient.  We'll bring forward legislation 

when the minister is here and gets the Bill completed, and you 

will see what we're proposing.  But to assume that as a result of 

some consultation the recommendations that come forward 

here are the policy of the government is premature. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting that 

a news release is released in this province with such a critical 

problem as this and the minister is in Ottawa at the time.  It's a 

complete sham.  The whole thing is just a snow job. 

 

Mr. Minister . . . I have a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, for the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, your hand-picked 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

advisory committee is at least forthcoming in why they insist 

that these measures be implemented.  In fact they say, and I 

quote: 

 

 the unionized sector is in jeopardy and a co-operative effort 

by the unionized contractors and the building trades unions is 

required to ensure its survival. 

 

Now not that we need job creation or that a strong business 

environment is needed to help the provincial economy, instead 

this committee wanted to ensure the unionized sector's 

continued growth and survival.  Those are the words. 

 

Mr. Minister, these actions will clearly bolster the political and 

financial powers of the union at our expense.  Surely you will 

join your own committee in recognizing this as the reason for 

implementing these proposals, and for no other reason. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the member should 

realize that he is speaking against the contractors I list here.  

This is a unanimous report and recommendations of a group of 

contractors and building trades.  And big contractors and build 

trades are interested in the survival of the construction industry 

in the province, that's true. 

 

And why wouldn't they be?  After 10 years of mismanagement 

and waste, they're interested in their survival.  That is the 

contractors and building trades, because it's a unanimous report 

of the industry and of the workers.  And for them to get 

together and come forward with some proposals and 

recommendations, then to be attacked by the opposition 

members, seems to not be in the best interest of the province, 

and certainly not in the interest of consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I find it strange that you would say that 

everybody is represented when unionized contractors and the 

building trade unions are the two groups from which all of 

these people come.  I see nothing from outside of the union 

structure in this committee providing any direction. 

 

My new question, Mr. Speaker, is to the same minister.  Mr. 

Minister, you also announced on Tuesday that you will likely 

be implementing a proposal from your hand-picked committee 

regarding union preference for subcontracting.  Now, Mr. 

Minister, in response to questions in this legislature on May 5 

of this year you said, and I quote: 

 

 I asked the committee if they were prepared to give (you) . . . 

advice on the question of union contracting, and they said no.  

They said they didn't want to do that.  So their mandate has 

been limited . . . and I expect to receive their report in that 

connection . . . any day now. 

 

Now these two statements are totally contradictory, Mr. 

Speaker.  This committee indeed passed on a recommendation 

on union contracting.  At the time, I was asking how a union 

preference policy would affect the cost to taxpayers of using 

union-only labour.  Perhaps you could now come clean and 

answer the question put to you on May 5, Mr. Minister.  How 

much more is a union-only policy going to cost the taxpayers in 

increased labour costs on government construction projects?  

Would you please answer this time, directly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously what the 

Minister of Labour was doing when he set up the committee, 

was attempting to get a new spirit of co-operation between the 

construction companies in the province and the working 

people.  And I think that's laudable and I'm surprised that 

members opposite don't support that. 

 

This new spirit of co-operation, we believe, will lead to a Bill 

that will have the approval of the building industry as well as 

working people.  Further to that, we've been doing a great deal 

of consulting with other groups -- business and workers -- from 

many areas of the province, and will continue to do that. 

 

I know the members opposite tried to survive for 10 years by 

pitting business people against workers, and farmers against 

non-farmers, and natives against non-natives, and people on 

welfare against non-welfare people.  But I can tell you, that is 

not the mandate of this government and we reject totally any 

attempt by the opposition to take us back to those good old bad 

days of Tory government when that was the mandate of that 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  It's unfortunate 

that you would say in one breath that we have co-operation in a 

province that seems to be destined towards a total dictatorship. 

 

I have a supplementary question.  And I suspect that your 

union preference policy goes far beyond the subcontractors, 

Mr. Minister.  Indeed I suspect you have unwritten policy 

which gives preference to unionized contractors and puts 

pressure on other contractors to hire unionized employees. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, last November you stated, and I quote, 

during the . . . this would be the Minister of Labour that made 

this statement during . . . and I want to quote from what he said 

because it's important, that this is his portfolio and I have to 

quote what he has said about his . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member has gone 

on at some length on all of his questions today and I've been 

very patient with him.  He has now gone on about 40 or 45 

seconds, and he wishes to make another quote before he asks 

his question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No way. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have the records here for members to . . . 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

I'll show you the records.  He's gone on very lengthy today, and 

I ask him to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I apologize for 

rambling on.  I guess I got caught up in the rhetoric.  Mr. 

Minister, is it true . . . My question to the minister is, Mr. 

Minister, that you have already implemented an informal 

union-only policy, and have you awarded contracts based on 

that policy for numerous closed tenders?  You would have 

liked to have heard the comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say again 

and reiterate that what my colleague, the Minister of Labour, is 

attempting to do here -- and I hope that he is successful and I 

hope our government's successful in it -- is to create a new 

atmosphere of co-operation between the building industry and 

the people who work in the industry.  And I think there are 

signs of that working already in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In talking to contractors as recently as this morning, the 

building trades are having a troubled time finding enough 

people to do the cement work and the bricklaying that's needed 

in the province of Saskatchewan at the present time.  Now why 

is that?  That's because there is a great increase in construction 

in our two major cities.  And we want to ensure that as this 

building takes place that there's co-operation between the 

trades and the people who work in the trades.  I think that is a 

laudable attempt by the minister and I'm surprised that 

members opposite are opposed to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to 

the same minister.  I obviously disagree with what he said, but 

I will carry on because I want to get to a point. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have received numerous reports that contracts 

from the Shand power station and others have been awarded 

with the caveat that the contractors hire union members on the 

site, on the job site. 

 

In fact the vice-president of Stuart Olson contracting, the firm 

which has been contracting to build the Melfort water treatment 

facility, has already been pressured by your agents to hire 

union employees.  Is this not an example of your informal 

policy, Mr. Minister?  A direct question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't want to 

speculate on the newspaper story the member is talking about. 

 

I want to tell you very clearly that at every opportunity we are 

going to be consulting with the industry and with the workers -- 

and the unionized workers, non-unionized workers -- to come 

up with a Bill that will be satisfactory in meeting the needs of 

the economic development of the province.  And that's the 

interest of this government. 

 

Now when the Bill comes forward there will be ample time for 

you and others to bring forward 

recommendations and amendments to the Bill.  But for you to 

jump to the conclusion that newspaper stories are in fact policy 

of the government or that these recommendations are the basis 

of the Bill, is premature. 

 

Be patient, wait for the Bill, and we'll have as long as you like 

to debate the pros and cons.  But I'll tell you, it will be an 

attempt of co-operation and new-found spirit of development in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new 

question for the same minister.  Mr. Minister, also on May 5, a 

few short weeks ago you told this House, and I quote: 

 

 I have assured the industry and everyone involved that before 

any such policy would be considered by the government, 

extensive consultations would . . . take place. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you are now considering 

such a policy, can you tell us of one individual, can you give us 

the name of any construction association outside of your 

hand-picked committee, that you consulted with?  Tell us who 

you consulted with outside of your advisory group which 

consisted exclusively of unionized labour and unionized 

contractors.  Is there any other one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that I cannot speak on behalf of the Minister of 

Labour as to who he has consulted with, but I can tell you that 

he has consulted with a large number of people.  And part of 

the process was the report that he had done for him.  I know 

other members will have consulted with a large number of 

people as to what kind of labour laws there should be in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As minister in charge of Economic Development, I've talked to 

many, many business people as to what would be a proper mix 

in terms of legislation that we would bring forward.  So there 

has been consultation. 

 

I'm surprised the member is now urging us to consult when his 

first questions he was critical of the consultation we had done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Supplementary to that question, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, had you bothered to talk to the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, who are the only provincial 

industry-wide association, you would have discovered that 

moving toward union monopolies has a devastating effect on 

the economy and the treasury. 

 

Take Ontario.  Legislation of this very same style has destroyed 

the province's economy.  Everyone recognizes that.  Did you 

consult with any of your friends in Ontario as to the results of 

what happened there before you came up with this policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

to the member opposite that we didn't consult with Ontario 

where the economy is in trouble as a result of free trade and 

many of the Tory government federally . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And is in trouble as a result of the 

free trade deal and many years of Liberal administration at the 

provincial election.  Nor did we consult with the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government in B.C. where the economy is 

booming.  This is a Saskatchewan consultation process and it's 

broad-based and we'll continue to consult, and then we'll bring 

forward a Bill that you'll have ample opportunity to deal with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to 

the same minister.  A report from the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, issued by the association, indicates 

that with comparable wage rates, labour components costs are 

20 to 30 per cent higher for some types of construction under a 

union-only requirement. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you not agree that these moves will increase 

costs for construction, increase costs for new business, increase 

costs for government, increase costs for taxpayers?  You are 

taking money out of business, out of taxpayers, and giving it to 

your union allies.  How can you justify this action, given the 

economic difficulties this province is in?  How can you justify 

this patronage on this massive scale, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I don't know why the member 

insists on union bashing and contractor bashing here in the 

House today.  The only real threat to the economy of 

Saskatchewan is the gloom and doom being perpetuated by the 

members opposite, and they won't quit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yesterday it was an attempt to shut 

down the Crown Life deal.  Today it's the attempt to shut down 

the construction industry.  Tomorrow, who knows what it will 

be? 

 

I can tell you, be patient, wait for the Bill, and you'll have 

plenty of opportunity to debate it over the next few weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. member likes 

to go on about the economic projections for this province.  

Today though we see the Conference Board of Canada has 

today singled Saskatchewan out for the largest decline in 

economic growth in the country -- fully a 3 per cent drop in the 

growth from the projection of last year. 

 

Will the minister clearly today admit that it's time to stop 

destroying the projects started by the previous 

administration and get on with the job of real economic 

planning that this province desperately needs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, the 

member should recognize that the forecast that the Conference 

Board made was lowering expectations for all across Canada 

except in the province of British Columbia. 

 

There are many projections that are made.  The Royal Bank 

recently released their projection showing a growth of 1.2 or 

1.4 per cent.  The Investment Dealers Association of 

Saskatchewan, after the budget, indicated a growth of in excess 

of 1 per cent. 

 

The Conference Board indicates and makes its projections on 

the basis of an assumption that Saskatchewan farm production 

is expected to drop 10 per cent from 1992 because of the 

bumper crop year that we had.  There is no way that one can 

fully predict all of those things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we have done as a government is put in place a policy 

of good financial management which will bring this province to 

the point where we can have economic development which will 

be meaningful, which will create jobs, and which will create 

wealth in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What the Conference 

Board indeed did say was that the economic performance of 

Saskatchewan is going to decline.  I think that's very clear, and 

the reason for that decline, Mr. Minister, I think is clear.  The 

differences of things like dropping of the AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement, things of that nature; 

cancelling of farm programs; the cancelling of the upgrader in 

Lloydminster.  Those are the types of things that are destroying 

the economic performance in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, the important thing we have to recognize 

is here that you people are responsible for the economy of 

Saskatchewan today, and it's clear that you don't have a plan 

for Saskatchewan.  And if you do have a plan, Mr. Minister, for 

the economic direction of this province, would you now 

articulate it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

member opposite that this government is doing exactly what 

the member opposite is talking about -- putting the finances of 

this province on the right track so that we can make sure that 

there is confidence by investors in Saskatchewan.  We are 

restoring that confidence, contrary to what the members 

opposite did for the last 10 years where they drove this 

province from a total debt of $3.5 billion self-liquidating to a 

total debt of $15 billion; got this province from the second 

highest possible credit rating in all of Canada to a point where 

we are now A minus on a credit watch, all the responsibility of 

the members opposite. 

 

Just the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite are now 

over there and not over here is a confidence builder 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

for the investment community in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister talks 

about fiscal responsibility, but indeed what's happened in the 

province is he's increased spending.  That's what he's done -- 

he's increased the spending in the province by $100 million. 

 

The minister talks . . . the budget presents $100 million 

increase in spending and $500 million of increased taxes.  The 

people of this province can't sustain the increased tax load that 

you're forcing upon them, Mr. Minister. 

 

The minister continues to blame of all it, the woes of his 

government on everybody else -- the federal government, 

anyone else, and pretty soon he's going to have to start blaming 

it on the taxpayers because the taxpayers of this province can't 

bear the load that you continue to put onto them. 

 

Will this minister now admit that their government has no 

plans for the economy of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, were it not for the 

interest on the public debt created by the members opposite 

when they were on this side of the House, the budget that is 

being considered by the legislature at this time would have had 

a surplus of $242 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I know the member from 

Kindersley is new, but I invited him to read all of the 

documentations now that has been tabled because of the new 

openness that is being provided by this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And he will find that the interest on 

the public debt from 1982 has increased from $43 million to 

$760 million which has strait-jacketed the province of 

Saskatchewan from doing some of the things that we would 

like to do.  But in spite of that, in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, 

we're going to do everything that's necessary to create investor 

confidence, to create development, and create jobs for our 

young people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is utter nonsense.  You put an economic 

forecast for the province of Saskatchewan together last 

December; you predicted growth based on the projects of the 

former government.  You did that, sir, in that forecast. 

 

Why don't you join with the Dean of Commerce from the 

University of Saskatchewan, why don't you join with him, who 

says that your budget, sir, is a further dampener on the 

Saskatchewan economy and that you've taxed, that you've done 

things to the Saskatchewan economy with this budget that 

won't let it recover?  Mr. Minister, 

why don't you join with him?  Why don't you use your own 

words from your December forecast and get on with an 

economic plan that makes sense to these people? 

 

People all across Canada, Mr. Minister, are seeing the nonsense 

of your budget.  Will you not agree with them now and change 

your ways, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me make it very, 

very clear.  We will not change our ways to return to the 1980s 

and the mismanagement of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We will do, as has been recognized 

by The Globe and Mail in which it is reported, the headline 

said: "Province still trend-setter, this time in fighting debt." 

 

We will do what has been reported by the investment dealers of 

Saskatchewan which have acclaimed the province of 

Saskatchewan for doing what we're doing.  That's the direction 

we're taking.  We have restored this province to open, honest, 

accountable government with good fiscal management so that 

the future for our children can be guaranteed rather than 

threatened as it has been in the previous 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill to 

amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act be now moved 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move item no. 3, 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Education and Health Tax 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move item no. 4, 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Corporation Capital Tax 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move item no. 5, 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: -- Before the minister moves his motion, would he 

please introduce his officials to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm 

pleased to introduce the officials who are here to help us today.  

John Wright, the deputy minister of Finance, on my immediate 

right; Mr. Craig Dotson, Associate Minister of Finance, to my 

right; and behind me, Mr. Gerry Kraus, the Provincial 

Comptroller, who's down here now; and John Law, executive 

director of the treasury board branch, immediately behind me; 

and Al Dennett, the director of operations of the treasury board 

branch, to my extreme right. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm going to just make a couple of brief 

comments for the benefit of the House.  As you know, this is 

consideration of Committee of Finance of the interim supply 

Bill.  An interim supply Bill, as members will know -- I say 

this for the benefit of new members -- is a Bill that is provided 

by the government during a session when after a budget is 

introduced but has not yet been fully passed, in order to 

provide one-twelfth of the funding for the following month of 

government operations, such things as school grants, hospital 

grants, municipal grants, and paying of wages and other things. 

 

This Bill essentially does that -- the Bill I'm going to be 

introducing after the House deals with a couple of motions.  It 

provides one-twelfth and actually more than one-twelfth, more 

twelfth by a hundred and . . . I think $116 million. 

 

The reason for that, Mr. Chairman, is because there are some 

funding that the government does on a quarterly basis. For 

example, a school funding will have six-twelfths of their 

1992-93 funding provided as a result of this and previous 

expenditures.  The same thing happens with municipalities and 

other things which require more than one-twelfth because of 

the kind of funding arrangements are there. 

 

So theoretically this interim supply Bill provides one-twelfth 

plus the additional funding necessary to meet other 

requirements so that third parties in particular could meet their 

obligations.  And so this is $116 million in excess of the 

normal one-twelfth provision. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, I need not explain any further in that 

except, for the record, indicate that this first interim supply Bill 

is for $469.935 million.  And I will leave it at that and proceed 

to move the two motions which are by the rules required. 

The first motion, Mr. Speaker, I move is that: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $469,935,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be making 

a few comments in regards to the motion that is brought 

forward by the hon. Finance minister, and at the end of those 

comments ask a few questions of the minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it's very odd that this minister should be before 

the House asking for this interim supply Bill today.  This 

coming from a minister and a party which ran around the 

province of Saskatchewan on numerous occasions talking 

about the use of special warrants. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that the House is in session so we 

can't call this a special warrant; we call this an interim supply 

Bill.  In effect, that's what it is, Mr. Speaker.  Three days, Mr. 

Chairman, three days before this legislature was called back, 

after every member in this Assembly had got notice from the 

Speaker of the Assembly as to when it would open, this 

minister and his government went to the Lieutenant Governor 

to ask for money three days before. 

 

This was from a government, Mr. Chairman, that said it was 

going to bring the legislature in on time, that the legislative 

timetables of the province of Saskatchewan would go back to 

the point where they should have been, according to the 

members of the government. 

 

Well that agenda just didn't work out, did it, Mr. Chairman?  So 

we now have the minister asking this Assembly for monies to 

defray the costs of the Government of Saskatchewan, not for 

one-twelfth but for one-twelfth plus -- $469.935 million. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that's a lot of money when that minister knows 

full well that he could have presented a budget to the province 

of Saskatchewan on time.  That budget could have been 

debated, the Estimates could have been debated, and all of the 

sums that are due the various departments of government, after 

debate in this legislature could have then been properly 

expended by the minister. 

 

Instead, Mr. Chairman, we have this minister now running out 

of money -- no budget passed, no Estimates passed in this 

legislature -- and he expects the opposition to simply lay down 

and say yes, we agree to the expenditure of over nearly 500 

millions of dollars when we haven't had the details of the 

budget presented to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that this government has 

passed on any of the arguments or the accounts that would 

allow it to justifiably bring this motion forward.  This 

government could have brought forward a budget last fall.  Last 

fall, when we met in December, this Minister of Finance could 

have brought a budget forward. 

 

(1445) 

 

And instead, he suspended the constitution so that he 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

could escape the laws of the land, of this province, in bringing 

that forward.  And instead, Mr. Chairman, we went through 

that happy little charade last December where the minister sat 

in his place and said, I'll answer questions for the entirety of 

government. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that that exercise a few days 

before everyone wanted to go home for Christmas, in the dark 

of night, was a futile one, I suggest, for all members of this 

Assembly.  That minister could no more answer questions 

about other departments than members of this Assembly could 

fly to the moon.  And the member full well knew it. 

 

So we went through the charade last December, Mr. Chairman, 

but we went through it at least with the minister saying that 

spring will be different; that this new government would be 

bringing in budgets on time; this new government wouldn't be 

using special warrants; that all the ills that they assigned to the 

previous government wouldn't be compounded by this one. 

 

Well January came, Mr. Chairman; February came, Mr. 

Chairman; we were into March, the traditional time of budget 

consultation in this province, everyone expecting the minister 

to bring down a budget at the end of March. And no budget.  

No notice of recall to the legislature.  Instead we see, Mr. 

Chairman, the Minister of Finance trotting off to the Lieutenant 

Governor to operate the province of Saskatchewan on special 

warrants. 

 

And we go through two months of special warrants and then 

finally, Mr. Chairman, the legislature is called in and we have a 

budget presented.  But they made sure, Mr. Chairman, that 

knowing how tough this budget was going to be on 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, how much pain they were going to 

inflict on Saskatchewan people, knowing they were going to 

break every last campaign promise that this political party had 

ever made to the people of Saskatchewan, they made sure that 

they snuck in three days before the deadline to get some more 

money from the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

And my guess is, Mr. Chairman, is the Minister of Finance has 

probably salted away enough to get himself about 10 days 

beyond May 31 if he runs into significant problems.  And I 

would guess that this little more than one-twelfth might give 

him a little more room beyond the 10 days; that we can put off 

some of the grants to schools and others. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this is an exercise that shouldn't be happening in 

the legislature of Saskatchewan, given all of the 

pronouncements that we have heard from that member 

particularly, and members of that government over the years in 

this Assembly and around the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'm afraid, Mr. Chairman, I'm afraid that this sum of 

money that is being requested of the Assembly today is going 

to be used for a number of purposes that Saskatchewan people 

disagree with.  We recently saw a Bill brought into this 

legislature that will have the use of force to enter private 

property without a warrant.  Is some of this sum of money 

going to be used for that purpose? 

We are seeing Bills brought before this legislature that will 

centralize power in the hands of ministers.  Regulations in the 

mining industry yesterday.  Regulations dealing with personal 

family details of Saskatchewan people.  I believe some of this 

money will be used to do those things, Mr. Chairman, Bills that 

deny individuals the rights to make a full defence of possible 

charges in a court of law.  Is some of this nearly $500 million 

going to be used for those purposes? 

 

Can we justify, Mr. Chairman, can this opposition really justify 

giving this minister that kind of money when it can be used for 

purposes such as that?  He's asking this Assembly to provide 

money to support this government that is rank with 

contradictions and inconsistencies.  He's asking this Assembly 

to provide money, Mr. Chairman, so that the Minister of 

Agriculture can use that money to fight in the courts of this 

province against farmers who have a legitimate case to carry 

with the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

The Minister of Finance -- let's make it clear, Mr. Chairman -- 

is asking for money to spend on lawyers to fight the farmers of 

Saskatchewan because the Minister of Agriculture did not send 

a notification to them as was deemed in law.  And the Minister 

of Agriculture has threatened in the courts of Saskatchewan to 

bring a piece of legislation before this Assembly that will deem 

that he sent a letter which he didn't. 

 

And I am terribly afraid, Mr. Chairman, if we grant supply to 

this minister that he will take some of that money.  He will give 

it to law firms such as Olive, Waller & Waller to fight the 

farmers of Saskatchewan and others who are contesting 

legitimately, contesting actions taken by this government.  And 

I think that would be inappropriate, Mr. Chairman, to grant 

monies for that purpose when this minister can take and deny 

the basic rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I'm afraid, Mr. Chairman, that this minister may take some of 

this money and engage in dangerous meddling as the Premier 

outlined in this Assembly yesterday with the Crown Life deal.  

It has been revealed by the chairman of the Crown 

Management Board that there may possibly be $50 million 

override costs attached to Crown Life because this government 

has dithered around for months and months and months, that 

there is a potential cost of $500,000 with Sachs and Goldman 

in New York because of this dithering that the government is 

doing.  And we have a potential huge cost to the taxpayer of 

this province because of it, Mr. Chairman.  And I am scared 

that this sum of money being requested by this minister, some 

of it may go to that particular entity. 

 

And I also am fearful, Mr. Chairman, I'm very fearful that this 

government who says on one hand they will spend $500,000 on 

due diligence on Crown Life, is launching off into other 

provinces in an insurance scheme, apparently without any due 

diligence.  It may cost the taxpayers of this province untold 

millions of dollars also. 

 

And I am fearful, Mr. Chairman, that some of this money being 

requested here today will be taken by the minister responsible 

for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), taken by that 

minister and taken off to do insurance businesses in other 

provinces.  And, Mr. 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

Chairman, I think that would be simply inexcusable for the 

members of the opposite to grant supply to a minister and his 

colleagues who may do that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, should this Assembly grant supply to a Premier 

and a government and a Finance minister who have, in this last 

budget, taken away the rights of diabetics to life-saving drugs.  

And I am scared, Mr. Minister, that some of the changes that 

this government has implemented in the budget, some of this 

money that they are asking us to grant in interim supply today 

will be used to make changes to the health care system that 

may in fact deny diabetics in this province the kind of access 

that they need in insulin in order to look after themselves in a 

proper and decent way. 

 

And I am scared, Mr. Chairman, that if we grant this nearly 

$500 million to the minister today in this Assembly, that the 

people on next Monday who are going to go see chiropractors 

and be charged fees may be forced to make further changes 

because of monies granted to this minister in this Assembly in 

this Bill he has presented to us. 

 

We may have the situation, Mr. Chairman, of seeing the 

minister take some of this money and actually have the 

government start ripping up paved roads in this province and 

converting them back to gravel.  What a shame, Mr. Chairman, 

that we would grant the Minister of Finance interim supply in 

this House before it is properly debated either in the Estimates 

of the Highways department or in other ways that this minister 

could supply money to that department and go out and start 

tearing up the surfaces of the paved roads of this province 

without any type of consultation of the people involved. 

 

Is the Minister of Finance, Mr. Chairman, going to use some of 

these monies in helping to get rid of the farm fuel exemption in 

this province?  Is he going to use some of these monies in 

taking the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) program 

away from livestock producers in this province, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Are some of these monies, Mr. Chairman, going to be used in 

the setting up of the government's phoney energy institute that 

they implemented in cancelling the AECL deal?  And I am 

sure, Mr. Chairman, that if one looks carefully through the list 

of areas that this money is going to, that that will be one of the 

areas where the government is trying to cover its tracks and 

monies from this particular motion would be granted to that 

phoney agency. 

 

Mr. Chairman, one of my colleagues has asked if he could 

introduce guests.  I'll now let him address the Chair. 

 

The Chair: -- Is leave granted to the member from Moosomin 

to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Leader of the 

Opposition I would like to introduce to the members of the 

Assembly, a group of 25 students, grade 4 students from 

Hillcrest Elementary School in Estevan who are 

presently visiting the Assembly.  They are accompanied by 

their teachers Michael Donovan and Cathy Gerein, and bus 

driver John Chest. 

 

I know the member from Souris-Cannington will be meeting 

with them shortly.  He is meeting with another group at the 

present time so it's my pleasure to be able to introduce this 

group of students to the Assembly, welcome them to Regina, 

and trust they have a safe trip home and a good day in the city. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I also fear that some of the 

monies that the Minister of Finance is requesting from this 

House today will be used to make interest payments on 

write-downs of corporations in this province that didn't need to 

happen.  I am sure, Mr. Chairman, that even though the 

Minister of Finance knew full well that there was no permanent 

impairment on the shares of Cameco Corporation, that this 

minister has chosen to write off entirely the book value 

differences on what the shares were originally valued at and 

what they presently are in the stock exchange today. 

 

The minister has chosen to do this, I say, Mr. Chairman, 

because he fully expects in the future to have a large capital 

gain attached to those shares at some point when he needs 

money for some of his political schemes. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, agency after agency within this country 

and outside of this country, in the studying of those share 

offerings said there was no permanent impairment suffered by 

offering those shares for sale.  And I am sure, Mr. Chairman, 

that some of the money used, being asked to be used in this 

supply Bill will be used to pay interest on the debt the minister 

has incurred, and do just exactly that. 

 

(1500) 

 

This minister, Mr. Chairman, has taken the opportunity to 

unload as much debt as possible into the previous fiscal year to 

make his further initiatives down the road look better.  Mr. 

Chairman, we saw the example in this legislature of monies 

taken from the last special warrant, monies expended by the 

Minister of Community Services on community recreational 

complexes, asked for in the special warrant three days before 

this Assembly was called in.  Those monies were asked for in 

this fiscal year and expended back into the previous fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is a classic example of what we are seeing 

today in this legislature.  That this minister cannot be trusted 

with this amount of money before this legislature has had the 

opportunity to go through the Estimates line by line in the 

budget presented in this House.  If this minister and his 

government can take money from special warrants in the '92-93 

fiscal year and turn around and put them back into the previous 

fiscal year, then I say, how many more of these fancy little 

deals are going to be done, Mr. Chairman, before we get the 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

Estimates of this budget passed in such a manner that the 

people of Saskatchewan can be assured that those monies are 

being expended properly? 

 

It's funny, Mr. Chairman, that as we listen to the Minister of 

Finance in debate, as we listen to the Minister of Finance 

explain away some of the numbers he uses, he always falls 

back for an excuse on the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we are very suspicious of that minister 

because he likes to mix and match his numbers.  The minister 

and his officials don't operate on accrual accounting in the 

province of Saskatchewan at present.  They don't operate 

anywhere close to that system that Mr. Gass often refers to in 

his remarks. 

 

And yet we have the minister coming in the House asking for 

nearly $500 million today, and often leaving the impression 

with Saskatchewan people that the deficit numbers that he uses 

all the time in this House are actually the way that the 

government is accounting for its money.  That he comes in here 

and asks for $500 million in interim supply, knowing full well 

when he stands in this House and uses a $15 billion deficit 

figure, that he is using a fully accrued system to arrive at that 

figure. 

 

And just as the prospectus filed in Washington, D.C. (District 

of Columbia) by the minister explained, because they have the 

addendum attached to it from the Gass Commission, said that 

the deficit of Saskatchewan is the same whether you use the 

Gass numbers, the accrual numbers, or whether you use the 

present cash-in system of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the minister has been unfair with the 

public in mixing and matching these numbers all the time, 

because you can't have it both ways.  You can't tell the people 

of the province that the deficit is one number, come into this 

House and ask for $500 million in interim financing because 

you didn't bring your budget in on time, but be operating on a 

different system that produces a different number. 

 

The same system that the previous government used.  The same 

system that the Allan Blakeney government used.  The same 

system that the Ross Thatcher government used, and I would 

suggest the same system that the Woodrow Lloyd government 

used.  And probably Tommy Douglas before that, because they 

tell me the present system was brought in in 1958. 

 

So all the way along government has been using the same 

system of accounting.  And yet this minister, bald-faced, stands 

up in this legislature time after time again and uses the other 

numbers -- a system that we aren't even on at present; a system 

which only the federal government has even advanced down 

the road to. 

 

And yet he comes into this legislature, says to the people of the 

province, we've got a $15 billion debt; I need $500 million in 

interim financing because I brought in a late budget. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, it would be more reasonable for the 

minister to maybe stop using those numbers until he 

has changed his accounting methods to comply with them, that 

he would use the numbers that the people of Saskatchewan are 

used to and for the accounting methods of this province. 

 

And then if he wants to use those other numbers, if he wants to 

talk about the pension liabilities that exist in this province, then 

he attached a true value to them in 1992 dollars, and he'd tell 

the people of Saskatchewan where most of that accrued 

liability came from before he comes into this legislature and 

asks for $500 million. 

 

What we have, Mr. Chairman, what we have today with this 

Minister of Finance coming into this Assembly and asking for 

this sum of money are a whole host of issues: some legal, some 

not; some involving consultation, some not; some involving the 

power of ministers to intrude on the lives of Saskatchewan 

people and companies.  We have a whole host of areas, Mr. 

Chairman, where the Minister of Finance will be using these 

monies, using these monies to change the lives of 

Saskatchewan people before they have had the opportunity and 

their elected representatives have had the opportunity to go 

through the Estimates of this province, through the Estimates 

of the budget presented by the Minister of Finance and 

question their expenditures on a line-by-line basis. 

 

And I think, Mr. Chairman, that is simply inexcusable.  If this 

minister had been caught with perhaps one special warrant 

because of some special circumstance in the new government, 

if we had not gone through the charade last December in this 

House, Mr. Chairman, that all members were forced to go 

through -- and I say it really was a charade, Mr. Chairman -- if 

we had not had to do those things, then perhaps the opposition 

wouldn't have to be quite so stringent with this minister. 

 

But I believe, Mr. Chairman, that we have to ask this minister 

many questions relating to the topics that I have outlined before 

this particular Bill can be allowed to go through.  It's that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

I will ask the minister a question in regarding to the FeedGAP 

program.  What analysis have you done, sir, on the livestock 

industry that will show that Saskatchewan livestock producers 

will not lose tens of millions of dollars because of changes to 

this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me just make a . 

. . I'm not going to respond to all of what the member opposite 

said, but I want to clarify some things for the benefit of the 

House and for the record and for the public.  This is an interim 

supply Bill.  It is nothing different or unusual or otherwise an 

exception from what has been normally done as long as there 

have been legislatures in the British parliamentary system. 

 

It provides for one-twelfth of the funding of the full fiscal year 

except in cases which are explained and can be explained 

where there is a requirement for funding because of other 

provisions such as quarterly funding for municipalities under 

the revenue-sharing program, the funding for school divisions 

so that they don't have to borrow the money to fund themselves 

because that's what they would have to do if there was not an 

interim supply Bill. 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

And so that there is nothing unusual in the presentation of this 

interim supply Bill.  Every year this happens after a budget 

introduction.  It doesn't matter if the budget was introduced in 

February or March or April or May or June.  We've had a 

budget in this House introduced in June in 1987, 1988, or it 

was in May.  Actually it was in June.  And in each of those 

years there were interim supply Bills, usually for the first two 

months, of one-twelfth and then in future months for 

two-twelfths. 

 

This is exactly what the purpose of this interim supply Bill is.  

In the Department of Agriculture, for example, the provision is 

for an exact one-twelfth of the budget in the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

I would say to the member opposite that the Estimates are 

presented to this legislature, to the committee.  Members 

opposite have an opportunity to deal and complete with one of 

the Estimates, the Estimates of the department of the Property 

Management Corporation.  I understand that this House is 

considering the Estimates for the Public Service Commission.  

And in each of the departments and agencies of the 

government, members will have, both on the opposite side in 

the opposition and on the government side, to ask specific 

questions of ministers and the departments related to those 

Estimates.  All this Bill does is provide the one-twelfth of the 

funding except where they're an exception. 

 

In the remarks that the member from Thunder Creek made, he 

did ask some questions in his comments, and I'll try to respond 

to some of them for the information of the House. 

 

For example, the question he asked: is money being requested 

for any funding for the Crown Investments Corporation; or is 

any money in this Bill, interim supply Bill, being provided for 

the purposes of funding related to the Crown Life proposal 

project; or is there any money being provided in here for 

interest payments on the write-offs.  The answer to those 

questions is no, because this is an interim supply Bill. 

 

For example, in the case of the interest payments on write-offs, 

it's statutory.  It does not come here in the form of a Bill and 

has to be dealt with when the Department of Finance Estimates 

are considered finally at some point during the session.  So 

there will be an opportunity, now that we have a full session in 

place and a budget which identifies clearly the expenditures 

and the revenues of the government, for all of the detailed 

considerations that members opposite want to give each of the 

departments.  So there's nothing unusual here. 

 

As to what the Department of Agriculture has done with its 

various projects, with its various programs, and the funding 

that it provides, the member will have to . . . have the 

opportunity to ask of the Minister of Agriculture when that 

department comes forward in the Estimates, to get those 

specific answers. 

 

I, as the Minister of Finance, can talk in general terms about 

the one-twelfth provision that is provided in this Bill which 

we're going to present, but I'm not in a position -- because I 

don't have the Agriculture officials here and 

I'm not the Minister of Agriculture -- to give specific details of 

the particular Estimates in each of the departments, which will 

be coming to the House in due course when they are presented. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Chairman, I guess that's why the opposition has so much 

trouble with this minister.  This minister now stands up and 

likes to hide behind the narrowness of discussion in this 

committee. 

 

Last December he was quite prepared after a fancy little piece 

of legislative work to say, I'm prepared to stand in this House 

and answer questions for each and every department of 

government.  I and my officials are either so knowledgeable or 

else we can get to you almost immediately any question that 

you wish to ask. 

 

As I said in my earlier comments, this minister was quite 

prepared to go through the charade then, but the minute that 

members here might -- and I don't know if they will or not, Mr. 

Chairman -- get a little bit specific . . . And I did take the 

opportunity to go back and study the verbatim of some of the 

interim supply Bills which the member mentioned took place in 

this legislature, and I can assure him that they got detailed 

enough down to the point of members of the then-opposition 

asking the Minister of Finance, the member from Weyburn, 

about the consultation process involved around consultation 

Saskatchewan, or what was the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Consensus. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Consensus Saskatchewan.  And the minister 

from Weyburn attempted to do his best to answer the questions 

about the consultation process, and that's from the interim 

supply Bill when those people were the opposition of this 

province. 

 

So I think you can expect, Mr. Chairman, that we in the 

opposition will try and be general in our responses to the 

minister, but that at times we will seek to have the minister 

answer questions because he expected the former government 

to answer them.  And he told us himself here in December that 

he was quite knowledgeable, that he was a minister that was 

quite prepared to take on every last department in this province 

and answer the questions that might arise from them.  So we 

plan on holding the minister to that. 

 

I also noticed in the minister's comments -- and this would pose 

a question to him -- he said that the potential impact of 

differences in the Crown Life deal would not affect in any way 

the monies that he has requested from this Assembly today.  

And I might remind the minister, I might remind the minister 

that if the Minister of Economic Development, the minister in 

charge of community bonds in this province, goes forward with 

some type of convertible bond or public share offering 

agreement with the principals around the Crown Life deal, he 

will need monies from this Assembly in order to issue those 

guarantees and to do his due diligence process as necessary. 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

I see in here that the Department of Economic Development is 

asking, and has apportioned, two million, six, four, eight, one 

thousand.  Mr. Minister, are you saying today, in the Assembly, 

that the Minister of Economic Development has been removed 

from that process, that no one in his department would be 

expending monies in relationship to either a community bond 

or a convertible bond or some type of public offering in 

relationship to the Crown Life deal?  Is that what you're saying, 

Mr. Minister, today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me 

make it clear to the House that the community bond program is 

not an expenditure of money other than the related staff work 

that may be required in order to perform due diligence and do 

an analysis of the proposal. 

 

All the community bonds, Mr. Chairman, are, are a guarantee 

of bonds which are proposed by community development 

committees or community development authorities. 

 

If the member opposite would look at the information, he will 

find that the amount of money provided in the department of 

industry, trade and commerce is exactly one-twelfth of this 

fiscal year's proposed appropriation for that department.  

There's nothing unusual about that.  If there are proposals that 

in this period of time come forward to the department with 

community bond proposals, there are officials who are being 

paid their salaries and other related expenses out of the 

one-twelfth provision that's being requested here who will 

carry out that in the normal course of events. 

 

If the member's question is, is there a specific amount of 

money here put for the purposes of Crown Life or any other 

such project, the answer to the member opposite is no, there is 

not.  There is not in this one-twelfth interim supply Bill a 

request for that kind of money. 

 

I want to also point out that last December when we considered 

the supply Bill at that time, there were many questions that I as 

the Minister of Finance was not able to answer.  I don't 

apologize for that.  I shouldn't be expected to answer those 

questions.  But I did take notice of all of the questions that we 

could not answer because of the unusual situation that we were 

considering, and in writing either I or each of the ministers 

about whose departments questions were asked, answers were 

provided to the members opposite so that there were no 

questions that were asked which were not answered at some 

point in time in the very near future following the consideration 

of that Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is 

absolutely right that the few questions that were asked were 

answered in writing at that time.  But I suggest to you, Mr. 

Chairman, three days before Christmas in the dead of the night 

with a minister who couldn't verbally answer any questions, 

seemed like a futile operation for members of the opposition.  

So what was the point of asking the hundreds of questions 

necessary of the minister, given the situation the opposition 

was placed in? 

 

So I don't think the minister should hide with comfort behind 

that particular reply to the legislature.  What he 

should do, Mr. Chairman, in coming in and asking interim 

supply this time is apologize for that charade, put this House 

back on a level footing, and say that I won't do this to the 

Assembly again, because it was a charade. 

 

Mr. Minister, during the consideration of interim supply you're 

absolutely right, that figure assigned to Economic 

Development is one-twelfth, which is the normal procedure.  

But are you also saying, Mr. Minister, that the Goldman Sachs 

study that you're doing in conjunction with Crown Life was 

accounted for in those expenditures, or was that a special 

expenditure?  And I suggest to you it was probably special. 

 

And how are we to be assured, Mr. Minister, as we consider 

this interim supply Bill, that there won't be other items such as 

Goldman and Sachs where you run off and spend a half a 

million bucks that's got nothing to do with this and yet 

ultimately may have a very large impact on Saskatchewan 

taxpayers as you have in the case of Crown Life because of 

your dithering? 

 

And I don't see any guarantees, Mr. Minister, that that won't 

happen.  Because you have potentially spent that money and 

there is the potential impact, and I suggest you might take some 

of this money and you might use it to pay Goldman and Sachs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me assure the member that the 

answer to the question is no, there is no money provided in this 

interim supply Bill for the purposes of Crown Life or for the 

purposes of the study that Goldman and Sachs is doing. 

 

I know that the member legitimately should be interested in 

that, and I can tell him that when this legislature considers the 

Estimates of the Crown Investments Corporation where this 

process is taking place, he will be able to ask the questions and 

those questions will be provided. 

 

I am not able to respond to that because in this interim supply 

Bill no such funding is being provided -- and I want to make 

sure that I assure the House of that -- at this time as we 

consider this Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I assure you that the 

opposition will wait for that opportunity when it comes to 

discuss Goldman and Sachs and the amount of money that the 

province's taxpayers are forking out to do a study that might 

not necessarily have been necessary. 

 

Mr. Minister, I raised a number of questions during my 

opening remarks, dealing with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and its involvement in legal tangles with 

taxpayers of this province.  Mr. Minister, because it covers 

more than one area, I think it's appropriate that the members of 

the opposition ask if any of the monies being asked for in this 

interim supply Bill will be going to pay legal costs of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in fighting legal actions with its 

own taxpayers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I had a note here and I thought I 

had responded to that in my first initial remarks, but apparently 

I did not. 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

The funding for the Department of Justice, where that kind of 

expenditure would be made, is one-twelfth, one-twelfth of the 

normal allocated amount or appropriated amount of money that 

is being provided in this budget for the Department of Justice.  

There are no unusual requests for unusual expenditures other 

than the normal expenditures in the Department of Justice, 

which is one-twelfth of the provision, which is one month. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that is very interesting, Mr. Chairman, 

because the people in the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation in their application to the judge in Melville 

concerning the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) case, 

said the potential cost to the Crop Insurance Corporation, i.e., 

the Government of Saskatchewan, was upwards of $40 million 

if the judge did not grant their wish.  Now thankfully for 

Saskatchewan farmers, the judge in her wisdom said that 

Crown corporations simply cannot trod on the rights of 

individual farmers in this province. 

 

What we have before us here is a $9 million figure.  Obviously 

if the public pronouncements of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation officials are correct, then Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance is in a far different state than what the minister has 

indicated in his interim supply Bill.  That case is before the 

courts at present.  There is considerable money being expended 

by the province of Saskatchewan -- expended to the point 

where they asked the judge in Melville to slap a $750,000 bond 

on the farmers to try and scare them off so that they wouldn't 

take the government to court. 

 

And the government by its own admission says that the cost is 

in excess of $40 million.  Now I would think that at some point 

the government may need some extra money, and certainly 

these ongoing court wrangles and costs are going to be 

considerable. 

 

Mr. Minister, given the pronouncements of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation in the court in Melville and the sums of money 

that we're talking about, can you assure Saskatchewan 

taxpayers today that none of the money allocated in this sum 

will not end up in some special circumstances as outlined by 

the Crop Insurance officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can once again 

assure the member that if you look at the appropriation in this 

interim supply Bill for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, it is 

one-twelfth.  It's one of the areas in which there is no exception 

because there is no good reason for it to have an exception. 

 

It is the normal one-twelfth, one month's supply for the month 

of June, and therefore there is nothing unusual other than 

paying for the normal functioning of the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance which one-twelfth appropriation will pay for. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to move 

into a few of the more specific areas.  I'm wondering if there is 

any money that's been allocated out of this supply Bill to fight 

the court case with respect to the GRIP contract holders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Any costs that would be 

associated with that would be provided in the appropriation 

that's here.  I assume, I think I'm correct, that the Department 

of Justice would pay where there were lawyers that were hired.  

If they were the Department of Justice lawyers, if they were 

lawyers outside of the Department of Justice, either the 

Department of Justice would pay or any other agency that 

would hire the lawyers.  But the money is the normal money 

that is provided in the interim supply, which is one-twelfth 

provision either in Justice or Crop Insurance or Agriculture.  In 

each case, the provision here is only for one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In the court judgement that we saw as a result of 

the court case, the judge identified the fact that it was, I think, 

important to recognize for all of us in the province of 

Saskatchewan that even if the judge . . . even if in the end the 

judge does rule in the favour of the government, there could be 

damages awarded to the farmers.  And I think they identified 

the damages could be potentially $27.20 an acre, and that's, I 

would assume, on the entire acreage, seeded acreage in the 

province of Saskatchewan, which would be something in 

excess of 31 million acres. 

 

Now that would be in excess, if there was that that judgement 

came into place, it would be, the province of Saskatchewan 

would be faced with a bill of something in the order of $900 

million.  Now I'm wondering whether there's any of this money 

has been allocated in that direction, particularly in light of what 

the judges said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The only amount of money 

provided in . . . or requested in the interim supply is the normal 

one-twelfth.  There are no provisions for what may or may not 

be a judgement of some court.  It's not possible to do that.  The 

member as a lawyer will know that.  The provision here is the 

one-twelfth provision which I indicated earlier. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure that we want to, 

in opposition, base our approval of supply to the government 

on assumptions like that.  You were assuming that the budget 

for the money to fight the court case is in these different 

departments somewhere or another. 

 

I feel that the role of the opposition is . . . I think we have to 

identify where it is.  I'm just not sure whether you've . . . Have 

you allocated it or hasn't it been allocated?  And that's the point 

we're trying to make is, has the money been put forward to 

fight those court cases and is there any of it that can be 

identified? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, if there are expenses 

related to the case that for example took place in Melville not 

so long ago, there will have been money provided in the 

various departments that would have had to pay the bill.  We're 

providing, and I can only refer to the departments who I 

believe would be involved -- the Department of Agriculture, 

the Crop Insurance Corporation, and the Department of Justice.  

All that's being provided here is the one-twelfth, the normal 

funding for those departments. 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Within that, if there are associated legal expenses with 

whatever actions they may be involved in, it would come out of 

the one-twelfth provision.  If the member opposite wants the 

specifics of what lawyer, what firms were paid what money, 

what firms are engaged, you'll have to ask that when the 

various departments come for Estimates before this legislature.  

That's the appropriate place to ask the questions because that's 

the department who will have those answers. 

 

The Department of Finance does not run the affairs of the 

Department of Agriculture.  The Department of Finance 

provides the appropriation for the year based on present 

representations made by the Department of Agriculture for a 

global amount of money geared to various programs that the 

department runs. 

 

Specific answers to specific programs and expenditures of 

those departments have to be provided by those departments.  

The member will have an opportunity to do that at whatever 

length that the members opposite will choose to take.  They can 

take a day, they can take an hour, or whatever, when those 

Estimates come. 

 

We are in the process of considering Estimates of the 

departments now.  That's one of the ways in which 

governments are held accountable to the Assembly.  Details 

have to be explained to detailed questions.  I can tell the 

member opposite, now that we have a normal session in place 

with a normal budget, those opportunities will be provided. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what the minister is asking 

for is anything but normal, though.  You're asking us as 

opposition members to allocate money on behalf of the 

government to various government departments and we don't 

know what we're allocating it for. 

 

So when I go home to my constituents and they say to me, you 

took part in this debate with respect to the allocation of money 

for the government, and I'll say yes, I most certainly did take 

part in it.  Well what was the money going to be used for?  Was 

it, for example, used to fight the GRIP case?  And I'll say, well 

the minister said he assumes that some of the money was used 

there, and he didn't know which department.  It might have 

been in Justice, it might have been in Agriculture, it might have 

been in Crop Insurance. 

 

I don't think that's going to be good enough for the folks out 

there.  They're asking me those types of specific questions on a 

daily basis about what's happening with the finances of this 

province.  So I think the minister has to do a little bit better 

than just say to the folks in Saskatchewan that we assume that 

the department has set aside some money for this.  We don't 

know what the amount is, we don't know where, even which 

department it's within, but we want you to grant supply. 

 

And I'm not sure, Mr. Minister, that we can go along with that.  

When people ask us as legislators to look after the public purse, 

I think that we have to look after it in a fashion that we know 

where the money is going to.  And that's the problem I think, 

Mr. Minister, with this Appropriation Bill.  We're not sure 

whether money is being set aside for these types of things. 

So I wonder if the minister would care to elaborate a little bit 

more about what kind of response I should be giving to my 

constituents when they ask me where the money is going to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I think the member can have a 

perfectly legitimate response to his constituents. 

 

The purpose of an interim supply Bill, one-twelfth, is to make 

sure that members of the legislature can do exactly what the 

member from Kindersley is talking about -- only providing 

one-twelfth of the interim supply.  And if the session happens 

to last another month, maybe there will be an interim supply 

Bill for another one-twelfth, so that the members opposite in 

the interim can ask of the Department of Agriculture and the 

Minister of Agriculture in this particular case, all of the 

questions that need to be asked.  Otherwise the Minister of 

Finance would be here asking for more than one-twelfth. 

 

The purpose of an interim supply Bill is to provide only those 

essential monies that have to be expended to run the operations 

of the government, to provide funding to third parties that 

require either by statute or under certain program obligations -- 

revenue sharing, for example -- the money that they need in 

order to operate their businesses or their jurisdictions and not 

have to go to the extra expense of waiting till the end of the 

budget debate and end of the Estimates, and in the interim 

borrowing huge amounts of money and having to pay interest 

costs on them because the legislature could not provide them 

with the interim supply. 

 

That's why you have only one-twelfth, so that this legislature -- 

not as it happened last year; a very exceptional thing happened 

last year -- so that this legislature does not have the final 

Appropriation Bill voted until any member who wants to 

question any department has had an opportunity to do that in as 

much detail as they may want to ask those questions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think what you're 

asking us though for is an opportunity to provide for you a 

blank cheque, a blank cheque based on the fact that we don't 

know what you want to use it for.  When we ask you specific 

questions about it, you can't answer the specific questions 

about it. 

 

For example, is there a cost associated with winding down of 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the Department of Finance . . . 

we're dealing so far with only those departments in which there 

are no exceptions.  If members want to ask questions where 

there is greater amounts than one-twelfth, I'll be able to provide 

the information of where it's going and what it's for.  But in the 

Department of Finance, nothing unusual, simply getting the 

one-twelfth appropriation for this fiscal year, not more than 

one-twelfth.  There is no extra money for any special 

expenditures and nothing abnormal about it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if the minister would provide us then 

with a list of the departments that are being allocated more than 

one-twelfth. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, we have it here.  The 

departments in which there is an amount that is in excess of 

one-twelfth are the following.  Community Services because of 

the revenue sharing; Education; Energy and Mines; Department 

of Health; Department of Highways because construction 

seasons are this time of year so you have to advance the money 

quicker; Natural Resources; New Careers Corporation; Rural 

Development, once again because of the revenue sharing; 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation; and Social Services. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I wonder if the minister would table that 

information for us, please. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if there's been any cost associated 

with the winding down of the FeedGAP program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I know of no specific costs, but as I 

said, the Department of Agriculture, we're providing 

one-twelfth of their appropriation. The Department of 

Agriculture, when you consider their Estimates, will have to 

explain how they have broken that down and each particular 

program.  You can get the answers in detail. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there any identifiable cost associated with the 

delays in the Piper deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member will have the 

information I sent him.  The Department of Economic 

Development and Trade has been provided a one-twelfth 

appropriation, and they will do their normal programming 

expenditures.  There is no provision for any exceptional 

expenditures as there are in, for example, the Department of 

Community Services because of revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there any identifiable cost in the delays in the 

Crown Life deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is no money provided 

anywhere in the interim supply Bill related to the Crown Life 

proposal. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there not ongoing discussions with the Crown 

Life folks, and their moving and all of that sort of stuff out 

here?  Supposedly there must be a cost associated with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sure there are ongoing 

discussions by the Crown Investments Corporation, Crown 

Management Board, with the principals involved in the Crown 

Life proposal.  But as you will note in the second row of 

Crown Investments Corporation, there is an asterisk.  We make 

it clear there's no money being provided in this interim supply 

Bill for the Crown Investments Corporations. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there any identifiable cost within the Energy 

and Mines department with respect to the upgrader at 

Lloydminster?  We understand that the government may be put 

in a position to have to fund the overexpenditures there, and 

I'm wondering whether there's any identifiable cost there. 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that would be a 

statutory provision.  Therefore it's not something that would be 

provided in the normal budgetary appropriation such as this.  

So the answer to your question is no. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there any identifiable cost in the Department of 

Highways for the ripping up of highways and turning them 

back to gravel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Department of Highways has 

in its appropriation in this interim supply Bill, a request.  We 

are requesting to provide to them an amount over one-twelfth 

of $6.643 million.  The purpose of that is to make sure that 

money is available for performing work that is done during 

peak summer periods.  This is now peak time for maintenance 

costs and for some construction costs.  That's what the money . 

. . money in excess of the one-twelfth is there because of 

maintenance and construction which is at its peak at this time 

of year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'd like to correct you when we're talking about 

ripping up highways.  I think we wouldn't call it construction; 

we'd call it destruction of the highways.  When you tear them 

up, it seems to me that would be the way you'd characterize it. 

 

But I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what is the reason for the 

costs associated with the New Careers Corporation?  I thought 

you were . . . Is that the cost of winding it down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The additional cost there in excess 

of the one-twelfth is $708,000.  And that's to meet 

commitments that are associated with the implementation of 

the new community employment program. 

 

As you know, it's basically . . . To a large extent, I believe, it's 

a summer employment program.  Not totally, but in order to 

meet the requirements of funding the creation of jobs under this 

program, there needs to be in this case an additional amount 

beyond the one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Within the Community Services department, 

what is the allocation above the one-twelfth to be used for 

there? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The allocation . . . Urban revenue 

sharing has to have a quarterly payment schedule, so there's 

$3.6 million.  Northern revenue sharing is the same; there has 

to be an additional $700,000.  Grants to libraries to 

accommodate the quarterly payment schedule needs an 

additional $600,000 in excess of the one-twelfth.  That's 

basically what the additional funding is for, mostly because of 

the quarterly payment arrangements under these programs that 

are there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The next one we see is the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  I think we might want to go through all of these 

in excess of the one-twelfth amount.   So if you want, rather 

than me having to stand and ask you on each one, if you want 

to just deal with each one of those ones over the one-twelfth, 

we would maybe save a 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

little bit of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me just first of all, if the 

member would look at the information which I sent over to 

him, he will find that the footnote says no funding is being 

provided for Crown Investments Corporation in this interim 

supply Bill.  So there's no additional funding that's being 

provided there. 

 

We've dealt with New Careers.  We've dealt with rural . . . no, 

we haven't dealt with Rural Development.  Let me just explain 

to the member opposite why there is in excess of the 

one-twelfth here.  It is there because there's money for lands 

branch because of the seasonal nature of the pasture operations. 

There has to be some money that is expended on a seasonal 

basis rather than on a 12-month basis.  And also the grants for 

Rural Development, there is a first quarterly payment of 

unconditional revenue-sharing grants which adds $1.9 million 

in excess of the one-twelfth. 

 

Social Services, once again there's an addition there: payments 

to New Careers Corporation for training and the employment 

of social assistance recipients as to fulfil the agreement that 25 

per cent of the total appropriation will be paid to New Careers 

Corporation by the end of June.  We're dealing now for an 

interim supply for the month of June, so that's required. 

 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation, there's $622,000 in excess of 

the one-twelfth payment to the Water Corporation for irrigation 

programs.  No money for outstanding commitments was 

provided in the April or May special warrants.  So where we 

didn't need to do anything by special warrants in April and 

May, we withheld it because we wanted to bring it to the 

legislature.  Because of that, we need an additional amount of 

money in the interim supply Bill to pay for that now. 

 

What else is there?  Education, same thing.  Education is 

funded on a . . . not month-by-month basis, and so there's an 

additional $79 million being provided to cover off the needs for 

basically, to a large extent, K to 12 school boards who will in 

total now be receiving six-twelfths of their total appropriation 

for the year.  That's half.  So there's an additional $79.882 

million; 72 million of which is for that purpose. 

 

There is some additional money for teachers' pensions and also 

some additional monies for Official Minority Language Office 

to make payments to the language institute which have to be 

paid by June 30.  Once again this I believe is under part of a 

federal-provincial agreement.  I don't think it costs us anything 

in the end.  It is refunded by the federal government, but we 

have to advance the money first and so we have to provide it. 

 

Energy and Mines, there is additional overexpenditures of 

$239,000 to provide an operating subsidy to the oil and gas 

revolving fund. 

 

In Health there is a whole wide range of things.  There is in 

excess of one-twelfth of $21 million to provide $12 million for 

provincial grant to the Saskatchewan medical care insurance; 

the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan 

to provide for a provincial grant there; grants in support of 

health services; grants to hospitals.  They're based on actual 

cash-flow requirements.  Grants for allowances for home care; 

grants for special care homes; and grants for special care 

facilities. 

 

Nothing unusual.  Simply that in some cases the money is 

advanced quicker than on a one-month by one-month basis. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In these Estimates is there any indication 

anywhere about the . . . with respect to the winding down of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, I understand you're planning on 

paying out that amount, the amount that the people have in 

their pension plan, paying it out entirely to them, I understand, 

sometime this summer.  Is there anything in there to allocate 

that amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  In the Department of Finance, 

if you look at the list there, there's nothing, no additional 

funding, it's straight one-twelfth of the Department of Finance. 

 

If it was necessary to spend some money on that in the month 

of June, it would have to be taken out of the one-twelfth 

appropriation.  There's no special money set aside. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there special money set aside in any of the 

departments then for unforeseen things?  You know, something 

of the nature perhaps where we're faced with huge fire-fighting 

costs in the North or something like that, a little unforeseen.  Is 

there anywhere in here that we deal with areas that may be of 

an unforeseen nature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  All of the interim supply 

requests are based on the budget presented on May 7.  The 

budget which clearly said: here is what is budgeted for each of 

the departments. 

 

And what we base interim supply on is that budget.  We cannot 

base it on unforeseen expenditures.  Especially if you're dealing 

with one month at a time, you shouldn't.  It's simply 

one-twelfth on the budget which was allocated to the 

departments and presented to this legislature and which 

members will be able to question at whatever length they like 

when the departments come forward to this committee. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is there any cost, identifiable cost, associated 

with respect to the Conference Board's reduction of the 

economic growth for Saskatchewan?  They announced that 

today.  Would there be any identifiable cost -- the interest cost, 

for example? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There would be no cost associated 

with the Conference Board.  This is simply an expenditure 

appropriation.  It's a request of this legislature to approve the 

expenditure of this amount of money during the month of June 

to meet the obligations which the government incurs because of 

the budget that is presented to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- If we see, though, a further erosion of the bond 

rating of Saskatchewan, would we not then also see an 

increased cost in interest cost?  And I'm saying that 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

maybe as a result of the Conference Board's lack of enthusiasm 

about the economy of Saskatchewan, perhaps there will be a 

cost associated if the bond rating services start lowering our 

credit rating. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Over the last 10 years our credit 

rating has been lowered quite significantly.  There is no 

downgrading of the province's credit rating.  Whether there will 

be or will not be, I cannot speculate.  If there was, and there 

was additional cost, you would not see that reflected here 

because that would be a statutory provision which would not 

have to come forward as an interim supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to say a 

few things.  I want to first of all begin by asking a couple of 

questions that I . . . in a general sense that I have a concern 

with.  And one of them is, as you've transferred the assets and 

liabilities from one Crown corporation to departments, was 

there any kind of a cost involved in relation to that? 

 

I want to point out a number of things that I'm aware of.  One 

of them is that capital projects like hospitals and health care 

facilities, level 4 care facilities, schools -- all of that was moved 

over as a part of changes that you've made.  I'm not sure 

whether there was additional costs in doing that. 

 

What I'd like to know . . . I know that this is interim supply, but 

we need to know and understand a little bit about what you did 

in relation to establishing not only your revenue and your 

expenditure but where this expenditure is going to really 

happen.  What I see in many places is -- and it's just an 

observation -- that I think you've over-inflated the expenditure 

to the extent that you deliberately allowed the $517 million to 

float in there.  And subsequently to that you're going to say, 

well nobody's going to notice the 517 million because I've 

increased the taxes, because nobody's going to talk about it, 

nobody's going to notice the increased expenditures that you've 

had or you've budgeted for.  And then turn around and say at 

the conclusion of the year, we had a real good year.  We came 

in at 150 million or $200 million of debt over and above our 

expenditures, or revenues and expenditures.  And that will say, 

oh well I did a real good job.  But you inflated the expenditures 

to the point where it was reflected in a negative. 

 

And I want to point out that we have some serious concerns 

about that.  We have serious concerns about it from the fact 

that it in fact is costing us more money because of our change 

in our rating.  I think that that's a part that we want to inquire 

about. 

 

One of the things that you, sir, said over and over again as a 

part of your campaign in the last election is, we'll never use 

warrants.  And lo and behold, you come right straight through 

and use them. 

 

Now in one case they're right, and in another case they're 

wrong.  When you do it, it's right, and when I do it, it's wrong.  

Just make that as an observation.  And I don't know, you can 

rationalize it in whatever way you want.  I will say to you that 

the rationalizations of those arguments are probably exactly the 

same ones as we 

used, only we never said we wouldn't do it.  And that's the 

difference, Mr. Chairman.  I think that that has to be pointed 

out. 

 

You indicated that there were third parties getting grants.  And 

I wonder if there would be an opportunity to find out a few of 

them and where they would be going and how much they 

would be in specific ways. 

 

The other thing that bothers us a whole lot is how you've 

shifted the debt and the liabilities to the place where you move 

it all in one year and then subsequent years you're going to say, 

well we made a whole lot of money in our Crown corporations.  

We made a whole lot of money in savings that we made 

because we were so frugal in what we did.  And that's a real 

concern to us. 

 

First, I'd like to ask a question about Agriculture and Food.  Is 

that exactly a twelfth of the amount of money that you've 

allocated there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes, it is exactly a 

twelfth of the money that's been appropriated for the 

Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

The member wondered about third-party grants; he'd like to 

have details on them.  The ministers and the departments, when 

they come forward, will be able to provide you those details for 

you, as any department will be able to do that. 

 

The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, the 

Provincial Auditor, and the Gass Commission, and others have 

made it very clear over time that the way the accounting was 

done there, on the basis of amortizing the expenditures, was 

inappropriate.  We agree that that was an inappropriate way to 

account for a debt which claimed to be an asset when it was not 

an asset. 

 

So now the expenditures will be expensed by each of the 

departments wherever that capital is being allocated -- whether 

it's Health capital or Education capital -- and will be spent, 

appropriated for, and spent in that year and accounted for in 

that year, rather the amortized route which was an 

inappropriate way to do it according to the Provincial Auditor 

and according to the Gass Commission. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's what concerns us, Mr. Chairman, that 

you're taking the debt and putting it all in one year, and then 

making it look like it's a way of saying that the deficit is higher 

when it was accounted for in a different fashion. 

 

And now what you're doing is you're just saying, well this is 

what is the debt to the Consolidated Fund.  And really it's a 

matter of a principle in bookkeeping, is what it is.  It's not an 

increase in debt, which you have said over and over again in 

this House, it's because we have such an increase in the debt; 

we didn't know that it was there. 

 

And if you'd have been looking at all of the aspects of the 

various material that the Department of Finance was issuing on 

other occasions, you'd find out that in fact it was all allocated.  

It was all designated.  And now you're saying, well we've got 

all this additional debt.  I'm not sure 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

that you don't understand it.  I'm not sure if somebody needs to 

explain it to you, or if you're just deliberately avoiding talking 

about it. 

 

How much of the debt did you put into the areas of . . . the 

government's total volume of debt did you move into the 

Consolidated Fund?  I'd like to have a list of all of those areas 

that you moved from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) or any of them.  I'd like to have a 

list of those places that you've moved that debt from one place 

to the other. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, I'm here as a 

Minister of Finance to talk about interim supply and not do the 

Estimates of Crown Investments Corporation or of any other 

department. 

 

But in order to be helpful, let me remind the member opposite 

that that information is available.  It has been publicly made 

public.  It has been tabled in this House, and if you check with 

the records, you will be able to get that information quite 

readily.  And all of the write-offs and how they were done has 

been provided to the legislature, and it's available.  If the 

member wants me to -- well I shouldn't have to dig it out for 

him -- but if he wants us to help him put it together . . . we 

don't have it here.  But when we get the Committee of Finance 

and the Department of Finance and the Crown Investment 

Corporation is considered, all of that will be readily available. 

 

There's nothing secret about it.  That's one of the reasons the 

new accounting processes have been put into place -- so that 

everything is out in the open, so that nothing is a surprise.  That 

does not change the debt.  The debt is still the debt. 

 

In all of the new accounting systems that have been put into 

place, all of the write-offs that have taken place, the amount of 

debt for the province of Saskatchewan hasn't changed.  It's still 

the same amount of debt.  It's just that it's more appropriately 

accounted for, as has been suggested by the auditor, as has 

been suggested by the Gass Commission, as has been 

suggested by the independent study of Ernst & Young.  It's the 

appropriate way to do it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, what I'd like to know 

then is . . . on your Property Management Corporation you got 

$951,000.  When is the twelfth of the allocation going to go 

from SPMC into the Consolidated Fund to register that change 

in its volume of dollars that it's moving around? 

 

You moved it in one lump sum.  Did you move it in one lump 

sum, or did you move it in one-twelfths? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't respond to 

that.  That was a question that I hope members opposite 

thought of asking when the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation was here during its Estimates.  That's 

why the Estimates for the various departments are brought 

forward to the legislature. 

 

If the members did not have an opportunity or did not 

think of asking that question, there is no problem.  Just provide 

the request to the minister in charge of the Property 

Management Corporation, and I'm sure that he'd be more than 

willing to provide that information for you.  And if I can be of 

assistance, I will do as well. 

 

But we're not considering here the Estimates of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporations at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to 

know whether this was one-twelfth of the debt that Sask 

Property Management Corporation had accrued through the 

years or whether this is new projects or whether this is buying a 

fleet of new cars.  What is it doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This is one-twelfth of the 

appropriation.  It is grant money for the central services.  Most 

of their other funding revenues will be received.  I believe they 

receive from the various departments to which they provide a 

service. 

 

The amount of money here is one-twelfth.  It's for central 

services and operations of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then where, to balance the books, do you 

move the debt that Sask Property Management Corporation 

had?  Where are you going to move that?  When you pass the 

budget?  Or are you going to do that prior to, or does this 

House not know . . . function in finding out the information 

about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the member wants to study all of 

the supplementary tables in the back of the budget book, all of 

that is identified.  We're not here to talk about the Estimates of 

the Department of Finance.  We're here to talk about the 

interim supply Bill.  But it's all there -- you can look it up, and 

it's been very open and fully accounted for. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Then I'll ask the question differently.  

Is there interest being paid, in lieu of the debt in Sask Property 

Management Corporation, coming out of this one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no there is not 

because that's statutory. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Then when does the interest payment 

accrue on the debt in Sask Property Management Corporation?  

Did it accrue on March 31, '92 or what was the date of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, none of that is in this 

Bill, so we're not discussing that here.  But the transfer of the 

debt from SPMC was transferred to the Consolidated Fund on 

March 31.  It is being paid . . . the interest is being paid as part 

of the total interest on the public debt.  It was always being 

paid as interest, but in this case is being paid as interest on the 

public debt. 

 

But this Bill does not deal with that.  So other than trying to be 

helpful there's not much more that I can tell the member 

opposite. 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there interest in this vote anywhere in these 

numbers here on the public debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No there isn't. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Where does that . . . is that just the fact that 

it's not payable in June or is it the fact that you're not allocating 

one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You will find when we do 

Committee of Finance in the Department of Finance that all of 

that is statutory.  It's all provided for in the Estimates for 

'92-93, which this Bill does not deal with and it does not have 

to be voted in the House because it is statutory. 

 

Anything that is statutory is required to be funded because of 

the statutes' requirements and therefore the government is 

already being accountable because it can only do what the 

statute requires.  That's how the interest on the public debt is 

looked after and therefore it does not become a part of the 

process of voting in the House. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, is there anything in relation to 

the capital projects in Education and Health that are additional?  

I believe that there were some Education that was additional 

amount of money, and I believe Health.  Was there any of that 

dealing with capital projects?  Or where is that money being 

spent on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, there is in grants for hospitals 

in this Appropriation Bill; part of the appropriation there is for 

capital.  There is capital based on actual cash flow 

requirements of $1.2 million which is in excess of the normal 

one-twelfth -- am I correct?  The same thing with special care 

facilities.  There is a capital base on actual cash-flow 

requirements of $200,000.  So that is in addition to the 

one-twelfth, the details of which the Department of Health will 

be able to provide you when they come before this legislature 

and this committee with their Estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I wonder if the minister would respond to my 

observations about warrants; why it was necessary for you to 

change your mind about the warrants in relation to the 

government, the needs for them and not a need for them.  I 

wonder if you'd elaborate on that point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the position of the 

government is that special warrants should only be used in 

certain circumstances which are required -- that's why the 

provision is there, when there are circumstances of emergent 

nature or unusual situations.  The government was faced this 

spring with unusual situation.  The unusual situation was that 

because we had to open the books, we had to find out what the 

finances of the province were.  We did not have the full 

information until the Gass Commission provided its report on 

about the 15th of February.  We were not able to start the full 

budget process until after that period of time. 
 

The member who's been in the treasury benches before will 

understand that the budget process takes six to seven months.  

We were faced with the situation where we had to put together 

the final decisions of the budget in the period of about three 

months, which made it necessary in order to be able to make 

some of those decisions with the 

kind of sensitivity that was necessary to make them . . . it was 

not possible to have the budget in place by the end of the fiscal 

year. 

 

That will never happen again unless there's some unexpected 

situation that's created.  Our commitment is to bring the budget 

on time.  I can tell the member from Morse, it will be brought 

on time.  Mark my words. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think the minister is absolutely right, 

Mr. Chairman.  There were special considerations, but they 

were mostly political in asking for those special warrants. 

 

The Gass Commission made certain recommendations as to 

changing accounting methods and taking write-downs.  And 

nowhere, especially in the case of some of those write-downs, 

was it absolutely necessary to take them in the '91-92 year, 

except for political reasons. 

 

Some of the capital projects that the member from Morse has 

referred to in asking the minister if there is consideration in this 

special warrant for interest costs accruing to those capital 

projects, had already been amortized for a period of four to five 

years.  Some of those projects -- special care homes, hospitals, 

educational facilities -- had already been on the books for some 

period of time with allocations of whether they were over a 

20-year, 25-year, 30-year period of time, that those projects 

were going to be amortized. 

 

There was no reason other than politics, I suggest to you, Mr. 

Chairman, to take all of that in one lump sum.  The very fact 

that there were letters on record with Cameco Corporation 

saying, because of no permanent impairment, that it was 

absolutely fundamental, if you were going to the new style of 

accounting, to do them all in that one particular year, except for 

the politics of the Minister of Finance and no other reason.  He 

could have done one or two of those in '92-93.  He could have 

done maybe a couple more in '93-94.  He could have done a 

couple more in '94-95 -- you know, over a period of time. 

 

But the minister had a set of numbers that he chose to inflict 

upon the people of Saskatchewan in preparation for his budget.  

And the easiest way that the minister could inflict that pain on 

the people of Saskatchewan and try and get away with it was to 

make some political decisions, and I say totally political, in 

running all of those debt numbers into one fiscal year and 

driving up the total debt of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the minister knows full well that those choices were open 

to him, that he didn't have to take all of the capital projects -- 

because a number of them had been on the books for a number 

of years -- in their transfer back into line departments. 

 

The member from Morse is absolutely right.  Those numbers 

were accounted for.  They simply weren't accounted for using 

accrual accounting as the Gass Commission talks about. 

 

The minister just delights in mixing and matching his numbers 

all the time.  And it'll be very interesting as time  



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

goes on and whether the minister actually adopts that 

accounting process.  Because as others around Canada have 

pointed out, to go to a full accrual system in a short period of 

time will be very, very difficult for any government to achieve.  

The changes to the systems that would be necessary to achieve 

that would mean a fundamental restructuring of government. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, that somewhere, 

particularly in the items that you have identified that are more 

than one-twelfth, where there are capital projects which you 

have moved from Property Management Corporation back into 

departments, where there are interest costs accruing because of 

those capital projects being moved, some of which, as I said, 

had been on the books for three, four, and five years and had 

already been partially amortized over that period of time, some 

of the monies, Mr. Minister, I say didn't need . . . some of those 

costs didn't need to accrue at the time that you chose to take 

them.  Would you comment on that, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I can comment on that, Mr. 

Chairman, that what has happened now is that the expenditures 

on capital projects will be expensed now as they occur.  

Therefore there will be no interest charges that will be involved 

in that process.  That's why we have changed it as the 

Provincial Auditor clearly has recommended that they be 

expensed as they occur. 

 

The accrual accounting has got nothing to do with the interim 

supply Bill.  All the interim supply Bill does, which we are 

considering here today, is the provision of the amounts of 

monies that the various departments of government need to pay 

their expenses for the month of June.  One-twelfth provision of 

the total budget request which is presented to this House, 

except in cases where there are exceptional circumstances, all 

of which I have outlined for the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But you see, Mr. Minister, the problem that 

we have with these numbers -- take an example, land bank, 

which before had to have an interest figure shown for it.  You 

have now shifted all of that debt in one fell swoop.  A program 

that had been around since the mid-70s, a program brought in 

by a former New Democratic Party government, incurred 

hundreds of millions of dollar in costs.  You've written all that 

debt off.  It doesn't show anywhere here.  There had to be some 

costs accruing with that particular write-down.  Those costs 

must be somewhere within the one-twelfth or the two-twelfths 

or the three-twelfths that the minister is asking for, and yet he 

denies that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, there 

is no provision in this interim supply for interest on the public 

debt.  Interest on the public debt is non-statutory.  We will 

consider them separately when the Department of Finance 

comes forward for the Committee of Finance.  We're not doing 

that here today, therefore no provisions are being requested of 

the legislature to provide that kind of money, because it's not 

necessary at this time because it is statutory. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister says that 

his mixing and matching of numbers and accounting methods 

have no place in this debate in this Assembly.  So the minister 

can come forward with an interim supply Bill which is very 

narrow and says that everything else is in a separate vote.  And 

he has done that, Mr. Chairman, very artfully, I might say to 

the minister. 

 

For he has been able to use one set of accounting numbers as 

his excuse with his budget.  He continues to say that those 

numbers can't be dealt with because he's changed the 

accounting methods of the province of Saskatchewan.  He says 

that we have more than one-twelfth in a number of areas here, 

and yet that there can't possibly be any debt, any interest costs 

attached to things like capital projects in the Department of 

Health, in the Department of Education, when we know full 

well that there is the ongoing costs of various capital projects in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And he says because he's 

changed the accounting methods, there aren't. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, that cost did simply not disappear into 

thin air.  At some place in this province there'll be a special 

care home, there'll be a hospital, there'll be a nursing home, 

there's something, where those costs have swung over from the 

Property Management Corporation to the line department and 

that somewhere the minister must be accounting for those 

costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I will repeat again, 

and all I can ask is for the member to accept my word.  In this 

Bill, none of those requirements are being provided.  So 

therefore there is no need to address that because we're not 

considering that, and that information I do not have available. 

 

We will be able to address that when we do the Department of 

Finance in Committee of Finance in this legislature whenever 

that Committee of Finance is called during this session.  This 

session will continue until we have a budget, until this 

legislature has voted on the budget, after this legislature has 

considered each of the departments including the department's 

finance Estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I know your deputy minister 

and he probably has this sheet in his head that he knows 

exactly what we're talking about and he can provide it to you.  

He could provide it probably verbatim.  And I know him well 

enough to understand that.  And I know him well enough to 

know that he knows. 

 

I just want to ask another question about . . . land bank is one 

of them.  Last year that Department of Finance initiated and it 

said there's $180 million worth of debt or $184 million, 

whatever it was, and there was $11 million run on my budget in 

the Department of Agriculture.  I know it was there.  I just 

wanted to know what you did to change it all around.  This is 

the first time we have had a chance and an opportunity to 

discuss it with you.  And subsequent to this, you have had two 

warrants issued for appropriation of funds in relation to this 

and nowhere do we find out what is going on. 

 

I'm going to ask you another one.  What about Beef 

Stabilization Board?  Did you write off that amount of 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

money?  First of all, tell me what the debt is, and then tell me 

how much you wrote off of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, the member wants 

specifics because we're not here with the specifics of the 

Department of Agriculture.  I cannot give you the specifics.  I 

do not intend to give you the specifics because I do not have 

the capacity or the Department of Agriculture staff who are 

able to provide that information.  When the Department of 

Agriculture comes, you will be able to get that information in 

detail. But directly to your question, because the Department of 

Finance will have something to do with that, you ask, is there 

some write-off on beef stabilization?  As far as I know there 

has been no write-off on beef stabilization. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I took a serious look at 

the details in your book here, the one you read from on the 

night of the budget address, and I didn't see any beef 

stabilization debt in it.  In fact if I hadn't read through it the 

third time, I wouldn't have even found the land bank debt.  

Now I'd like to know where it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As far as I know, and my officials 

tell me, there is nothing in this interim supply Bill provided for 

the purposes of which you speak.  We simply are providing for 

the Department of Agriculture one-twelfth of their required or 

appropriate amount of money as presented in the budget. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, and then let me attack it in a little 

different way.  Under administrative services in agriculture, do 

you take one-twelfth of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- One-twelfth of the total department 

expenditures. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, now let's go to livestock and personal 

services and expenses under that subvote and you've got 

one-twelfth of that.  Right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, and you'll have to ask the 

Department of Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture to 

give you the answers on that provision when the Department of 

Agriculture appears before this committee as a Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right.  Now when you get to the land bank 

land, it went from the Department of Agriculture to the 

Department of Finance, I assume.  The debt went from 

Agriculture to Finance.  Am I assuming that accurately? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When the decision was made to do 

away with the Heritage Fund because it no longer was fulfilling 

any purpose, any liabilities or any debt in the Heritage Fund 

was transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  Therefore the 

interest on any debt that may be incurred during that process, 

which was being incurred in a different way before, we will be 

provided under non-statutory or statutory provisions. 

 

So you will have to ask that question when the Department of 

Finance is here as a Committee of Finance, because in this Bill 

no provisions are made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're just deferring 

the decision and the decision to choose when to have the 

question answered; that's all you're doing. 

 

Your department is here.  Your department officials of Finance 

are here.  I don't know why you can't answer the question.  You 

just don't want to.  Now say that that's the reason why you're 

hedging on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm here prepared to 

deal with an interim supply Bill.  The interim supply Bill 

provides one-twelfth funding, by and large, to various 

departments.  And we're not here in this supply Bill . . . this 

supply Bill does not provide an opportunity to provide the 

detailed subvotes of any particular department. 

 

I'm not here responding for the Estimates of the Department of 

Finance.  I'm only here to deal with the interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well then let's make some more assumptions.  

Let's say in the month of June we go through this same process 

again and we haven't had the Department of Finance here to 

check on that.  And then in the month of July we go through 

the same process again and we haven't had the Department of 

Finance here to do that. 

 

What we need to have is some answers from the Department of 

Finance who are sitting all the way around you.  And we need 

to have some answers for those kinds of questions dealing with 

how you dealt with the debt and how you moved it from the 

Heritage Fund to the Consolidated Fund, and how you move it 

back and forth from SPMC or Sask Water Corporation or 

Souris Basin Development Authority or any of them.  We need 

to know that.  And we want to know what the dollar values of 

those items are. 

 

Because when I go through your book on borrowing debt and 

guaranteed debt, I don't find some of them there.  And that's 

why we need to know.  We want to know where you did this, 

when you did it.  And if you did it before March 31, '92, you'll 

come back here and say, well we don't have to talk about that 

because it isn't the year under review.  And so you can hedge 

yourself all the way around that. 

 

We want to know, as a part of this committee -- and I believe 

we have a responsibility to know -- when you did it, how you 

did it, where you did it, and what you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill that we are 

discussing does not deal with those questions.  I can assure the 

member that we will be prepared, I will be prepared to provide 

all of those answers when the Committee of Finance considers 

the Department of Finance.  I won't be able to deal with them 

all because some of them will be involved with the Crown 

Investments Corporation, and the minister in charge of Crown 

Investments Corporation will be able to provide all those 

answers. 

 

But when we are prepared to deal with the Committee of 

Finance on all of those questions, I can tell the member without 

any hesitation at all, he will be able to get all the 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

answers. 

 

Interim supply Bill does not provide any of those things.  And 

right now in this committee, we're considering the interim 

supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we need to go 

around this once more.  I know that your department is here; 

they understand what I'm talking about.  I think it's your 

unwillingness to participate in the discussion about what we're 

doing here under these kinds of circumstances. 

 

You voted in cabinet to have warrants given for money 

expended in April.  You did it in May, and now we're doing it 

for June.  This is the first time we have had any opportunity to 

realize and have the public of Saskatchewan realize what 

you've done with all of the different kinds of fundings.  And I 

want to know how you move those around.  I think it's 

necessary for us to find out. 

 

I want to know, for example, like I said before, where is this 

land bank land?  Where is the debt for the land bank land?  

You talk about the rural services was providing some of the 

funding for financing that debt initially; I think it was $6 

million.  And now it's gone from Agriculture and Food.  It 

doesn't even have a space there, as far as I know.  Where there 

was one before of $11 million, it doesn't even have a space 

there in '91 Estimates. 

 

And that, Mr. Chairman, I think is showing us that you need to 

identify where those concerns of ours are not being realized.  

We have identified a whole host of those.  SPMC, Sask Water 

Corporation, Souris Basin, the land bank, the Beef Stabilization 

Board -- all of those were debts by the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Can you tell me which each of those items 

were identified in which?  Was it the Heritage Fund?  Was it in 

the Consolidated Fund?  Or are we still paying interest to some 

New York bank for the land bank land that we bought in 1971 

to 1982? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course we were before the 

changes were made; we are after the changes are made.  If you 

borrow money -- the member will know -- you have to pay the 

interest on the money.  The money for the land bank is part of 

the Consolidated Fund debt.  But that doesn't change anything.  

The total debt doesn't change.  The interest you have to pay 

because the money was borrowed for that purpose, that doesn't 

change at all.  But since the Heritage Fund no longer exists, 

any debt that was in the Heritage Fund is now part of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

But we're not here considering the Estimates of the Department 

of Finance, and therefore I do not have that information for 

you.  I will have . . . and it's useful for the member to raise all 

these questions because we'll be better prepared when the 

Committee of Finance considers the Department of Finance's 

Estimates.  And that information will be provided. 

 

We're here under the rules that require us to discuss the interim 

supply Bill and I'm prepared to answer the questions on the 

interim supply Bill. 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to ask the 

question again about the beef stabilization fund that had a 

liability.  And I want to ask the minister if he would give his 

undertaking that there are none of those costs for the board or 

for the role of the board in the administration costs from the 

part of Agriculture, whether they're in there or whether they're 

not in there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They're for administrative expenses 

of various functions of the department, various boards.  For the 

one-twelfth required, there will likely be provisions made in 

the one-twelfth that's provided in the interim supply Bill that's 

before the House today.  If there's an administration cost on 

any program in the Department of Agriculture, obviously 

one-twelfth of that cost will have to be paid in the month of 

June.  That's why that request is made here as part of the 

interim supply. 

 

But interim supply does not break down each of the various 

expenses that the Department of Agriculture will be making.  

That's something that you will have to ask the Department of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture when they're here, 

because it is they who will expend the money and it is that 

department that has to be accountable for the money. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Where are the interest costs being borne for 

the Beef Stabilization Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not aware of any interest costs 

involved there, and I'm not saying that there might not be.  I'm 

not aware and neither are my officials aware of it.  When we 

get to the Committee of Finance on the Department of Finance 

and the Department of Agriculture, that information will all be 

available.  But because we're considering interim supply, I'm 

not aware of any such costs. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

we've been sitting here for some two hours, trying to divulge 

some information from the minister regarding the expenditures 

that the department and certainly the government is asking of 

this Assembly at this time. 

 

I've been listening with some interest to the debate that has 

been before the House, and certainly, as my colleagues have 

indicated, we have seen a government today that is coming and 

asking for interim supply when indeed we were informed prior 

to the election last fall that interim supply or indeed special 

warrants were a thing of the past.  And that once elected, the 

New Democratic Party, if elected government, would then 

bring forward the budget in proper time so that the House could 

indeed address the budget, address all the Estimates, and have a 

budget not only brought forward in time but put forward to the 

public that would allow for proper expenditures of funds. 

 

And I would also indicate that yes, I'm not necessarily an 

accountant or have a real sound idea of accounting principles.  

Having been on the government side of the House for one term, 

and having followed with interest some of the debate and 

certainly listening to members 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

from the department -- certainly your Associate Minister of 

Finance as well -- it's intriguing to try and follow the 

expenditures in government where funds are taken from, where 

revenues are collected, how revenues are spent, and where 

they're put. 

 

Certainly I think many people across this province today are 

wondering what has happened to the government that they 

elected back in October.  First of all, we had a government that 

was telling people prior to the election that they would be able 

to live within a budget of $4.5 billion; that the government of 

the day through mismanagement of finances had wasted a lot 

of money, and that this government, if elected, would do away 

with all the waste and mismanagement. 

 

They would bring into place simple accounting practices that 

would be able to show the people of Saskatchewan exactly 

where their money is being spent.  And indeed by eliminating 

the waste and mismanagement, by eliminating the wasteful 

spending, by eliminating the process that the government of the 

day formerly indicates was there, they would be able to live 

within -- well within -- the means of a $4.5 billion budget. 

 

However, Mr. Chairman, what we see today is, not only was a 

budget presented in this House somewhat later than we had 

indicated it would be, somewhat later than what most people 

had expected it to be presented, but we also see that the budget 

presented to this House has expenditures of well over the $5 

billion mark. 

 

The minister indicated that he had difficulty bringing forward 

his budget on time because of . . . It was due to unforeseen 

circumstances that were confronting the government of the day 

when they were elected, when they became government, when 

they had access to the books that indeed the circumstances 

were, as they would indicate, worse than they had been led to 

believe. 

 

And I would suggest that yes, these circumstances were 

unforeseen because I believe -- I'm taking the minister's word 

for it and I'm taking the opposition's word for it -- that they 

really were sincere in the fact that they felt there was so much 

extra money floating around out there. When indeed in fact the 

former government and the former government of the day had 

indicated for the last number of years that we had been in some 

very difficult economic times and that the expenditures and the 

cut-backs and the reins . . . the government of the day was 

trying to pull the reins in but the opposition would not believe 

that that process had to take place. 

 

And so of course, Mr. Speaker, when indeed the government 

was elected in October of 1991, all of a sudden they were 

brought into reality.  The reality hit home that indeed the 

expenditures . . . the books were open, as Mr. Gass had 

indicated, and that there wasn't this big tree of money sitting 

out there that they could just go to, so that they could pull a 

dollar here and they could pull a dollar from there and could 

meet the demands of the public, whether it's in regards to 

health, whether it's in regards to education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate the fact that yes, that's the reason 

the minister is standing in this House today with an 

interim supply Bill, because he must have found it very 

difficult.  I'm sure his colleagues, his cabinet colleagues, and no 

doubt probably all of his members, found it very difficult to all 

of a sudden have to re-gear their thinking and their ideology.  

Instead of spending and instead of throwing out funds that they 

said were there, all of a sudden, oh boy, we've got to pull the 

reins in here. 

 

And then next thing we know, the budget deficit all of a sudden 

starts to balloon from $400 million deficit to a $500 million 

deficit and it seemed that even the Premier and the Finance 

minister couldn't agree.  One would be in Saskatoon throwing 

out one figure and another would be, say, in Regina throwing 

out the other figure. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what I can see confronting us today, I can see 

the difficulty the minister is having in trying to answer the 

questions -- the fact that the minister would say, well he's just 

asking for one-twelfth of the allocation for this fiscal year so 

that the government can operate and provide the funds to meet 

the needs of third parties across this province, to meet the 

needs of seniors across this province, to meet the needs of the 

government payroll. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we're . . . or Mr. Chairman, or Deputy 

Chairman, our responsibility is to try and find out where all 

these funds are being spent, what the government is calling for 

at this time, why they would be . . . with regards to the dollars 

and the interim supply Bill they have for us, where it is going 

to be spent, where the expenditures are going.  Are they going 

to the proper departments? 

 

Are the expenditures in the Department of Agriculture and 

Food, the one-twelfth that's been appropriated for or the request 

that has been made, is that going to be sufficient to cover the 

needs of the Department of Agriculture and Food for the next 

month, or we are going to be indeed facing an additional 

request for funds before we even get through the month? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, like as I indicated, there are many people 

who today are really wondering what has hit them regarding 

the budget that was brought out.  I would ask the minister, even 

in his request for funds through the Appropriation Bill we have 

here today . . . or the interim supply Bill, what consultation 

process did the minister take or go through in developing their 

budget and in talking to the many people that have been 

affected, especially in the area of health?  What consultation 

process was taken regarding people with specific problems 

such as diabetics and their insulin problems, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, for the purposes of 

an interim supply Bill, the consultations that take place is that 

the Department of Finance requests of each of the line 

departments what their requirements are for that one month.  

The departments have provided to the Department of Finance 

their requirements for the month of June.  Usually it is 

one-twelfth.  In some cases it's in excess of one-twelfth.  That's 

been explained during this debate that we have had here this 

afternoon. 

 

I appreciate the comments about the member's responsibility to 

ask the questions and to get the answers. 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

And that's why we do have Committee of Finance so that all of 

the departments who expend the money and have to be 

accountable for the expenditure of that money can come before 

the Committee of Finance.  And members on government side 

and the opposition side can ask the questions that the member 

opposite said are important to be asked.  I appreciate that, and I 

respect it.  And as the House knows, that opportunity will be 

provided for that to happen. 

 

I want to answer the question: is this sufficient?  Is the 

one-twelfth sufficient for all of the expenditures for all of the 

departments for the month of June?  The answer to that 

question is yes, it is sufficient.  Will there need to be possibly 

an additional request for the month of June?  The answer is no, 

there should not be an additional request for the month of June.  

This interim supply Bill should satisfy the requirements for the 

month of June. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, regarding the . . . in the 

expenditures in the Department of Justice, how much of the 

funds that you are requesting through this interim supply Bill 

will be going to cover the cost of any expenditures that could 

arise from the court case regarding the GRIP? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That same question was asked by 

the member's colleague a little while ago.  I cannot tell you 

because I can't provide the breakdown of each subvote 

expenditure in the Department of Justice.  But I can assure the 

member that the amount being provided is exactly one-twelfth 

of the appropriation that is being provided for the Department 

of Justice to run the Department of Justice and pay the bills of 

operating the Department of Justice during the month of June. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister whether 

or not the funding requested through this interim supply Bill 

takes into account the extra costs regarding legislation and the 

costs of the extra legislative committees that have been 

introduced and brought forward in this House.  And if so, how 

much? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The interim supply Bill provides 

for one-twelfth of the normal operating of the House, but there 

is an additional amount provided here in excess of the 

one-twelfth of $44,000, which is for the purposes of covering 

the extra cost associated with the House being in session.  Am I 

correct there?  Yes, $44,000. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, does that also address the added 

costs that probably occur through the additional committees 

that have been introduced, and I believe today there was an 

additional request for a committee on the environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Any of the costs of committee work 

will be funded out of the normal one-twelfth that has been 

provided here.  There is no exceptional amount of money being 

put into place. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a new 

member, this is my first time I've had a chance to stand up and 

speak on interim supply on a budget.  And 

I'm sure my constituents will be interested in some of the 

answers that hopefully the minister will give us. 

 

As a new member, Mr. Minister, I'm having a bit of a trouble 

understanding the whole process here.  We're dealing with the 

budget, and we're dealing with one-twelfth of the budget.  And 

you're also talking about statutory funds debt.  Now your 

budget this year comes down at $5 billion-plus.  If you take 

one-twelfth of that, Mr. Minister, you get somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 417 million.  You're asking for, in this Bill, 

469 million, $470 million, and that would work out to over 

$5.6 billion for the year if your supply Bill, your interim supply 

was actually was one-twelfth.  But you say you're not including 

in that interim supply Bill anything from the public debt as I 

understand it because it's statutory. 

 

One-twelfth of the public debt that you have outlined in the 

budget is $63 million.  I'm just wondering where does this $63 

million for the month, any one month of the year, fit into your 

interim supply Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure that I've got all the 

question there.  If the member . . . if I don't answer fully, I'm 

sure the member will ask again.  I've been a member of this 

House for 17 years, if I could be of help in explaining the 

process which I must be the first to admit is not always simple. 

 

But there are rules, and there are traditions, and there are 

processes that have been established in the legislatures of this 

country which actually make our system very accountable.  

And that's one of the strengths of the British parliamentary 

system.  There are checks and balances.  There is executive 

accountability, and that's why the member from 

Souris-Cannington is able to get up in the House and ask the 

questions. 

 

Some of the answers individual ministers may not have in hand 

because sometimes you have to ask those questions in a 

particular committee.  So if you want to know the details of 

Department of Agriculture, you will do what members have 

done with the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation in the last week getting the answers to the 

questions.  And I was not here, but I understand that the 

minister was prepared to pass over all kinds of information 

which he had prepared ahead of time so that members in the 

opposition could have access to the information.  That's going 

to happen in all of the departments. 

 

What is happening here is simply a consideration of interim 

supply, providing one-twelfth of the appropriation of the 

expenditures that have to be voted on for the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the various departments.  There are other 

things there that are statutory which don't have to be voted on 

such as interest on the public debt, things like pensions, for 

example, which we do not consider under interim supply but 

which will be considered when we do the Estimates for the 

Department of Finance sometime during the period of this 

session. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, when we're considering 

interim supply and the monies that you are asking us to 

allocate, do you include the pension 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1992 

portions, the public debt into that number, that 469 million, or 

is that outside of it some place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- For interim supply, no.  They're not 

included for an interim supply.  They're part of statutory 

provisions which are voted on when we consider the Estimates 

for the Department of Finance in Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, so when we are asking about 

interim supply, when we're looking at the budget, we have to 

pull out all those numbers that would be classified as statutory 

such as pensions, such as the public debt.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, how can you come in here 

then and ask for interim supply of $469 million and call it 

one-twelfth of the budget when it's not anywheres near close to 

one-twelfth of the budget because you have pulled out very 

large sums of money and say, we don't consider that.  That is 

not part of interim supply; that's statutory.  Yet you're coming 

in and saying, we want one-twelfth of the budget and it's not 

anywheres near one-twelfth of the budget.  How do you explain 

that?  How do you justify that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer's very simple.  I'm not 

asking for one-twelfth of the whole budget; we're asking here 

for one-twelfth of the amount that needs to be voted.  That's 

what we're doing here.  There's a certain amount that has to be 

voted and we're asking for one-twelfth of that because the 

legislature has to vote on it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, would you tell us out of 

your budget then what portion is the supply that has to be voted 

on?  Take out the statutory amount; how much money is left 

that we get to vote on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- My staff has I think told me 

something about the questions which may help me provide you 

the answer. 

 

I'm sorry, but other members asked the question about this and 

there was questions about, why is there some provision here 

beyond the one-twelfth?  Okay.  The reason -- and one of your 

members has got a copy of this; I sent it over  

_- the reason for that is -- the member from Kindersley -- is 

because there are some expenditures that we vote on which we 

have to make which are not based on a one-twelfth basis for the 

whole period of the year. 

 

Revenue sharing, for example, is paid out on a quarterly basis, 

so we have to provide enough money in the interim supply Bill 

to fully pay for the quarter amount, quarterly expenditures that 

have to be made. 

 

Same thing with education.  By the end of June the amount 

paid for school divisions, the school divisions will be 

six-twelfths of the total appropriation. 

 

Because of that, there are in some departments some 

exceptions beyond the one-twelfth to make sure that this 

legislature votes the required money to be able to make 

those payments. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, if that is the process that you 

say is quite normal, why wouldn't you identify that then in your 

budget document and say that X millions of dollars are going to 

have to be expended on a quarterly basis no matter what the 

legislative timetable is. 

 

Be up front about it.  Put an addendum on here that says that 

these are expenditures that we have no control over because 

they're attached to third parties or something like that, and that 

the one-twelfth or one-quarter or one-third or however you're 

divvying that particular process up because of 

federal-provincial agreements would then be outlined at the 

very beginning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, it is outlined.  All of 

that is in legislation which this legislature has passed.  And all 

we're doing by the interim supply Bill is abiding within the 

terms of the legislation for revenue sharing, for school grants 

which designates the period of the school year, and we're 

meeting the requirements of the legislation.  Nothing more and 

nothing less. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Chairman, as I understand, what we are doing here today, 

you're here asking for one-twelfth supply, we're here to ask you 

questions about it, and you're here to justify why you should 

have one-twelfth supply.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, we're here to request the 

House for a vote on one-twelfth appropriation of the total 

budget, except in circumstances which we have made clear, 

where we have to have more than one-twelfth. 

 

Because in our opinion -- not only in our opinion; it's the 

opinion of all legislators -- that when the House is in session 

and there is yet not the full budget has been considered by the 

legislature because all of the Estimates have not been brought 

forward to committee, that each month . . . And in some cases 

legislatures over the years -- 1987-88, '89-90, '90-91, and even 

under the previous government -- sometimes the vote was for 

two-twelfths so that the legislature wouldn't have to deal every 

month with this while the full budget was being considered. 

 

So we're here to provide . . . to ask the legislature to provide for 

one-twelfth of the expenditure of the total budget so that the 

government's payments to third parties, payments of employees 

in the government, payments of grants to non-government 

organizations can be accommodated for the month of June. 

 

We could have come for two-twelfths.  But in my judgement it 

was important to come for one-twelfth, and if the House is still 

sitting at the end of June and maybe sitting into July, we'll 

come back again at the end of June to ask for another twelfth. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, because you say you have 

to come into the House to ask for this supply, does it not also 

stand to reason then that you have to justify to the House why 

you need the one-twelfth supply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, and to the extent that we can, 

that's what we're doing.  As to where the specific 



May 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

amounts are going to be expended, in the detail, you'll have to 

ask each of the departments because they're the ones who will 

be spending it and they're the ones who have to account for it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if we can't ask you 

some detailed questions on that portion of the one-twelfth that 

you are attempting to receive here today, how can you justify 

that you really need it? 

 

I have a question on one department that I would like to ask 

you, to justify whether or not you need this money.  On the 

Water Appeal Board, are you taking, are you asking for 

one-twelfth of the budget for the Water Appeal Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the case of the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation, the request here is for one-twelfth except -- 

and I will find it in a moment -- except for an additional 

$622,000 beyond the one-twelfth, which you will see on the 

flow chart which we provided, that is being requested for the 

following purposes:  $200,000 payment to the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation for irrigation programs. 

 

No money for outstanding commitments was provided in April 

or May.  So we need the additional money because we didn't 

include that in the special warrant in April and May.  We're 

allowing for it in the appropriation, in this interim supply Bill, 

so that the legislature can vote on it.  It was necessary to put it 

in the special warrant now.  We thought it important to bring it 

here instead. 

 

The other additional amount of $400,000 as payment for the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation for irrigation development 

capital, once again, because no money was provided in a 

special warrant in April and May, we are requesting that it be 

provided here now to cover for April, May, and June, and that's 

why there is $622,000 above and beyond the one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  But the 

question I asked you was the Water Appeal Board, and the 

Water Appeal Board is under the Department of the 

Environment.  So I'm asking you, are you asking for 

one-twelfth of the budget for the Water Appeal Board which is 

under the Department of the Environment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Department of Environment is 

being allocated precisely one-twelfth of their fiscal year's 

appropriation.  There are no special provisions of any 

additional money -- straight one-twelfth.  How much of that 

goes to the Water Appeal Board, we do not have that 

knowledge.  You will have to ask the Department of 

Environment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, how can you justify 

coming in here and asking for one-twelfth supply for the 

Department of the Environment, when we can't ask you 

whether the particular programs within that department are 

actually in place and if they are actually working? 

 

I've had phone calls about the Water Appeal Board that they're 

not doing anything, that nobody can get any work done there 

because they're not working.  And yet you're 

saying that you're asking for a one-twelfth supply for that 

department, for that program.  Is that program working?  Are 

you asking for a one-twelfth supply for the Water Appeal 

Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I believe that is the case.  We're 

asking for one-twelfth for the Department of Environment.  I 

can only assume from that that it'd be one-twelfth of the norm 

because the normal operation of the Saskatchewan Water 

Appeal Board. 

 

But as for the specifics, you're going to have to wait for the 

Department of Environment when it comes to Committee of 

Finance.  We don't have that information.  The Department of 

Environment does. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, how can you come 

and ask for one-twelfth, when you can't answer whether these 

programs are in place or whether these departments are actually 

doing any work.  If you're going to ask for money and to say 

that it's justified to receive that money, don't you have to have 

something concrete to bring forward to say that they are 

actually doing something and they actually need the money? 

 

What are the other programs in the Department of the 

Environment?  Are they doing anything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- When the Department of 

Environment asks for one-twelfth appropriation for interim 

supply, they surely are asking for it because they are operating 

all of their programs for the purposes of what the money for the 

fiscal year has been appropriated.  So therefore one-twelfth is 

being provided so that they can fulfil all of their roles and 

functions during that one-month period of time which is the 

month of June. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've come in . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


