




















































Hansard: August 19, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2729 

 August 19, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, I'd like to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce Sharon 

Armstrong, a long-time friend of mine, a teacher, and the 

mayor of Wynyard.  Welcome to the Assembly.  I ask other 

members to join in welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I have with me 

today Bill Reader, who's the deputy minister; Ernie Anderson, 

the executive director of transportation; Walter Antonio, 

director of transportation and planning; Bob MacDonald, who's 

manager of the operations of Crown lands; and Larry 

Chaykowski, director of administration. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

when last we tackled the Department of Rural Development we 

had gone into requesting some information from you.  I 

wonder, if you have that information, if you could table it so 

that we could have it for our perusal tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials inform 

me that we have sent everything that we were asked for.  If 

there's something that's missing that we didn't send, if we could 

have a list of it we would do it.  My understanding was that we 

had sent all the information that you'd asked for. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- This might be a dumb question, but where did 

you send it?  I haven't seen it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Some of it came the night that you 

asked it, through here.  You got that.  And if there's some that 

you didn't get, if you would give me a list of the questions, we 

can have it for you in a few minutes if it got mislaid 

somewhere. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will, in the course 

of the questions over the next few minutes, try to get one of my 

colleagues to assist me to deliver that to you. 

 

We did have this complete list that you passed over of all of the 

grants that were paid out to rural municipalities from your 

department, and we had discussed in some length, the last time, 

the figures that it indicates and the fact that we had certain 

monies that were reduced to most municipalities and the 

average number of percentage points of the reductions. 

 

My first question here, sir, would be: could you provide us with 

the detailed formula on how these grants are calculated and 

how those monies are . . . figures are arrived at for each 

municipality in the province of Saskatchewan?  We would like 

to have the formula that is used. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I have the formula here.  Get a 

page to table these for us. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now just to clarify 

this formula that you've handed us, is this the formula that is 

used to figure out all of the grant structures for all 

municipalities, irregardless of what they concern, for the whole 

year, every year, for rural municipalities, or are there some 

others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have everything in there except 

possibly the re-gravel grants which we can get you here too, as 

well. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We would 

appreciate it if you would table those as well.  Would you for 

the . . . Do you want a minute to look for that or shall I 

continue?  Carry on?  Okay. 

 

I think for the purpose of understanding, could you explain to 

the general public how this formula works and what's entailed 

in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, to explain the 

grant, these grants were . . . the equalization grant was . . . it 

started in 1966.  It's a grant that is intended to help the poorer 

municipalities, put them on a more equal footing with some of 

the wealthier ones.  Rural municipalities with lower tax base 

and high expenditures would receive higher grants that 

municipalities considered to be wealthy.  The base calculation 

assumes that all municipalities are providing the same level of 

service although this may not actually be the case. 

 

The reasonable expenditures for a municipality to incur, which 

are considered in a formula, include the following 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

. . . So in other words they're looking at what normally 

municipalities would . . . what services they would provide.  It's 

administration, road construction, road maintenance, bridge 

construction and maintenance.  The costs are the municipalities' 

share of the costs and do not include government grants. 

 

Revenues which are included include the use of methods 

available for the municipality to directly raise funds, such as 

taxable assessment, grants in lieu of taxes, etc.  So what they 

do is take what would be normal expenses for a municipality 

and what revenues that municipality would normally be able to 

raise.  Using those, they calculate what's called a theoretical 

mill rate, which is what the RM (rural municipality) would 

have to use as a mill rate to raise the amount of money to do a 

sort of standard set of services that are mentioned above. 

 

And the theoretical base mill rate, which any municipality has 

achieved before being eligible for an equalization grant, was 

set at 50 mills.  So in other words, any RM that could raise 

enough taxes to provide a standard of services with a 50 mill 

tax rate would not get an equalization grant.  And those that 

required more than 50 mills would then receive an equalization 

grant.  And those grants are calculated on a yearly basis and 

change considerably from year to year, depending on the 

assessment of the RMs and so on. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that a 

municipality then would be better off to set their mill rates 

higher in order to achieve a bigger grant from the government? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not the case.  It would be 

. . .  the mill rate that I spoke of is a theoretical mill rate.  It 

says, if this municipality wanted to provide the standard level 

of services with the assessment that it has, it would have to 

have a mill rate of 50 mills or 70 mills or 80 mills.  That's what 

it would have to do to provide a level of service.  And that's a 

measurement of how wealthy the RM is. 

 

The actual mill rate that the municipality uses may vary 

depending on what services they actually do provide, whether 

they provide more than standard service or less than standard 

services, whether they have money in the bank or whether they 

have to borrow money, or whatever.  That is a theoretical mill 

rate which says that this RM is not a wealthy as this RM, and 

therefore when we pay equalization grants, we will pay this 

RM a higher grant.  And that's the basis of the equalization 

grant formula. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But what you're saying is that you have a 

theoretical figure that you use to make discussion out of, but 

what you're really saying is that a municipality that has had bad 

administration, bad decision making by councils, has run itself 

into the red, has blown all its money, squandered it away, has a 

real high mill rate with no services, is by nature now with this 

formula going to end up getting bigger grants than a 

municipality that is prudent and puts money in the bank, saves 

dollars, has a low mill rate because they're efficient and taking 

care of 

business the way it should be taken of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not the case.  The grant 

is based on what it would cost the municipality to provide a 

reasonable level of service in their municipality.  And if they 

do not provide that level of service with the money they get, 

that would be the problem of the municipality.  This is strictly a 

measure of what resources that municipality has to get revenue 

from and what services it needs to provide in order to provide 

roads and so on for their municipality. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Wouldn't it be better then to use the total 

assessment of the municipality rather than mill rate as the basis 

of your calculations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In calculating the theoretical mill 

rate, we use the actual assessment of the municipality.  It's 

based on a year-old assessment, but it is based on their 

assessment.  So if a municipality has a certain level of 

assessment, then we assume that they have that base to raise 

revenue from and theoretically we have a rate that they would 

have to raise on that . . . mill rate they would have to use on 

that assessment in order to provide a standard level of service. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, the standard level of 

services has me concerned.  What would you describe as the 

standard level of services for a municipality? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is based on a number of 

factors, the miles of road that the RM has to maintain and 

rebuild, the number of bridges in the RM, the number of miles 

that need gravel and those sorts of services. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who measures that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have records of all the different 

miles of road and different classes of road that each RM has.  

We have a record of the number of bridges they have and so 

on. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Who draws up those records and how do they 

draw them up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do inventory of the 

municipalities.  We have a record of approved roads that a 

minister has to approve when a road is put into a grid road 

system and so on.  We do actual inventory of driving the roads 

to see what roads are in an RM. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay you classify the roads into different 

classes then, backroads, primary grid, farm access, regular grid 

roads and those kinds of classifications.  You determine that 

through consultation with the municipalities and then build 

those roads.  And you keep a record of that.  And by that 

designation, irregardless of the quality of condition of the road, 

the grant is assessed on miles, not necessarily taking into 

account condition of the road? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- And on the equalization grants, 

that's right.  It doesn't matter the condition of the roads.  This is 

just a measure of the services that are needed.  It gives them an 

unconditional grant.  They can spend that grant in whatever 

way they like, whether they 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

want to spend it on roads, or administration, or whatever.  And 

the road construction grants are based on actual roads that need 

to be built. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I just took a second here to glance at these 

papers that you delivered me now.  And it says on the front 

cover, unconditional revenue-sharing grants for rural 

municipalities.  Are there also conditional grants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes there are. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is that formula also included in this brochure?  

Or is that a separate set of calculations?  And if so, would you 

table that for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, you did get the sheet for 

conditional construction grants. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's included with this unconditional one?  

I'll just give you a minute to find that. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is on a sheet that says . . . has 

Department of Rural Development on top.  Distribution of 

conditional revenue-sharing grants for construction, 

reconstruction, and oil servicing of designated . . . (inaudible) . 

. . should have been at the back of your package.  This is our 

last copies, though. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I have now found 

that, and I appreciate getting that .  Did you now have time to 

find that gravel formula to table? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We will appreciate having a little 

time later to study through that and to perhaps ask you some 

other questions in detail on how those programs work. 
 

Now we have several areas of concern, and I pause here 

because I'm not just sure how to go through this in an orderly 

fashion in order to derive the answers sort of in sequence rather 

than to sort of hop, skip all over.  So I may miss and be 

hop-skipping, but I'll try my best to try to get into some of this 

in an orderly fashion. 
 

With regards to the formulas, we've had people tell us from 

your department through the past eight months that rural 

municipalities were going to be reduced 7.4 per cent in the 

budget.  And it turns out now that we have from you, the grants 

that were actually calculated and measured, and that came to 

18.3 per cent. 
 

Now we've heard some disturbing rumours, and because we've 

heard them we would like you to indicate to us how the 

department will be affected in terms of its relationship to 

giving out grants to municipalities in the future.  And I do this 

in all sincerity, Mr. Minister, not to embarrass your department, 

but to try to prepare rural municipalities for what the reality 

might be. 
 

And my question is this: if, for example, you were asking for a 

30 per cent reduction in the costs of operating your department 

for the next minibudget, and if that were to translate into a $6 

million reduction in grants, my first question would be, which 

grants would that most likely be applied to?  My second 

question would be, what percentage of reduction would 

municipalities expect on 

that much of a reduction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, when we talked to 

the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

and the rural municipalities last year, we were a little late 

getting our numbers out to them which makes it difficult for 

them to do budgeting.  One of the things that we try to do as 

government is to give them a fair idea of what their grants are 

going to likely be like next year so that they will have some 

planning.  The numbers that we gave as the most likely 

reduction in revenue sharing for next year is 3.3 per cent, and 

as of yet we don't know which grants that's most likely to come 

from.  It's one of the things that we want to meet with SARM 

and some of the municipalities to get some feedback on before 

we finalize that in a budget. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I appreciate your candour in that answer, Mr. 

Minister.  I realize that you could have dodged that issue.  And 

I think rural municipalities will appreciate having the 

opportunity to know that you at least are honest enough to put a 

figure on it, and that they can plan for some reduction.  It will 

be a long time till February in terms of looking ahead, but in 

reality in life, February comes around awfully quick and it'll 

soon, of course, be here again, and faced at that particular time 

of the year . . . municipalities have to decide what their 

budgeting is pretty well going to be through that month.  And it 

will be helpful for them to have that figure. 

 

I hope that somehow you can get your government and your 

officials to be a little more accurate in this coming year than 

you were in the past.  I am critical.  I don't want to be overly 

critical, but it became somewhat of an embarrassment as well 

as a very real difficulty for a lot of municipalities to take a 

much larger reduction in their actual monies than what they 

were expecting to get.  It meant having, in some cases, to 

employ less labour.  That had an effect, not only on the ability 

to repair the roads this past summer, it also has the spin-off 

effect, of course, of increasing the unemployment problem in 

our province.  Rural municipalities are quite big employers 

throughout the summer months, and I'm sure you're aware of 

that. 

 

And so accuracy, while it is understandable couldn't be 

absolute or perfect probably this far ahead, surely we can be 

closer than 10 per cent out, and that is significant when you 

deal with municipalities that are looking at maybe 60 or 70 or 

$80,000 worth of grants that are reduced by 10 per cent.  Right 

away you've got the value of hiring one more employee for the 

summer involved in these transactions. 

 

So it is important to be close on these things.  And I could give 

you an example of a municipality that has one less employee 

this year and is struggling to match the budget.  And while I 

can give you that one example absolutely because I am the 

reeve of that municipality, I can assure you that most likely 

what's happening to us would have to be happening to 

everybody else in the province because we're not really special.  

We're pretty average when it comes to the conditions that affect 

rural people in terms of municipalities and a lot of other things. 

 

So thank you once again for giving us that information 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

and we will of course be passing that along to the people out in 

the country. 

 

I won't dwell on this formula any further for now until I've had 

a chance to read through your papers.  But I want to go on to 

the list of questions here that I prepared the other night and 

didn't finish because I would like to give you a chance to get us 

the sort of nuts and bolts types of things done with so that we 

can get into some of the other areas. 

 

I had provided here that we would like to be provided with a 

list of all the space rented, leased, or owned by the department, 

and the purpose for which the space is being used at the present 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I was under the 

understanding that that was in the package of material that we 

had passed over, but I have another copy here if . . . 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Unfortunately I 

don't know where that package went so I'm just going to run 

through these ones that I have noted, the ones that I read into 

Hansard, so you have a record in Hansard of the ones that I 

read through.  The ones that I haven't read through, even 

though you may have a copy of this paper and have determined 

to put that together in a package, I haven't both received it, and 

the other point, that I haven't put that into the record so that it's 

available on Hansard.  So I will continue to ask these 

questions, and hopefully we can get the package all together. 

 

The next one is all the costs associated with each rental 

agreement or lease. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The numbers that we sent over are 

the numbers that we pay to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation), who owns the property.  It includes 

rent, rent on furniture, and some maintenance I assume.  So 

what the SPMC actually pays to the lessees, we don't have that 

information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Which minister do I ask to find that 

information out when Estimates come up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's the minister responsible for 

SPMC, and I believe his Estimates are already up.  We can get 

a copy of that. I can endeavour to get that for you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'd like the 

operating and maintenance costs of all the space occupied by 

the departments, broken down by owners, lease, and rent space 

as well, while you're doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will attempt to get that from 

SPMC. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We also would like 

the names of each principal leasing or renting space to the 

department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will endeavour to get that as 

well. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just as we talk a little bit about the rentals, the 

thought crosses my mind, Mr. Minister, that your department 

was scheduled to be moved out in the Fair Share program last 

year.  Were some buildings rented at that time in rural 

Saskatchewan that are still being rented at this particular time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We had leased one facility at Gull 

Lake.  We have since relinquished that lease and are no longer 

paying it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is that the only one in the province, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you.  We would like to have also listed 

all of the vehicles being paid for by the department either in 

maintenance costs or actual purchase deals, whether the vehicle 

is owned by the government or privately owned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What I'll do is I'll send over . . . We 

have a whole package of information that I thought that you 

had.  We will send the whole package over.  It's in here. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate getting 

this package.  I can assure you just by looking at the first 

couple of sheets here that I haven't really seen anything like 

this before and so we are glad to have it. 

 

Now my problem is, I don't know for sure what the package 

covers or what's in it.  I obviously can't read it as I'm asking 

you questions and I obviously think it would be 

counter-productive if I were to leave the Assembly at this point 

and not ask you the questions.  So for the record, perhaps, even 

though the answers are probably in this pile, perhaps you 

would like to respond to the questions so that the public can 

know that you are as familiar with this package as I'm going to 

be once I read it. 

 

In that view, that we have to somehow get this on the record 

and give you an opportunity to show your expertise with your 

department, I would like to continue with the questions and 

allow you the opportunity to answer them for the public. 

 

We would like an explanation why the vehicle, each one that I 

mentioned just earlier, is being paid for by the department.  

Perhaps you would like to elaborate a little bit on how things 

work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the vehicles that are 

listed are all vehicles that are used by our field staff with the 

exception of one which the deputy minister has. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay.  Could you tell me why these vehicles 

are paid for by the department?  For example, you just said that 

housing types of things and buildings are handled by SPMC. 

Why are vehicles handled in your department differently then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- These are not vehicles that are 

owned by the department.  They're vehicles that are 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

leased through CVA (central vehicle agency) for the 

department, so they are also owned and purchased by SPMC.  

But these are just a list of vehicles that our department leases 

from CVA. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I've just been handed another package of 

material that I was working on earlier today, Mr. Minister, and 

my typist has just completed the typing on them so I now have 

them with me.  Rather than skip to those right away, I think I 

might just as well finish what I'm doing here so that you can 

keep on this same trend for a few minutes. 

 

The actual costs of the departmental expenditures in relation to 

each vehicle and the breakdown of those costs is what we'd be 

asking for.  Could you give us a brief breakdown on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Our charges are based on a per 

kilometre charge to CVA.  We pay a basic rate of 22.6 cents a 

kilometre, and for some vehicles that have air conditioning and 

so on, another cent or so above that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's close enough for my purposes tonight, 

Mr. Minister.  Even though within a couple of cents might 

sound to some people like you're not giving a very accurate 

answer, I realize that the answer you gave is close enough for 

us to be fairly sure where things are going.  And we will tie that 

down a bit more closely when we study your package.  If it's in 

serious error, we'll let you know.  And you can correct that at 

that time. 

 

We would also like to know the employees' parking space paid 

by the department and the cost of individuals' names. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do not pay anything for 

parking space.  Part of our charges for our buildings with our 

leases with SPMC include parking.  But we do not have any 

parking charges as such. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'd like to know 

the names and titles of persons authorized to use the vehicles 

individually, where a car is specifically assigned, and an 

aggregate list where no specific assignment is made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's on the list that we have just 

passed over to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will trust that you 

have that information in the package.  We would also like 

provided a list of all of the advertising done by the department 

since November 1, 1991, including: production and distribution 

of direct mail, pamphlets, newsletters, prints, ads, broadcasting 

ads, speaking tours, public displays and exhibitions, 

promotional items such as pens and key chains, and media 

relations, and all other communications, vehicles, very 

particularly a list of all newspapers, internal and external, and 

the names of the persons responsible for these newspapers as 

well as the other information relating to all communications 

activities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The list that you asked for since 

November 1 is on schedule 6 of your package.  It 

includes an internal newsletter, traffic-safety pamphlet, some 

print advertisements on Crown lands lease posting, advertising 

in weekly newspapers for short-term permit custom farm 

operations or notices of extension meetings for courses, and 

some displays and exhibitions including one at Agribition for 

$625, and Mexibition for $435, and the Farm Progress Show 

for $325. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The obvious 

question that the general public would be saying to themselves 

right now I think is would any of this advertising be 

misconstrued as political party advertising? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't believe any of the 

advertising could be construed as political in any way.  One 

fact that I might point out is that last year's expenditures for 

advertising was $281,880.  Our projected budget for this year is 

$110,400. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That sounds good to me, Mr. Minister.  I'll go 

on with my next question.  We'd like a breakdown of the cost 

of each communications activity referred above including the 

name of all non-government agencies or persons paid for the 

work and the nature of the work performed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have nothing that was done 

outside the department since November 1. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And we'd like also, 

a breakdown of the internal cost associated with each 

communications activity including salaries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those numbers are those . . . that 

information as well is in schedule 6.  It tells who on the 

department worked on the in-house productions and lists the 

Farm Light & Power and The Western Producer and so on, 

where we booked advertising.   So that is also in your schedule 

6 document. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I now have three of 

my colleagues working on these lists, and they will be checking 

the correctness of them. 

 

Next question we wanted to know about was a list for the work 

that was done externally, a copy of the invitation to tender and 

explanation for the final tender selection including whether or 

not the selected tender was the low bid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've just pointed 

out, we didn't do any outside advertising or outside 

communication.  It was all done in-house. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Okay, if the 

Estimates for this department do not have a communications 

vote . . . I don't know.  I guess first of all I have to ask you, is 

there a communications vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is on page 76 of 

the budget.  It's the . . . that falls under item 10 which is 

personal services and other expenses which includes the 

110,000 which I just gave you, plus telephones. 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

You'll notice in the vote, the vote for this year is a 100 . . . the 

total is 168,900.  Last year was 584,000. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that 

people who follow this for longer than I've been involved seem 

to hold some great store by the fact that these types of 

expenditures should be separated and that there should be a 

separate vote for each of these items.  And because they haven't 

given me their reasoning for why that is, I'm just going to 

suggest to you that it seems important to those people.  And I 

would hope that in the next budget that perhaps you would 

consider doing that for their benefit. 

 

We would like you to provide a list of all the polls and opinion 

research conducted by the department since November 1, 1991. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I will take the 

member's suggestion under advisement.  I think it is important 

that people know what governments are spending on 

advertisements and not in any way try to hide it in any form. 

 

We have done no polling since November 1. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We would like you to provide us with a list of 

all the trips paid for by the department since November 1, 

1991, whether in the province or outside of the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have a list 

of in-province travel.  We're a field department; it would be 

impossible to keep . . . a list would be impossible to have 

within the province. 

 

We do have a list of all the out-of-province travel and the 

names and positions and the cost of, and I will send that across. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will that list 

contain the names of all the persons on trips, indicating which 

persons were for . . . by the department and which ones were 

not?  Will it also include the breakdown of the costs of each 

trip by persons, including transportation, meals, 

accommodations, and any other costs?  And will it also include 

the destinations, dates, and purposes of each trip?  Will it also 

include the method of travel, the names of travel suppliers, 

names of hotels and other institutions, and provide 

accommodations?  Will it provide us also with the results of 

each trip, including a copy of any tangible evidence showing a 

benefit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Most of that information is on the 

sheet that we gave you.  It includes the destination, the purpose 

of the conference, the name and their position and costs of the 

trip. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We have on May 

23 to 26, 1991 here, Montreal ICURR (Intergovernmental 

Committee on Urban & Regional Research) Conference, Lloyd 

Talbot, executive director.  What would that be all about, just 

as an example of the first one, to give people an idea of what 

you're talking 

about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This trip was a conference of 

community planners.  Mr. Talbot attended that conference and 

presented a paper and his costs were picked up.  That's why it 

only cost $87.64 to the trip for Montreal, because he presented 

a paper at the conference and had his costs picked up because 

of that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I've taken a quick look at 

this paper and I see that every date on this is dated 1991, and 

the last one on the list is June, the last month.  Now what I 

asked you for was to provide us with a list of all the trips paid 

for by the department since November 1, 1991, which indicates 

to me that none of those figures would be on this list that you 

just sent across, so maybe your folks over there grabbed the 

wrong list.  Maybe you want to try again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do not be able to seem to find 

that list but we will certainly get it to you as quickly as we can. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps you could, 

from your memory or the memory of your officials, give us an 

example of one or two situations so that the viewing public 

won't have the idea that you're simply trying to hide your 

activities and give them some idea of what types of trips are 

involved and where they go and what you do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have kept out-of-province 

travel to a very minimum since November 1.  We have had a 

bridge engineer go to a conference on bridges in Whitehorse.  

We've had some people who are on Transport Canada 

committees who attended some meetings.  The deputy was in 

Edmonton for a conference.  Personally, I've been out of 

province only once myself since November 1; that was to 

attend a ministers' meeting in Clear Lake just last week. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I can certainly 

understand that you would not have much time to get out of the 

province with the work that we've been keeping you at here in 

through the past summer.  The name Whitehorse, I think you 

mentioned, is that correct?  Nod your head. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct but it wasn't me.  

That was for a bridge engineer who went to a bridge 

conference. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How many bridges does Saskatchewan build 

in the Whitehorse? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We didn't go to Whitehorse to 

build bridges.  We went there to learn how to build them in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I suspected that, Mr. Minister, but in all 

fairness, couldn't you have a meeting like that in Regina?  Why 

would you go to the Whitehorse? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is a conference that's held 

annually with all four western provinces and the territories, and 

it's alternated from year to year to the 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

different provinces and territories. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm quite sure that 

you're happy that you were able to answer that question so that 

the implication involved could be corrected. 

 

We would like to know, Mr. Minister, can you tell the 

committee, and I will be asking this, I have written here as 

well, vote by vote, whether or not the department has spent any 

money in 1992-93 fiscal year that we are being asked to 

include in the 1991-92 fiscal year?  And can you assure the 

committee that all of the monies being requested in the 

supplementary Estimates and the main Estimates that is 

attributed to the 1991-92 fiscal was actually used before March 

31, 1991.  And further, even if you choose to make the 

expenditures prior to March 31, assure us that the products, 

services, and obligations were actually and really received, 

consumed, delivered, or executed in the 1991-92 fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the government's 

accounting policy allows payments made in April to be charged 

to the old fiscal year providing the goods are received and 

services are rendered by March 31.  Since there's a lag between 

the date of goods received and services rendered and the 

receipt of invoice, this policy provides the standard 30 days to 

process payments related to the old fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm not sure if I got an assurance there or not, 

which was my first premise, that there would be an assurance.  

You've stated a policy.  Whether or not that policy was 

followed, I suspect, is the thing that some people might dispute.  

Can you assure us that the policy that you just quoted from was 

in fact implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the policy was 

indeed followed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

would you provide me with the list of the names, titles, and 

salaries of employees who were, since November 1, 1991 or 

are now or are budgeted to be, attending university or other 

educational institutions while in the employ of the department; 

the number of paid days off and non-paid days being provided 

to the employees as a consequence of their taking this further 

education; and where there are paid days off, the total value of 

those paid days for each listed employee; the individual cost of 

tuition; and all other itemized expenses associated with the 

education or training being paid by the department or any other 

part of government.  Also list the names of the courses being 

taken by each listed employee and the institution providing the 

education, the purpose of the education, and the expected 

benefit to the taxpayer for paying those costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have in the department two 

people on education leave: Doug McNair and Brent Kirychuk.  

We pay them a portion of their salary to attend school.  It's 

something like 25 per cent of their salary.  The cost for Doug 

McNair is $12,983; and the other, Mr. Kurtchuk was $19,837. 

 

There are several other short courses and upgrading that 

employees have done.  There are no days off involved.  The 

only cost to us is tuition fees: Marlene Dally, $178; Ken Rider, 

$325; Sharon Green, $220; Ronald Kerr, $286; and Larry 

Chaykowski, $247. 

 

This also is a schedule in the package that we sent over. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I guess 

questions are worth asking.  As a private citizen not having 

been involved with this process before, I never realized that in 

fact there were these kind of programs carried on by this 

department or any other, and I'm sure a lot of folks out in the 

rest of the province would be happy to know about how these 

things work. 

 

Mr. Minister, out of then the information you are providing 

relating to the universities or other educational institutions, I 

would like a list of the names, titles, and salaries of all the 

employees who were, since November 1, 1991 or are now . . . 

or are, rather, budgeted to be engaged in any professional 

development program, course, or project, the number of days 

off, paid, non-paid, associated with the professional 

development, and the total value of paid days off for each listed 

employee, the cost of the courses and all other itemized 

expenses for each employee, any global costs associated with 

the professional development that cannot be specifically 

attributed to any one employee, the name of the courses, 

seminars, or professional development projects, the name of 

the vendors providing the professional development, and the 

purpose of the professional development and the expected 

benefits to the taxpayers where the professional development 

service is obtained by tender, and was the need for the service 

advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The list of our employees who will 

be taking courses through the Public Service Commission is in 

schedule 9.  We have . . . I believe those are the . . . that's a 

complete list of people on education leave . . . or not on 

education leave, pardon me, but who are taking courses for the 

year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Perhaps I could be so bold as to ask you to 

read one example out so that the viewing public could also 

catch up to what we have in our package and they won't be 

aware of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just as an example of some of the 

training and updating we do with our employees, we have 

somebody taking an instructor skills group leadership course.  

It's a three day course, cost of $300.  We have several people 

taking a course in Lotus 123, which is a computer course -- it's 

a two-day course -- at a cost of $340, and so on. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Without providing 

personnel information . . . or personal information rather, 

provide the aggregate values of costs of dental benefits for 

department employees; and again without identifying 

individuals, provide a list of dental procedures paid for by the 

dental plan and the cost of those procedures to the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the department 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

does not pay for employee dental benefits specifically.  The 

employees are covered by an insurance program, the premiums 

of which are paid for from the public employees dental plan 

which are paid for by the Public Employees Benefits Agency, 

the Department of Finance, on behalf of the employer.  So the 

dental benefits are paid for out of payroll in Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is the department 

making payments into RRSPs (registered retirement savings 

plan) or trust funds on behalf of any individuals?  And if so, 

name the individuals, their titles, salaries and benefits, the 

value of the RRSP contribution, the authority by which the 

payments are being made, the rationale for the payments, and 

the benefits expected for the taxpayers of such a payment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the department is 

not paying into any RRSPs on behalf of individuals. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps you ought 

to look into doing that service for your employees.  Even at the 

RM level, we contribute part of the employee's wages into an 

RRSP plan for him.  It's his own wages, but it does greatly 

assist them in the bookkeeping end of it, and it provides them 

with a fund that they can't readily and easily spend from month 

to month.  And that way they provide themselves with a 

retirement plan of their own that sort of gets done no matter 

what their other commitments are.  So perhaps you ought to 

consider doing that for your people. 

 

We would also like you to provide a list of all the persons, 

including yourself and your ministerial staff, who have credit 

cards for which the department is responsible, the amounts paid 

out to date on each credit card, the purpose of the credit cards, 

the name of the institution providing the credit cards, and the 

credit limit that applies to each card. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are . . . there 

is only one card there, which is issued in the name of the 

deputy minister, which is used exclusively for booking air 

travel for department officials. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are there any limits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not aware of 

what the limits are on the card.  We can probably get that 

information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Have you provided us with the amounts paid 

out to date for this credit card? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The only thing, as I said, that was 

charged was air travel.  We don't have the number but we can 

certainly get that for you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, because 

I'm sure that the folks would like to know how many airplanes 

have been chartered to fly over the drought areas of 

Saskatchewan to examine crop conditions, and that sort of 

thing.  And so it might be nice if you would provide us with 

that information about the amount of limit on the card and the 

number of trips that have been booked on that particular card 

and all of those 

other pertinent things that I've mentioned when I read this the 

first time.  And you've heard it.  And I'm going to take you at 

your word that you'll provide us with that information. 

 

Would you also provide us a list of all the persons who have 

cellular phones for which the department is responsible; the 

supplier of the phone; whether the phone is rented, leased, or 

owned; the purpose the person has the phone; the breakdown of 

the cost associated with the phone since November 1, 1991, 

and the estimated cost for the phone in 1992-93, including 

rental and long-distance charges; the date the phone was first 

purchased, rented, or leased; and the name, title, and salary of 

the person being provided the phone, and that person's office 

location. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have the 

schedule 10 which we can pass over to you.  There are some of 

these phones that are now . . . because of the reorganization, 

belong to Ag and Food, but we have a list of them here of the 

ones that were in the department, and we'll pass that over. 

 

You have that.  I think it came in your package.  It's schedule 

10. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  My colleague is 

going to check the package and see if it's there or not. 

 

We'd also like you to provide a list of all the persons who have 

lap-top computers for which the department is responsible; the 

name of the supplier of the computer; whether the computer is 

rented, leased, or owned; the date of the computer was first 

purchased, rented, or leased; the cost associated with the 

computer, including any software that was purchased or leased 

for use on the computer; the purpose of person having the 

lap-top computer; whether or not there's a service contract 

associated with the computer, and if so, the name of the vendor 

and the cost of the contract; the name, title, and salary of the 

person being provided the lap-top computer and that person's 

office location. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is in schedule 11 

of your package. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll have my 

colleague check that out. 

 

Reversing back to the last question, we have a supplemental to 

that question for you, Mr. Minister.  We note that some people 

have more than one of these telephones . . . or computers, 

rather, we're on.  Okay.  We have the computer list.  We have 

some people with more than one of these computers it looks 

like.  In fact, I see the one name, one, two, three, four . . . four 

times here.  Would that person have four different computers?  

And why would he have to have four of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in many cases these 

computers are shared and the manager or the head of the 

branch . . . in one instance, Terry Crowe, who is head of the 

branch, has the computers all in his name and then shares them 

amongst the workers who use them from time to time. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I noticed that most of these computers are 

bought from WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation and close 

to $5,000 a piece at purchase price, with software being extra.  

Is that a reasonable cost to be paying for these type of 

computers, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Considering that these computers 

were bought three or four years ago, I think you'd best direct 

that question to someone else. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Unfortunately you 

are the Minister of Rural Development, and the past minister of 

Rural Development is being unemployed by the electorate of 

the province, so I'm stuck with having to ask you.  So 

irregardless of your answers, I'm going to still have to keep 

asking the questions from you because you're it.  You're the 

whole ball game as far as this department is concerned, as far 

as I'm concerned. 

 

So could you provide us with a list of fax machines for which 

the department is responsible; the location of the machines, 

indicating whether the machines are situated such that they are 

for general use or for the use of one individual; if for one 

individual, the names and titles of that individual; whether each 

machine is rented, leased, or owned; the name of the vendor; 

the date the machine was obtained; the break-down of the cost 

associated with the machine, including long-distance service 

contracts, leases, rentals, or purchase payments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have fax machines at each of 

our rural service centres, and they are owned by the 

department.  And we have that on schedule 12. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just off hand, do you know how many service 

centres we have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are 52 rural service centres. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you planning any closures of any of 

those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we are not. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Could you provide us a list of the televisions, VCRs (video 

cassette recorder), camcorders, and other audio-visual 

equipment including the production equipment for which the 

department is responsible; the location of the equipment, 

indicating whether the equipment is situated such that it is for 

general use or for the use of one individual; if for one 

individual, the names and titles of that individual; whether each 

piece of equipment is rented, leased, or owned; the name of the 

vendor; the model name of the specific piece of equipment; the 

date the equipment was obtained; a break-down of costs 

associated with the equipment including service contracts and 

leases, rentals, or purchase payments; and the specific purpose 

for which the equipment was obtained. 

 

(2015) 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have that on schedule 13.  

Again, service centres all have a TV and a VCR which is there 

for use of farmers and customers who come in.  And there are 

some cameras and tape recorders and so on.  It's all on schedule 

13. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I always wondered 

where that stuff came from, and now we're starting to find out. 

 

Could you provide us a list of all the verbal or written contracts 

involving a value of 5,000 or more to which the department is 

party regarding employment, products, or service, but which 

are not covered by the Crown employment contracts Act; if the 

contract is not bound by confidentiality provisions, a true copy 

of the contract; if the contract is covered by confidential 

provisions, provide details of those provisions and to the extent 

the provisions allow, the names of the parties to the contract, 

the purpose of the contracts, all costs associated with the 

contract.  Was the contract obtained by tender?  And was the 

need of the service or the contract advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is in schedule 14.  

I might add that there are no personal services contracts, and 

most of these contracts are computer-related contracts.  But 

that information is all in schedule 14. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just so the folks 

who are watching us for entertainment won't miss anything, 

Milwaukee is ahead 8 to 3. 

 

Could you provide us, Mr. Minister, a list of all the 

subscriptions to magazines, journals, newspapers, periodicals, 

newspapers paid for by the department, including the names of 

the periodical, the cost of the subscriptions, the person or 

specific office receiving the subscription, the purpose of the 

subscription, and the disposition of the periodical after use,  

i.e., is it simply discarded?  If it is discarded, the member can 

suggest that if the subscription cannot be terminated to save 

money, at least the magazine can be offered to a library to add 

to their collection. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is in schedule 15.  

We do have a library where we keep magazines.  We have 

subscriptions to such racy stuff as the news . . . the Leader-Post 

and Management Memos and Gazette and Business Week 

and bits and pieces, and those sorts of things come to some of 

our rural service centres. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure that the 

people of the province will be happy to know that that money 

is being spent on timely issues that to some extent are being 

saved and going to libraries. 

 

Is the coaching for results program still active in the 

department?  If so, that program had provisions for retroactive 

salary increases based on a performance review.  Provide a list 

of employees who received such salary increases in fiscal 

1991-92 and those that received such increases since the 

beginning of fiscal 1992-93, including the size of increases in 

percentage and the actual dollar terms, what proportion of 

employees did not 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

receive a coaching-for-results increase in '91-92 or to date since 

'92-93? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The coaching for results program is 

actively used across the government departments with all 

non-unionized departments.  In '91-92 pay increases ranged 

from 4 to 8 per cent.  There were no pay increases in '92-93. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you provide 

us a list of all the employees that have been reclassified since 

November 1, 1991, and in cases where the same employee 

received more than one reclassification, give details of all 

reclassifications for each employee, including the employee's 

name, title, and salary before each reclassification and after 

each reclassification, the reason for each reclassification, the 

date the employee was originally employed anywhere in the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and the date of each 

reclassification. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we had the list of 

reclassifications as Maggie Neal was classified from a CT 2 to 

a CT 3; Brent Kirychuk was reclassified from Agrologist 1 to 

Agrologist 2; Joan Corneil was classified from an ICC 2 to an 

ICC 3; Walter Gregor is likewise; Todd Jorgenson, Agrologist 

1 to Agrologist 2; and the reasons were additional experience 

and additional educational requirements that they met. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you provide 

us the total cost to the department of all the days for which 

employees were paid but during which employees did not 

actually work, including all earned days, special days off, sick 

leave, and any other paid days off.  Break down the totals by 

category, the reason for the days off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is in your package as schedule 

16 as sick leave and that information is in there. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would you like to give one or two examples 

so that the people know what you're talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just without giving names, I can 

just go through, start down the list of some that . . . They range 

from zero days off, sick days used, to up as high as 32.  But 

just as an example down the list it's one and a half, half a day, 

eight days, eleven days, zero days, four and a half days, eight 

days, ten days, two and a half days, zero days, and so on.  

That's the list of all the employees. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that a 

figure like 32 will raise some questions later on.  We'll come 

back to that though after we've had a chance to study it to see if 

there's any appearance of a need to question that in more detail. 

 

We'd like to know, what was the total long-distance telephone 

bill for the department for 1991-92 and the projected 

long-distance bill for '92-93? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Saskatchewan Rural 

Development's long-distance expenses in '91-92 were 

$400,184.  The '92-93 budget amount is $411,922. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- When you made that estimate in your 

department, Mr. Minister, did you do it on the basis of some 

kind of a cost-reduction formula that you applied to the whole 

department or did you come up with this magical figure from 

some other way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The way we came up with that 

figure was we asked each of the rural service centres to project 

how well they could do and we added the numbers together, 

and that's where we got the magic number from. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, when you asked them that 

question, did you also footnote it with, if you don't come in 

with a certain kind of percentage of discount we will somehow 

arrange for you to find discounts in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we did not. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I think there are some in this 

province that might quarrel with you on that issue and we'll 

take it up also later. 

 

Could you provide a complete list of all the media-monitoring 

services the department pays for, including all clipping services 

and broadcast-monitoring services, detailing the names of each 

firm or person providing the service, the cost of the service 

since November 1, 1991, and the estimated cost for 1992-93, 

the distribution list for the clippings or media reports? 

 

Who gets the service, the minister's office or who else?  The 

media sources and subjects being monitored, the reason for the 

service, and a copy of the contract engaging the service.  Were 

the services obtained by tender?  Was the need of the service 

advertised?  If the government also or instead provides such 

service internally, detail the internal costs associated with 

providing the service, including the salaries of the employees 

providing the service as well as the distribution list and the 

source and subjects be monitored with the internal resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan 

Rural Development has not engaged the use of external 

media-monitoring services since November 1.  Internal 

newspaper-clipping services consumes approximately two days 

per month of support staff time which costs approximately 

$250 per month. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does the 

department pay for any free-lance or contract writers, including 

speech writers?  And if so, name the persons being paid to 

provide this service, the cost, copies of any contracts, and the 

purpose of obtaining the service externally, a list of persons for 

whom the writing has been done, and the occasions associated 

with specific writing assignments, audio-visual equipment 

including production equipment.  Were the services obtained 

by tender?  Was the need for the service advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, no free-lance or 

contract writers have been hired since November 1,  



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

1991. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you provide 

us a list of travel agencies the department does business with, 

the names of the owners of the agencies, the value of the 

business done with the agencies since November 1, 1991, the 

basis on which the agency was selected, and whether or not 

there is any contractual obligation on the department's part to 

use the agency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan 

Rural Development does business with National's Wideworld 

Travel agency.  The value of the flights booked since 

November 1 is $2,340.58.  We have no contractual obligations.  

Incidentally, that number is the answer to the question that you 

asked earlier about the credit cards.  That would be the amount 

that was used on the deputy's credit card to book air flights, and 

that's the only number that would appear on that credit card. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You're going to 

blow my whole evening here if you keep answering two 

questions at once when I only ask one.  I'll run out of questions 

after a while. 

 

Okay, I would like a list of all the committees, commissions, 

boards, and agencies created by the department or on which the 

department participates or for which the department is 

responsible, including in each instance the name and the date it 

was created; the name, title, and salaries, and expenses paid of 

committee members; and if staffed, similar information for 

committee staff; the purpose of the committee, including the 

terms of reference and the expected completion date; the 

establishing authority; all other costs of the committee; and 

finally how committee members were appointed, whether there 

was any kind of advertising or public involvement in the 

committee's creation and appointments; any boards, 

commissions, agency members terminated or replaced. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is on schedule 17 

and 18. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you give us a couple of examples, 

again for the purposes of those people that might be watching 

tonight, to give them an idea of what we're talking about. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Just as an example of some of the 

officials and committees they sit on, Walter Antonio, who's 

here tonight, sits on the municipal potash tax-sharing 

administration board, sits on the Technical and Research 

Committee Council on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for 

Canada, Roads and Transportation Association of Canada, sits 

on the Sask Safety Council, on the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Centre studies steering committee, on Crow 

benefit alternative studies steering committee, and on the 

Saskatoon regional rural highway planning studies steering 

committee. 

 

Some of the agencies, boards, and commissions that 

Saskatchewan Rural Development is responsible for is the 

Lands Appeals Board, Saskatchewan Hutterite Liaison 

Committee, rural Board of Examiners, municipal potash 

tax-sharing, minister's advisory committee on development and 

diversification, Saskatchewan advisory council on agricultural 

extension services and regional councils, Abandoned railways 

Right of Ways Committee, and agriculture development 

diversification boards. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That list in itself is 

going to probably require some examination and some 

extensive questions, but I'm not going to go into that right now 

because I want to finish what we're working on.  And then we'll 

come back to that later, if you don't mind.  For clarity, could 

you provide the same information requested in the last question 

for all the committees, boards, commissions, agencies, or other 

bodies that are separate from but responsible to the department 

or to the minister in his or her capacity and his portfolio. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That information is schedule 18. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll study that a 

little later.  In each vote where it states other expenses, please 

provide the complete break-down of what those other expenses 

are.  The title provided no information at all, and the committee 

cannot be asked to approve money for purposes which it cannot 

distinguish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It will just take us a second to pull 

that information together, if you want to carry on. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I'll just make a note here -- to come.  

Okay, could you provide us a list of all the fees, charges, and 

levies that SPMC makes, whether on other government 

departments or agencies, individuals, employees, or other 

organizations.  I want a list of everything that you make, charge 

for, how much the charges are, and what the expected revenue 

is from those charges. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that information in 

one package.  We'll have to put that together for you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- When could you provide us with that 

information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can have it tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll make note of 

that as well, then. 

 

There are numerous references to the Estimates being changed 

to reflect changes in the organization of the department and 

other changes regarding accommodations.  Please provide the 

details for those changes.  Include what pieces the department 

has lost or gained, employees that have transferred in or out, 

from and to where.  As well, please be very specific about the 

changes in regard to accommodations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The member should have, in the 

material we gave him, the document that says, public service 

position deletions.  These are the . . . I have a list of the votes 

and the pieces of the department that were transferred to Ag 

and Food.  There were 73 employees that 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

were transferred from the department to the Department of Ag 

and Food.  We don't have a list of those people here, but those 

are the people that were moved out of the department. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Perhaps you could get that list and deliver it 

tomorrow with the other material. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can do that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Never even had time to sit down.  Thank you, 

Mr. Minister.  We will look forward to receiving that material. 

 

Every department has policy and procedure manuals.  For 

example, I think all departments have a human resources 

manual that spells out how prospective employees are to be 

interviewed, on what basis they are judged, and how successful 

candidates are to be selected.  It also includes policies and 

procedures on discipline, promotion, use of departmental 

equipment and vehicles, and so on. 

 

I want a copy of all such manuals used in the department, if 

you could provide them for us, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps it would be 

helpful if the member could clarify his request somewhat.  We 

have, as my officials tell me, a very large volume of manuals, 

some of which are manuals, lands policy and transportation 

policy and so on, some of which are common across 

government -- PSC (Public Service Commission) manuals, the 

human resource referred to -- which are common across the 

piece. 

 

We can provide all of these manuals, although we may have to 

take some time because it will require some duplication of 

some of these manuals and if you could be more specific I 

think it would be helpful providing which manuals you want. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How long would it take you to provide all of 

them, Mr. Minister?  Perhaps I might have the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We certainly can provide them.  It 

may take us a day or two to get them all duplicated and put 

together, but we can provide those. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That time frame would be acceptable on these 

issues.  I'll just make note that it will take a little longer here.  

Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll look forward to getting 

that material as well. 

 

Is the department currently engaged in any legal actions?  If so, 

provide me with a list of all the legal actions to which the 

department is party, including the nature of the action, the 

lawyers representing the government, a detailed break-down of 

the costs to date and projected costs, including any contingent 

liabilities and any background details that cannot be 

legitimately classed as confidential. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The only legal involvement we 

have, or the only legal case we're involved in at the moment, is 

the Silver Lake farms.  We are using Justice lawyers in that 

case.  I have the break-down of other expenses that the member 

asked for.  I'll send those across 

now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, when you indicate that you only 

have one legal case, that would be, I presume, an overall case 

of the department or something to that effect.  It wouldn't 

necessarily be all of the legal cases that you would be handling 

in each individual department.  For example . . . I'm not quite 

sure.  Maybe I'm out of your jurisdiction in this ministry.  But 

is ACS under Rural Development or is it under Crop Insurance 

or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- ACS is a Crown corporation and 

it's . . . the Minister of Agriculture is responsible for that 

particular corporation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I was 

thinking that some other branches under your jurisdiction 

might have legal actions going on that wouldn't be classified as 

in general terms from the department, but be more specific to 

something in a specific department.  For example, if I were 

talking about Agriculture, I would say to you then, are there 

legal actions in ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) that are also covered in your answer? 

 

So what I'm saying to you is: are there any other branches of 

your department that might have legal actions that you wouldn't 

have necessarily felt required to answer that question about in 

my last question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we don't have, to my 

knowledge, any other branches or Crowns that are responsible 

to this department or through it that would have legal action. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would that also qualify for lands branch, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  To the best of my knowledge, 

we have no legal actions in lands branch. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just a footnote to that.  If you were to find out 

that that weren't right, I would hope that you would pass that 

information on to us, and . . .  Go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly.  We will do that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now could you provide us with a list of all 

the fees and charges the department levies for services or 

products, whether those fees or charges are levied on members 

of the public, outside organizations, other parts of government, 

internal parts of the department or employees; include the 

names of the fees or charge, the amount of the fee or charge 

over the past 10 years, the total collected to date, and the 

projected to be collected in this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can get that together tomorrow. 

We don't have it in one place in our records here. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll make note of 

that along with the other things that you're to deliver tomorrow, 

and we'll look forward to receiving that information then. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

Mr. Minister, I have many other questions that I'd prepared at 

my desk, but I also want to have a few minutes to go through 

these other things that you sent over.  So I'm going to allow my 

colleague -- the member from Arm River -- to ask a few of the 

questions that he has wanted to ask you.  So I want to thank 

you for the time being for your assistance in answering the 

questions and I'll return to you a little later. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We've now been 

on Estimates for an hour and three-quarters, and just a little 

advice to you, Mr. Minister. 

 

I don't know whether it's your department's fault or your fault 

or your office or maybe nobody's, but yesterday I was the critic 

for Social Services and we did it, a big corporation, in two 

hours, because all the information was to my office two or 

three weeks ago and our staff and myself had a chance to go 

through it all.  And so that's where we've been about an hour 

and a half going through all this material.  So advice to a new 

minister for another year would be to have all that information. 

 

Now I understand there was a little mix-up there in the start, 

that you thought it had gone.  But I would suggest that if we 

want to save a lot of time, that that material should be in the 

hands of the critic.  Because that's the suggestion that's worked 

very well that the member from Churchill Downs, which I am 

critic for SPMC and Public Service Commission . . . We got 

into an impasse here for several days getting no place until 

finally we come up with an agreement and it worked well 

because somehow or other it was stopped for two or three 

weeks. 

 

So I give a list of all the questions and then that was the same 

kind of questions more or less that went to all departments.  So 

it worked very well.  And some of the ministers have been 

getting them information supplied to our office way in advance 

and it gives us a chance to go through it.  It's not really fair to 

the critic to have to look at it tonight and then come up with 

questions. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, my questions right now 

will be . . . I'm going to be talking about lands branch.  I'd like 

to know, Mr. Minister, how many lease cancellations did you 

send out under section 20, notices last winter prior to seeding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we again don't have 

that exact number.  We can get it.  I think the number is 

approximately 1,100 notices of intention were sent out.  No 

cancellations were done. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Were those total cancellations sent out to 

farmers or the ones that went to the Farm Debt Review Board?  

That's the section 20 notices I'm talking about.  Because I 

understand last . . . we asked you in question period here one 

day and you didn't know the number and I thought for sure that 

you would make sure that you knew the number for your 

Estimates.  Because it was like several hundred notices if my 

memory serves me correctly.  It was around 700 prior to 

seeding at the Farm Debt Review Board. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- My officials, without having the 

number here, from memory are suggesting the number at 273. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you . . . 

I don't need that tonight because you . . . that's the approximate 

figure that I understood, or approximately 1,100 notices went 

out.  Whether it went out directly or through Farm Debt 

Review Board, but I would like you to get me the information 

because I was told from Dean Vaive from Farm Debt Review 

Board.  That's when we asked you in question period, that it 

was 700 in about a two or three week period.  But anyway, I 

just want that information.  It's not an important thing because 

we agree on approximately that 1,100. 

 

And you're saying . . . are you saying, Mr. Minister, so I got it 

on the record for sure, you're saying there was no lease 

cancellations last spring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No leases were cancelled for rental 

arrears.  There may have been a couple cancelled for non-use 

or that sort of thing where people were not using land, but none 

were cancelled because of arrears. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many acres 

of land under the control of lands branch? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately 8.7 million acres. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How many of these acres are leased by 

individuals, companies, or corporations, whoever would have a 

use for farm use? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Almost the entire acreage is used 

for either grazing or cultivated use.  So it's almost entirely used 

for agricultural use except for some small parcels of specialty 

leases or so on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So they don't have, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, lands branch don't have a lot of waste land.  That's 

probably owned by parks then; it's not . . . lands branch don't 

have any then, I understand.  Thank you. 

 

Now you have these 1,100 leases that are out there.  What is 

your policy going to be for collections of the past-due rentals or 

leases?  What's your policy going to be because this can't go on 

for ever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Presently we're reviewing our 

policies on leases and collection of those fees.  The reason 

there were no cancellations is that the department felt, although 

the agreement that we had with lending institutions this winter 

did not apply to lease land but only to foreclosures, we felt that 

to be within the spirit of the agreement of attempting to keep 

farmers on the land, that we would not cancel any leases until 

we had reviewed the policy.  And we are currently reviewing 

that policy now.  And we'll hopefully keep as many of these 

farmers on the land as we possibly can. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, let's just use 

for example that . . . You said some land was abandoned, or 

there is always somebody that could 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

naturally be leaving the land, and they're going broke, and 

they're through, or whatever, and just let the land go.  Let's just 

use a hypothetical statement here for now then that there is 

leased land ends up back in the department's hands.  What 

would your policy be with that land once it's in your name 

again and nobody has it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As I said, Mr. Chairman, we're 

reviewing that policy.  If there's grazing land that comes up for 

. . . the lease is surrendered on, we will be put out again to be 

leased for 33 years on our lease policy, on our system that we 

have to have an open tender and a point system, whereby we 

would award the lease to another farmer.  Most of the 

agricultural land that we are . . . if the lease is surrendered, we 

are tendering it for short-term use, depending on our review of 

land policy. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Am I understanding you to say, Mr. 

Minister, that perhaps you won't be putting that land up for 

sale, that you'll go back to the old policy that we defeated in 

1982, that the government not own the land.  Because now the 

policy of the past government is to try to sell this land and get 

it into the hands of the farmers if possible.  And we know that 

things have been not . . . The economy's not been good in the 

last years.  But still, what is your policy going to be, to sell as 

much as possible, or to go back to the old policy where the 

government's going to own and lease all the land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Any of our Rural Development 

land is for sale at the present time for cash sale, except for 

some that is under critical wildlife restriction or some such 

thing.  We are not proceeding with the rent 

_to-own purchase program that was in effect.  We're reviewing 

that program to determine whether it's suitable or not.  We have 

no intention of freezing or stopping sales on Crown land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the 

lease-to-own program that was introduced by the past 

government -- and there was definitely some contracts; I'm 

quite sure that people entered into contracts with the 

lease-to-own -- have you cancelled that just like they did the 

natural gas program and they cancelled other contracts?  Or are 

those contracts still being honoured, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those contracts are being 

honoured.  We haven't cancelled anybody's contract.  What we 

did do was, people who had applied to purchase land under the 

lease-to-own program, if they had the appraisal done, if they 

had put out money for an appraisal fee, we continued with the 

sales.  Those that were not in progress to that stage were frozen 

pending review of the program. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, could I get you to repeat that 

again?  You said . . . Could you repeat that last statement?  I 

didn't quite pick it up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What I said was that we did not 

cancel any of the contracts.  We honoured anybody that had a 

contract on lease-to-own, and there are a number of them out 

there making their lease payments.  We're honouring the 

contracts.  What I said was that anybody who had been in 

progress . . . The way we 

measured that the sale had begun and that progress had begun 

was if there was an appraisal done or money put out.  If the 

farmer, lessee, had put out money for an appraisal fee, we felt 

that that was a sale that was already in progress and therefore 

we completed them.  Anybody who did not have progress to 

that point, the rest of the land, rent-to-own, was frozen. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, but you are 

saying you're looking at a policy . . . Can you give us any idea 

at all what you're looking at for land that comes back, owned 

by the government?  Are you going to favour . . . What are you 

yourself, Mr. Minister -- never mind what the policy ends up 

being -- what do you yourself believe?  That it should go back 

in favour of lease or purchase?  What do you believe in? 

 

Do you believe in the old NDP (New Democratic Party) policy 

that the government's got to own all the land?  Never mind with 

the new policy.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, would you like to see 

your department that you're the minister of, would you like to 

see it favour . . . I know it'd be maybe impossible to sell all the 

land but would you like to encourage the sale of land or 

encourage the leases on the land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't believe it 

was ever NDP policy to own all the land.  Even the land bank 

program had a provision in it whereby farmers could buy the 

land after five years.  We've always had a sales program for 

Crown land.  I think that depends on the individual farmers. If 

they prefer to rent the land, which many of them do, I think 

that's quite acceptable.  We have no great philosophical reason 

for not selling the land.  We are, as I said, reviewing the policy.  

We're getting input; we have meetings going on this week.  

Last week we were out in the country talking to farmers about 

our land policy and our land-use policy.  When we get the input 

from the farmers, we'll put it together and we will make some 

judgements on our policy and we will come up with a land-use 

policy which is comprehensive for, not only the land that's in 

Rural Development, but the land that's held in parks and other 

Crown land and decide what's the best land-use strategy for the 

province. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you're out and 

anybody in your department's out talking to people and getting 

their ideas, you'll be the first department in government that's 

doing it because that's where you've been failing.  There's 

hardly a program that you've been out asking the people. 

 

You've been coming in here . . . and I'm hoping this department 

will be different.  I'm hoping that you, Mr. Minister, will be 

different because this is my first debate with you since . . . 

other than the odd question in question period.  But I'm asking 

you as an individual, what do you prefer, if the government 

could lease this land or sell as much of it back to the farmers as 

possible?  Never mind what the farmers are saying.  I want to 

know what you, Mr. Minister, believe yourself. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if I'm going 

to consult with the farmers and get some public 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

opinion and make a decision based on that consultation, I think 

I should do that and not impose what I think, as an individual, 

on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you just formed a government 

about nine months ago, and anything else this government 

thinks, they tell the people, this is what we think.  You're the 

part of the government that said at election time that we're 

going to balance the budget, lower the taxes, create jobs, and 

save all the farmers.  I mean, you made policy.  You said 

there'd be no more increases in all the different . . . like 

SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, all the essential services.  

You were part of that.  You made policy. 

 

Now you stand here, Mr. Minister, and say, oh I don't want to 

say what I really believe on this because I want to wait to see 

what the farmers think.  You've got your right to say that, but I 

still say, Mr. Minister, that if you got any backbone 

whatsoever, you should let the people at least know what you 

think. 

 

I'd have no problem if I was a minister saying, this is what I 

believe; this is my philosophy.  I believe in the government 

owning the land and leasing it out, or I believe in the 

government . . . Take your stand because the people will follow 

you if you take your stand or else throw you out.  But if you're 

afraid to make a stand, you're not going any place with your 

meetings.  You've got to make a stand, Mr. Minister, what you 

believe in. 

 

Well I want you to answer me that question, as an individual.  

We have that right to ask the minister, what is your view on 

that?  Do you believe in government owning the land or leasing 

the land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we've had a 

combination of Crown land and private land in the province for 

the last 100 years. 

 

And I think I have no philosophical reason to oppose that 

position where both can exist.  And I think I have certainly no 

desire to see government take over any large portions of land.  I 

think if a government can help farmers and keep farmers on the 

land by maintaining ownership of some Crown land, I think 

that's a very good decision.  And I think I don't have a 

philosophical bent that says one is good and one is bad, and 

therefore come hell or high water we're going to do all of one 

and all the other.  I think we need a logical approach and I 

think that's what we will have with this government. 

 

We're reviewing our land policy.  As you know, the Minister of 

Rural Development doesn't make policy alone.  It depends on 

consultation with the people and also consultation with the 

caucus, and the decision of government after consulting with 

people to get their input in making the decision which is best 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that 

statement.  You said mildly in there that you would . . . well 

you did say that you would like to see as many farmers own 

their land as possible.  And I understand under tough times that 

that maybe isn't all probable right now.  But okay, I appreciate 

that answer, Mr. Minister. 

Now we did touch on this a little bit before here, but I think 

there's two policies.  It was the policy that you could just out 

and buy the land out . . . If you were a lessee, you could buy 

the land from . . . get it appraised and buy your leased land.  

But they had this policy where you could go on the rental basis.  

Is that the one you say you put the hold on, the one that's on the 

lease to own? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That was the policy that we put the 

hold on, yes.  It was called rent-to-own program. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now if the lessee is in good standing and he 

comes in and asks an appraiser to go and assess that land, and 

willing to write a cheque for it and pay for it, is that land for 

sale for him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes it is. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How would you 

go about appraising that land?  Who would appraise that land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The lessee has a choice of having 

us in the department do the appraisal or having a private 

appraisal and accredited appraiser to value the land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, does the department have 

appraisers working for them full time now, or do they just hire 

them from the work place?  Do they have appraisers on the 

payroll? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The people who do the appraisal 

for the department would be land agrologists that are on staff. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I don't know whether you'd remember, Mr. 

Minister, that back when we took over government in '82 and 

we were trying to sell land as quickly as we could, we 

advertised that we would sell land.  And advertised land was 

put out by the dozens of quarters all over Saskatchewan for 

sale, and there was a policy paper sent out to every lessee that 

that land was for sale.  But the department would send out their 

appraisers, and it seemed to always come in too high, and it 

seemed to be always . . . not always -- but mostly it was too 

high.  So the policy of the past government was to have no 

more appraisers from the government at all.  They hired a 

farmer and the government together or the department together 

would pay for . . . I know that policy changed two or three 

times -- but to get outside appraisers completely.  So I was 

under the understanding that there was no real accredited 

appraisers.  You're just saying that these are agrologists. 

 

My question was: do you have any accredited appraisers that 

under that association -- Saskatchewan -- appraise this land or 

just your agrologists, so I get that straight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The land agrologists are not 

accredited appraisers, at least I don't believe any we have on 

staff are accredited appraisers, but that is who does the land 

evaluation if we do it in the department.  If a farmer or lessee is 

not satisfied with that, they have the option of hiring an 

accredited appraiser to do the evaluation. 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay that's better, Mr. Minister, because I 

didn't think that there was accredited appraisers left in the 

department.  But if the farmer has that option, if he's not 

satisfied with the department's price per acre or whatever, he 

has that right to bring in a private appraiser. 

 

All right, Mr. Minister, move on to . . . You must have land.  It 

has to happen every year -- and if not, it soon will be -- where 

land is given back.  It has to be happening under this economy 

situation the way it is.  If land is put out for sale and it doesn't 

sell or put up for rent, what I want to know, if the land is put up 

for rent, what would be your policy on how, say, more than one 

applies for that land.  What would be your policy in how to 

pick a lessee for that land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If the lease is to be short-term one 

for a year, we tender those leases out.  It's done by tender.  If 

it's to be a long-term lease, we have our lease policy which 

includes age, distance, and land base and so on, in the formula 

determining who gets the lease. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you're saying 

that if a long-term lease is put out, then it goes to the point 

system.  That's the same policy that was brought in by the past 

government.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct.  We haven't made 

any changes to that policy manual. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Are you looking at any changes to the point 

plan, Mr. Minister?  I'll just make a comment before I have you 

answer.  I wasn't 100 per cent . . . That wasn't 100 per cent plan 

but it was better than what was in place under the old 

government and under past governments.  It used to be if land 

branch land or any government land came up for sale, they had 

to go out and pick and choose.  And I know maybe at that time 

there was no other way and it's a hard thing to do. 

 

I remember when I was a rural councillor and nothing to do 

with politics whatsoever, that someone from lands branch or 

maybe it was under land bank at that time, I'm not sure, but I 

remember them contacting my area and saying that there was a 

parcel of land for sale and we have 20 on this list.  This 

particular time there was 20 people that applied.  And they 

said, we need some help to get some recommendations who 

would be the best farmer.  I know they came to me as a 

councillor, I know they went to the MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), I know they went to . . . even in some 

cases they went to the MPs (Member of Parliament) and was 

federal.  Just whoever they . . . what government was in power.  

And it had its bad points, I'll tell you, because it was just 

somebody had to pick an individual. 

 

So I know we . . . I was in the agriculture caucus all the years 

we were in government and we worked at that program.  It was 

changed several times and we come up with the point system, 

but it's not a 100 per cent program, but it's much improved like 

I said before. 

 

And I was wondering if you were looking at maybe improving 

it some more.  The points that I have against it, were you've got 

a person that's maybe an excellent 

farmer and he fits all the . . . you've got the right age and he's 

the right distance to the land and he gets extra points for . . . 

maybe because he lives close enough to the land but maybe 

somebody that loses points because he's too far away and he 

really needs it badly.  And so the flaw in the system was they'd 

pick anyone that was within 10 per cent.  This is the flaw that I 

worry about. 

 

I don't know whether all my caucus agree with me on this or 

not.  But it's a flaw that I've run into that if four or five people 

or two or more, they have to go to the draw system, and you 

could be within 10 points.  Somebody could score an 85, 

somebody a 75 or a 90 and an 80.  And I've 7, 8, 10, 12 and 

they draw one.  Well I would like to just see what you think of 

this plan, Mr. Minister. 

 

I thought it would be better, the plan that you draw up on the 

point system that -- whatever it be -- I think that it'd be better if 

you made, you know, stick right to the point system.  And if 

you score an 88 and the next one to you scores an 87, 88 gets it 

rather than throwing within 10 into the pot. 

 

I'd just like your views on that, Mr. Minister, and I'm not sure 

how familiar you are with that point system because it might 

not have come to your attention.  So I'd just like to get your 

views from you and some of your officials on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I appreciate the minister's 

comments.  It is always a very difficult situation to allocate 

land, and I guess it's one of the things that we'll be looking at, 

at our land policy.  And I know that we'll certainly take it under 

advisement.  As you said, no system is a hundred per cent, and 

we'll certainly try to improve it.  I think you make a good 

suggestion; we'll take it into consideration, I think.  It is always 

a difficult situation, and as you always have some complaints 

about people who feel that it's not quite fair.  But we certainly 

will hope to get it as fair as we possibly can. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I'll just leave it at this, Mr. Minister.  I 

was responsible for lands branch for a short time, and I got a 

lot of calls throughout the province.  And when you have the 

draw system, somebody's always awful unhappy that doesn't 

get drawn out of the hat. 

 

So I always felt that it might be better to improve that point 

system, improve it so it is . . . you are scored pretty accurate 

anyway.  You can't change your age.  You can't change your 

distance away from the land.  You can't change how much 

other land you've got.  So those points could be maybe geared 

up to be a pretty concrete . . . So when you come up with a 

score that that is just like you're writing exam; that's a score. 

 

And so I think that you would hurt less people and keeping in 

mind . . . I'm sure not coming down on you, Mr. Minister; this 

was our policy.  And I'm just, for discussion, I'm just trying to 

make suggestions to make things better.  I feel that the people 

that I've seen hurt in the draw would feel better if somebody 

said, well you scored an 85 and the other one scored an 87, so 

you lost it.  I think they would feel that better, rather than score 

an 89 or a 90 . . . like I had a case one time where a guy scored 

an 89 and the next one to him was 80.  They made the draw --  



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

just two of them -- made the draw, and the guy with the low 

score got the land.  And it was really . . . It was hard to handle, 

something like that.  So I'll just leave that with you that . . . for 

the department.  I see your officials are here.  And I know some 

of them, and they've got good heads on them, and along with 

yourself, Mr. Minister, maybe you could look at that. 

 

(2115) 

 

And when you're making this here tour around the province to 

talk about farmers and your new policy, you could perhaps ask 

some of the people about that, or something that can improve 

on what I'm saying. 

 

Mr. Minister, let's move into another area.  We talked a few 

minutes ago about approximately 1,100 farmers that . . . They 

had cancellation notices, either through the Farm Debt Review 

Board or cancellation notices.  And we agree on that -- 

approximately 1,100 farmers.  And none of them lost their 

land.  You said none of them lost their land.  Why was Bryan 

Oster . . . why was he losing his lease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, Bryan Oster 

voluntarily surrendered his lease. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Why did he voluntary surrender his lease 

and still be farming it?  I don't understand that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, I made that point in 

question period.  The time that he surrendered his lease was 

very close to seeding time.  The department asked him if he 

would farm it for the year or so, so that we wouldn't have the 

difficulty of trying to advertise it and get a new lessee on a very 

short notice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Is this gentleman . . . has he indicated that 

he's not going to want to farm it another year, that this is just 

for one year he wants it?  Is that for sure?  Is that a statement 

that he's made?  Have you got that in writing, or whatever, that 

he just quit farming?  Because you asked him, you asked him . 

. . The department asked him to farm the land; he turned it 

back; he got a lease on the land again.  Is that because he . . . 

You said he voluntarily turned it back.  So did they ask him to 

take it back for one year, or is he still going to be trying to buy 

it back or lease it again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Oster has a one-year lease on 

the land, and we will be tendering and advertising that land 

next winter. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How much land did he rent from the lands 

branch, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Two quarters of land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, on this land how many acres 

were cultivated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- 260 acres. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Now was that just a 260-acre half-section or 

was it like a meridian or a correction line?  What about the 

other 60 acres? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The other acres were grazing land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What was the assessment on these two 

quarters of land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that information.  

We can get it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Was this 60 acres that wasn't cultivated, was 

that seeded grassland, pasture land, or was just rough land that 

never was broke up?  Was that prairie grass or seeded land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that information 

here either. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well is there not some way we can find it 

out? Because I want to know all the details on this whole 

situation before we move off these Estimates.  Is there some 

way one of your officials can find out?  After all the issue 

we've had here, we're coming up to a $70,000 figure we're 

talking about on this land here shortly, and I'm sure that 

someone should have been looking into what kind of land we're 

talking about.  If it's planted land and it was cultivated land to 

start with, and 60 acres were cultivated up and sowed to 

pasture land and yard, that's got a lot to do with the difference 

in what kind of land . . . or is it rolling, rough pasture land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The value of the land . . . I think 

the file that we sent over on that, from answers in question 

period, have . . . I think the opposition has as much information 

as we do on the case, because I think we sent over photocopies 

of the appraisal of the land, the values owing, the number of 

acres.  I think that information is . . . You have as much as we 

do, I believe, although we may have more on the land. 

 

We didn't, as you realize, sell the land to Mr. Oster.  So we still 

own the land.  We didn't appraise the land.  That was land that 

he leased from us.  He paid for 260 acres of cultivated land and 

I think 40 acres of grazing.  We believe that was native land, 

although my officials are not certain without driving out there 

to check it.  And that had nothing to do with the sale.  What we 

bought from Mr. Oster was the improvements, and those 

appraisal sheets and so on have been sent over to the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, our office did not receive that 

information.  Mr. Minister, under no circumstances did we 

receive that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I have here, at least I think, most of 

the information, if not all, that we have on it.  I'll send that 

over. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- While my colleague is looking at that, Mr. 

Minister, I'll go on with other questions.  What year did this 

gentleman rent the farm from lands branch?  What year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- 1973. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I thank you for sending 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

this over, but I want to assure you that we've never seen it 

before.  It looks like it didn't get to our office, got lost along the 

way, same as the other material that didn't get to the critic 

tonight.  So that's what causes little problems when we . . . I'm 

not blaming anybody in your office but somebody along the 

way has . . . We just didn't receive that. 

 

What was the yearly rent in 1971 . . . or 1973, and what was the 

yearly rent that he was paying now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The information on 1973 would 

require considerable digging back into 20 years of lease files.  

The fee for this year was $2,290. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- It's $2,290 for when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The present year. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- For the half or for the quarter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- For the full half. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So it doesn't look like it's what you call real 

heavy Regina gumbo land.  It doesn't look like . . . $2,260 for 

260 acres.  And I understand that the gentleman hasn't got any 

cattle so if it didn't have the cattle the rest of the land might 

have been broke up, more likely.  So probably that will allow 

him 20 acres or 10 acres for buildings, and there's at least 50 

acres that hasn't been broke up. 

 

Who owned the farm prior to this gentleman renting the farm? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- One Robert L. Stevenson. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Did lands branch purchase the land from 

Mr. Stevenson? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The Saskatchewan land bank 

purchased the land from Mr. Stevenson. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The land bank purchased the land in 1973? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In 1972. 

 

Me. Muirhead: -- Just so I have it straight.  The land bank 

purchased the land from a Mr. Stevenson in 1972 and then 

rented the land to Mr. Oster in 1973. Is that correct, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- How much money . . . how many dollars per 

acre did Mr. Stevenson pay for this land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know how much Mr. 

Stevenson paid for the land.  The land bank bought the land 

from Mr. Stevenson.  The north-east  quarter was $8,990; the 

south-east quarter $10,157. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes.  I'm sorry.  You gave me the answers 

that I wanted but I didn't . . . I meant from . . . how much did 

land bank pay to Mr. Stevenson for the land?  I 

said, how much did Mr. Stevenson pay?  But you were ahead 

of me, Mr. Minister, and gave me the right answer. 

 

Now that doesn't . . . at that time I know land wasn't very high 

at that time so that's $18,000 roughly for the whole farm in 

1972 -- $18,000 roughly.  So it wasn't what you call, like I said 

before, Regina gumbo.  It's not what you call a top-notch farm.  

If you're only paying $2,260 rent in 1992, it is not high-priced 

land or high productive land. 

 

Now what was there for buildings on that land when you 

purchased that land? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The value of the improvements 

was $10,380. 

 

I have the list of the improvements and the ages to them and 

can go through them.  There was a house there in 1961.  It was 

built onto and added to.  It was built onto in 1982.  Oh I have 

the list in . . .  The house was a 1,080 square-foot house, was 

valued at $7,860 when the land bank purchased it.  Two steel 

bins valued at $1,050, a plywood bin at $450, three granaries 

for $150, a garage for $50, a garage for $720, and a barn and 

other outbuildings $100, for a total of ten three eight. 
 

I can go on to list some of the improvements that were made.  

Okay I'll wait till you ask for it and then I'll get it straightened 

out. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, sound like you're so anxious 

you're trying to get ahead of me here.  And I appreciate that 

because we're doing quite well here. 
 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, paid a total of 18,000 . . . well 

roughly $18,150 whatever.  I didn't get that exact figure of the 

one quarter -- 10,150, I believe you said.  Anyways we'll just 

say in round figures $18,000.  So really when you take the 

$10,000 off the house, you only paid 8,000 for the land.  Is that 

correct? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not correct.  The 18,000 

was for the land.  The improvements were another 10,380.  So 

the total purchase with the land and improvements would have 

been 28 to 29,000, in that range. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So the round figures are 29,000 now.  

They've changed now because I asked you what they pay for 

the half section of land, and I've never heard anybody in my 

life ever say, what did you pay for that half section of land, and 

they'll say well I paid $200 an acre, $300 an acre, $500 an acre, 

and then find out afterward that he put another $100 an acre 

into the buildings.  So it looks to me like he paid almost as 

much for these old buildings as he did for the land, so it must 

be real poor land. 
 

Now I'd like to ask these particular questions pertaining to the 

buildings on the land at that time.  I know you started to tell me 

some of them.  I want to know if there was a barn on the land at 

that time, the size of the barn, and the shape of the barn . . . or I 

mean what shape it was in, was it an old wreck of a barn.  

There are some beautiful barns in Saskatchewan yet, so maybe 

is it a good barn at 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

that time?  Was there a quonset?  Was there a shop, granaries, 

and what other buildings?  I know you did start into that and I 

kind of cut you off, Mr. Minister.  So could we get an outline 

exactly what buildings were on the farm when they bought it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Right, I will go through the list I 

did again.  I will pass this over to you so you'll have it when I 

get through it.  I don't know how many copies I have.  The 

residence was 1,080 square feet valued at $7,860; 2 steel bins 

at 1,050; plywood bin at 450; three old granaries for $150; an 

old garage for $50; and garage for 720; barn and other old 

buildings for $100.  That was the total of $10,380 which was 

what the improvements were at the time the land bank 

purchased it. 

 

Now the evaluation when they purchased these assets back 

from Mr. Oster were residence 1,250 square foot, because the 

house had been built onto in 1982 and expanded, and I think a 

new basement put under it, and renovated -- that was valued at 

$30,000; a steel workshop which was built during that time 

period for $21,330; two steel bins for $1,500; a garage for 

$350; a garage and carport which was added to the 

improvements, $2,000.  And services, there was a well dug 

valued at $6,800; trenching for $1,400; dugout and power site, 

$2,000; telephone services, $1,000; natural gas, $2,600; 

fencing, $1,000.  And the total improvements in 1992, when 

they were purchased from Mr. Oster, were $71,720. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I only picked up the house, 

that there was $30,000 spent on the house.  And then I picked 

up some of the small . . . It looked like the house was the main 

improvement but I didn't pick up the workshop and the 

quonset.  I wonder if you'd send it over to me please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm just getting it photocopied, so I 

can get you copies.  We only have one copy. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'll ask another question while they're 

getting that.  The 1,250 square-foot house, that's what it was 

after it was renovated.  Now what was the structure and the size 

of the house to start with before he started on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The size of the house was 1,080 

square feet, I believe. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So what they did is built a little onto the 

house.  Looks like a 170 square feet was built on and some 

improvements to the house for 30,000.  Do we have that 

correct, Mr. Minister?  Then you must have built on . . . you 

said 1,080 feet to 1,250 feet.  It's 170 square feet for $30,000.  

So we have that straight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe so.  The house was built 

on to.  And I think there was a new basement put under it and 

some major improvements to the house in 1982 valued at 

$30,000 in 1992. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So when I get . . . Perhaps I have to wait 

until I see that list.  I just have to look at that list before I ask 

any more questions. 

Mr. Minister, I have some questions I want to ask on here.  The 

residence, you said 1982.  That was the renovation was done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What year was the workshop -- it says steel 

-- what year was that built and what size? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It was built in 1987.  It's 36 by 48 

by 14 feet; poured concrete grade beam and slab form floor; 

two by six frame with metal exterior; insulated and lined; gas 

radiant heater, and I guess that's it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Did I get you straight when you said . . . if 

you wouldn't give them quite so fast, Mr. Minister, I'm trying 

to write these down -- 36 by 38 by 14 high, is that what you 

said, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It's 36 by 48 by 14, that's correct. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, the two steel bins, what year 

were they purchased and what size are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know what size they are.  

There are two steel bins on the improvements at the time that 

they purchased it and two steel bins on the . . . again in '92.  

Whether they're the same two steel bins, I don't know. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- We see on the map here they're 

1,350-bushel bins -- just little bins.  The plywood bin . . . I 

won't ask you to give me the year on that.  I would take that's 

probably an old bin if the value's at $350. 

 

The garage and carport -- $2,000.  What year was that built on, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't have the information as to 

what date those were built. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- It says the well . . . I take that the ones that 

didn't have a year beside it, that they must be old because now 

they got the well -- $6,800 in 1987.  And then trenching, I 

would say that that would probably go with it in the same year 

-- $1,400 dugout and power site; $2,000 telephone services.  

What would the telephone services be for $1,100? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know specifically what 

those are for, whether it's for a private line dug in or coaxial 

cable for a computer or whatever. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well now, Mr. Minister, I think that . . . You 

see, in question period, Mr. Minister, we weren't able to ask 

you these detailed questions.  Now we've got to the tragedy of 

this thing, and it is a disaster.  I'm going to tell you that any 

time that one of your own, an NDP candidate, gets 71,000 for 

$71,000 paid out over all these years, is absolutely a 

give-away.  I hope you treat the other 1,100 people like this 

because this is terrible, absolutely disaster. 

 

I build a house in 1986 on my farm, right away from the main 

farm, and it's approximately $100,000 in 1986, and 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

it was a 1,500 square-foot house, completely finished 

basement, and attached garage; had to bring the water a quarter 

of a mile. And I remember an appraiser telling me at that time, 

or an individual friend that was an appraiser, says that that 

farm, that house, why did you build it on the farm -- I'm only 2 

miles from town -- why didn't you build it in town because 

your $100,000 house is worth $35,000 today?  That's how fast 

they depreciate. 

 

You couldn't possibly ever call it logic and not political 

patronage here to have someone spend $71,720 over all these 

years and then give him $71,000.  Now there's no way.  There 

isn't a way in the world that you can answer that with any logic 

whatsoever other than political patronage. 

 

And after having such a good evening here, I'm sorry to have to 

come down on you hard, but how else can I do it?  I just said to 

my colleagues that I know for sure, without a doubt, that if 

there's $70,000, there'd have to be 3 or $400,000 spent to pay 

out $70,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It's hard to answer logically a 

question that isn't a very logical question. 

 

The values that we gave you were the values that we appraised 

those properties at, and they were paid at the appraised value.  

That is not what Mr. Oster spent on those improvements.  We 

paid $30,000 for a house; he probably spent more than $30,000 

renovating. 

 

That was treated in exactly the same manner as every other 

farmer was and every other lessee is treated in the same way.  I 

had nothing to do with this; did not even know that it was 

going on.  This was done by the standard, by-the-book process 

and the land was valued.  I'm surprised that the members 

opposite would have lands branch take advantage of farmers 

who are forced to give up their lease, and try to steal their 

improvements from them at far less than what they're worth.  I 

think that that was a very fair assessment; it was done by the 

book; and there certainly is no patronage involved in it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you were just elected eight, 

nine months ago and you're an honourable man.  I take it to be 

that or you couldn't have got elected.  And for you to stand here 

and give me the figures, figure by figure, what was spent, this 

is what it cost.  And that's reasonable -- building 200 or 150 

square feet . . . 170 feet on a residence in 1982 -- to me it's 

pretty high, but we'll give the benefit of the doubt -- $30,000.  

That's a lot of money, in 1982, to spend $30,000 on building 

170 square feet and renovating it.  That's a lot of money.  And 

you told me that this is exactly what was the cost. 

 

And then when I bring it to your attention, you stand up and 

say, oh no, he paid . . . it cost him much more than this; it cost 

much more.  Did it cost him 3 or $400,000? 

 

And then I ask you, if you look in page 76 of the Estimates, 

where is it in here that you had $1 to pay him from?  Have you 

paid the man yet?  Has he got his cheque?  And where did it 

come from?  Because you go down here, acquisition of land 

and improvements capital, zero. 

 

Come on.  Level with me, Mr. Minister.  You're under oath 

in this here room.  This is the Legislative Assembly and you 

are under oath.  And I expect you to tell me the facts and 

exactly the facts. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm quite glad to 

supply the member with the facts.  I just wish he would listen 

and get the facts straight.  The facts are, those numbers that we 

gave are appraisal.  We don't ask him what he spent on them.  

We don't ask what the costs were.  We appraised those on a fair 

market value, and we pay them out on a fair market value. 

 

I have here a copy of an appraisal that Mr. Oster had done by a 

private appraiser.  He values the improvements at $84,000.  

We, as a department, thought those were high.  We went with 

our own appraisal which comes in at 71,000, done by the book 

and, I think, a very fair appraisal. 

 

And for the members opposite to stand up here and accuse my 

officials of patronage and incompetence, I think is not very 

professional of them.  And I think he should also remember 

that he is also in the legislature here.  And this is not . . . We're 

doing Estimates and not trying to slander people's characters 

here tonight. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the Minister of Agriculture on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would ask for leave for introduction of 

guests, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce two 

friends in the Speaker's gallery here: Patti Ranschaert, who is 

the financial officer at the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, has served the association long and well and 

continues to do that; and Glenn Schmidt who worked in the 

computer services at SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) and is now with a private computer firm in 

Regina.  I ask you to join me in welcoming them to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Vote 43 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know where this is 

going to end.  But it's not going to end by you standing up here 

saying the kind of statements you said. 

 

We are the opposition.  We have the right to ask you the 

questions, and we can stay here until doomsday until you 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

answer the questions.  This is our right.  This is absolutely our 

right, day after day after day unless this government brings 

down closure on Estimates -- never been done. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want you to come clean because we'll look in 

Hansard tomorrow.  We can't look at it tonight, but these are 

the figures that you gave for the cost of the renovations. And 

then when I caught you in the trap that I was hoping I wasn't 

going to get you in because I thought for sure, I thought for 

sure that we'd have like a large, large figure and that . . .  You'd 

have to have to pay this man $71,000, he would have to have at 

least 3 or 400,000 spent on that yard.  It would depreciate that 

fast. 

 

Now let's talk about, you think that somebody went back to 

four years and you appraised the well of being worth $6,800.  I 

mean the trenching, $1,400; the dugout and the power site, 

$2,000; telephone services; all-weather driveway; natural gas.  

Because I can prove it right here that these are the actual 

figures.  You're caught in your own trap if you don't even 

realize it.  Well, $2,600 is what the Progressive Conservatives 

cost to put in natural gas and that's what's down here, $2,600?  

Full recovery.  How do you put down and get a man full 

recovery when he's using it?  So that means you've given him 

full recovery all through the whole list. 

 

Now I know you got good officials around you here tonight, 

and we're not blaming them because I don't think that this 

year's scandal ever even started in Regina.  It's happened with 

some bureaucrat some place else, but it happened that this 

favoured . . . I don't know why you picked an NDP candidate 

that got defeated.  I could see maybe somebody in a riding that 

won a riding, but they didn't even deliver the riding.  It cost you 

$71,000.  You didn't even win the riding for goodness sakes. 

 

But I mean, it is the worst thing that I've ever heard because 

you got up here under oath and said that oh no, he paid much 

more than that, that this is depreciated value what he valued at.  

How do you get $2,600 for natural gas and is still $2,600?  And 

you're going to find out that that is the price.  Do you think that 

I'm not a farmer and don't know what a 1,350 steel bin is 

worth?  Well I'll tell you what it's worth because you haven't 

even got the year beside it, so it means it's likely old. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 1972. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- 1972 my colleague says and $1,500 is a lot 

of money. 

 

Now we're not going to get stopped here until you stand up 

here, Mr. Minister, and quit defending somebody in your 

department because somebody in your department should be 

without a job.  So whoever did this, and some agrologist, 

whoever did this, somebody should be without a job.  You've 

laid enough people off and hired enough of your own NDP to 

come back in.  Every department's done it. 

 

Now here's one that should go.  And you as the minister should 

not be standing here and protecting that individual.  And don't 

you step . . . get up and waste your time saying that we're 

bringing scandals to the legislature.  We're bringing facts. 

Because I sit here and I watched here in Estimates not more 

than a year or two ago the member from North Battleford going 

on to bringing individuals' names in about a gravel scandal up 

in Meadow Lake with Energy and Mines and kept Estimates 

for days over it.  It went on for days and days.  You new 

members weren't here.  I've been here for 15 years and I know 

what goes on around this place.  I know what you're capable of.  

I know that the NDP is capable of paying their own. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there's no sense keeping on.  

We've proved it.  And tomorrow you're going to get it back in 

question period tomorrow like I've ever seen.  We're going to 

spend a half an hour on you tomorrow and then a half an hour 

the next day, because you have admitted it all here tonight.  

You admitted it.  And what proves it is the figures.  The figures 

prove it all the way down the line. 

 

And then you rent the land back at $8 an acre.  I mean what a 

crud; 8-point-something dollars per acre he leases it back for.  

There isn't . . . I guarantee you that if Farm Credit or 

Agricultural Credit Corporation or lands branch or any lender 

in Saskatchewan put that whole farm up for sale, they could not 

begin to get 70,000 for the entire farm -- with the land and all 

the buildings.  You couldn't recover it.  It's impossible. 

 

You couldn't sell the land for what lands branch paid for it or 

land bank 20 years ago.  You couldn't sell it for that and get 

another 70,000 for the buildings because we all know -- the 

minister from Rosetown knows; the Minister of Agriculture 

and anybody that's a farmer in this room here knows -- that 

once you've got a . . . build a set of farm buildings and you go 

to resell it, unless you built it the day . . . even build it the day 

before, you've lost 50 per cent.  And here you are, paying 100 

per cent of recovery.  It's the most disgraceful thing I've ever 

heard happen with the NDP government I think since I've been 

here in 15 years.  It's the worst I ever seen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm amazed at the 

appraisal skills of the member opposite.  I might point out that 

he was just complaining a little while ago that the price of 

putting natural gas on farms has actually gone up, so maybe we 

didn't assess enough. 

 

Two 1,350 bushel bins for $1,500, he thinks that's outrageous.  

He thinks $30,000 for a 1,250 square-foot house is outrageous.  

I point again -- here's an appraiser, Apex appraisals, somebody 

who does this for a living, appraised these improvements at 

$84,000.  That's a professional, somebody who does it for a 

living. 

 

I think the member opposite can sit here without seeing the 

buildings, without seeing the house, without seeing the steel 

shed and say this is outrageous.  I certainly wouldn't try to 

attempt to appraise buildings in Maple Creek from sitting in the 

legislature.  And I don't think the member opposite should 

either. 

 

And I also don't think that he should be questioning the 

professionalism and the competence of Rural Development 

staff, sitting here looking at numbers and saying this is a 

ridiculous way to appraise it because my 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

house is only worth something.  I think in all fairness to the 

professional people who did this and the policy that we have, 

which I think is fair to the lessees who are turning back 

improvements . . . We have no desire to rip off . . . and lessees 

who are turning back their land, who have worked hard and put 

improvements on those lands over the years . . . And so I think 

that this is a very fair appraisal. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- But I'll challenge any agrologist in your 

department, that you can give me the picture of any set of 

buildings . . . Or not even the picture, just tell me when they 

were built and give me all the machinery, and I can come 

closer than the average individual in this province.  I've done it 

for years.  And I can do it.  You give me the list of every piece 

of machinery on your farm, the size of your house, when it was 

built, and you and I can sit down.  And we know what's it 

worth.  It's worth what you can get out of it. 

 

And you're putting prices on here.  You're saying that I'm 

saying it's ridiculous -- that $30,000.  I didn't say it was 

ridiculous to spend $30,000 on that house.  It probably was 

right.  But you can't pay out your buddies that much money.  

You can't pay out your friends what he put into it 10 years ago . 

. . spend $30,000 on a house 10 years ago and get the cheque 

for it today.  Come on now.  Talk to your officials and get this 

thing straight.  You got some good people sitting around you 

that are qualified.  Get them to give you the straight goods.  

And I want you to tell us who the agrologist was.  Who was the 

agrologist that did the appraisal on that farm? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The appraisal was done at the 

Swift Current office.  I don't know which staff member did it.  I 

don't think I . . . From looking at the independent appraisal that 

was done by an independent appraiser, I think this certainly is 

well within guidelines.  And I think the staff has done a 

professional job at appraising this.  And I don't know which 

staff person was actually involved in doing it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I feel sorry for you really 

because this is not your fault.  A man like you with high stature 

comes in here, and you're put into the cabinet.  And you're left 

here with a mess like this to have to handle.  You've got to 

stand up here and mislead the rural Saskatchewan over 

something like this. 

 

Of course we just talked about it a little while ago when I said 

when we formed government in 1982, we were getting the 

agrologist and the appraisers out of the department to appraise 

land to sell it.  It was so ridiculous that they were appraising 

land at $400 an acre that wasn't worth only 150.  And to prove 

it, I can give you the numbers of the land.  And you can go 

back.  And I can give it to you right in my own area where I 

didn't interfere other than give the man the right and to go and 

to get a private appraiser.  And land that these agrologists and 

appraisers out of the department were coming up with $400 an 

acre because the philosophy of the old NDP was never to sell 

the land.  So that followed right through to the agrologists there 

at that time.  How do I know it's not the same agrologist there 

today?  That he wants to appraise land at a high price and 

appraise these buildings. 

 

You can't tell me that it's right and it's proper.  And I'm 

going to get off this because we're not getting any place.  

You're not admitting it because you can't.  You can't admit it.  

There's no way that you can stand up here as minister and say . 

. . You should.  I would just say, to heck with my front-row 

benches and I would say, if somebody made a blunder like this 

in my department if I was minister, I would stand up and say, 

yes, the member from Arm River and to the member from 

Maple Creek, that you're absolutely right and some agrologist 

overestimated and then . . . You haven't even answered my 

question.  Where in the world is the money to pay for it?  

Where's the money?  It wasn't in the budget.  Where's the 

money? 

 

Turn to page 76.  Under acquisition of land and improvements 

capital, you've got zero there.  Has he been paid?  Or how's he 

going to get paid or what's going on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- If the member looks on page 93, 

you will see the vote there.  It's investment in Crown land held 

for resale, estimated for '92-93, $250,000.  And that's the 

money from which the funds came. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You're saying under loans, advances and 

investments, that that's where the money could come from, 

under that $250,000.  Are you sure of that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes I am. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I guess you're right.  It had to come 

from some place.  You sent another document over here, a 

minister's briefing note that you sent over to us.  And it's 

talking here about the total improvement value, $71,720.  

House, shop, water systems, out-buildings, phones, power, 

natural gas.  Improvement value of 71,720 and less permit fees, 

2,291.07, and less improvement balance, 2,865.90.  What is 

that for?  For a net pay-out of 66,563.  Tell me what the 

2,865.90 is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The balance of . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Saskatoon Wildwood on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- By leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(2200) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, someone seated in the west gallery along with a 

couple of members of the fifth estate.  I would like to introduce 

Mr. Jamie Jonasson, formerly of Vancouver who is on his way 

to Ottawa to Carleton University and I would hope that 

members of the Assembly would warmly welcome him and 

wish him well in all his future endeavours. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Department of Rural Development 

Vote 43 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The $2,291.07 was the lease fee for 

the year which was deducted from the amount and the 

$2,865.90 was the amount owing on improvements that was 

still to be paid.  Improvements were paid under the contract 

over, I believe, a 25-year period so that would be the balance 

that was left owing on the improvements. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You mean to tell me, Mr. Minister, that all 

these years he's been paying on the improvements that he 

bought from you, so now you overpay him so he gets paid, gets 

that bill knocked off, gets another 66,000.  I mean this guy he's 

had, he's had something really given to him.  He's had a gift.  

It's better than winning a lottery for goodness sakes. 

 

Let's just talk about this here house again, this house, $30,000.  

It's an old house to start with, it's 31 years old, built in 1961 I 

understand, a thousand and some square feet, 1,080 and it's got 

170 square feet built on in 1982.  And all of a sudden it's worth 

$30,000 and it's a long ways from nowhere I understand.  How 

far is this house from the closest town or post office, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those are not factors that we use in 

our evaluation of improvements.  We do it according to our 

manual and those are not, that's not one of the factors that we 

use in evaluating improvements on farm land. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Then what did you use then?  What kind of 

a factor did you use?  You must have had a dandy set of figures 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- You have those in the sheet that I 

gave you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, let's just go back.  For 

example, there's a house 2 miles . . . town of Craik, built brand 

new, 1976, $100,000, on a 3.7 acre acreage, 2 miles from the 

town of Craik.  It's my own home. 

 

I've had it appraised, $25,000 and it's in beautiful shape with 

1,500 square feet, 1,500 square feet finished in the basement, a 

double garage and an endless water supply -- it comes from a 

quarter of a mile away of course but still  

_- and it's all landscaped.  And they tell me the value by 

appraisers of that whole entire home 2 miles from town is 

$25,000.  How do you get a home to be appraised at $30,000 

just for the improvements?  I mean, my goodness, he can't get 

paid for what was there to start with because he's still paying 

on it.  Somebody else . . . the lands branch bought . . . Well 

don't laugh.  The minister's laughing.  For goodness' sakes, go 

back.  The lands branch paid Mr. Stevenson for the home and 

the buildings to start with.  He paid for the 1,080 square feet or 

lands branch paid for it once.  We're not talking about a new 

home built in 1982.  We're talking about $30,000 worth of 

renovations. 

 

Now how far is this here farm home from the closest post 

office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again, the $30,000 

is not for the improvements.  It's the total value of the home, 

remembering that Mr. Oster has purchased this home over the 

period of years that he leased the land.  And now he's selling it 

back to us.  I want to remind the member opposite that we 

haven't changed our policy for valuing farm improvements.  

This is the policy we took over from the previous government.  

Perhaps it's one that we should look at.  Maybe we should be a 

little tougher on farmers and try to squeeze a few pennies out 

of our lessees who give up their lease and have to leave the 

land and try to recover some more money from them.  But 

that's the current policy which we took over.  We valued this 

according to that policy, and I think, in my opinion, it's a fair 

policy and a fair evaluation. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I could tell you, Mr. Minister, you 

never got that policy from any Progressive Conservative 

government because we used completely outside appraisers.  

And you will never find a farm home in Saskatchewan . . . that 

a home built in 1961 and built $30,000 worth of renovations on 

it -- and that's 10 years ago -- and then you got a total of 71,000 

paid entirely on the farm.  I mean your own figures prove it.  

And then pay him $71,000.  I mean, it just never happened.  

Did they allow . . . did he do any improvements to the land?  

Was the land improved?  Did he . . . Maybe some of this is 

improvements in the land.  Did he get paid maybe some of this 

for . . . that you . . . There's got to be something wrong here.  

There's got to be something, some unanswered puzzle here.  

Did he bury a bunch of rock piles?  Did he bury trees?  What 

did he do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials who 

were here under both administrations assure me that this is 

exactly the same policy the Progressive Conservative 

government used when they valued land.  There's been no 

change in the policy, and this is the system that was used. 

 

And again, we valued these improvements.  What you have 

over there is a list of the total value of the improvements, what 

was there when land bank purchased them from Mr. Stevenson 

and were sold to Mr. Oster, and was purchased again from Mr. 

Oster by the land bank.  The total value of all the buildings and 

improvements were there.  And again, all I can say is that in 

our opinion and in the opinion of a private appraiser who does 

this for a living -- and appraised it at 84,000 -- I think 71,000 

was a very fair appraisal value. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: --   Well I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that it 

was not Progressive Conservative policy to go out and appraise 

land and appraise buildings in 1982 because in July 1982 over 

there, we ceased to buy any more land.  We didn't.  It was 

somebody lost their land like this.  Certainly we appraised the 

buildings.  But you can stand up there and say, Mr. Minister, 

you can stand up there and say . . . and you can't say anything 

else because you're caught in a real trap.  You can stand there 

and say, well the same system, the same agrologist, the same 

people doing 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

it.  But maybe if they had done it right and properly and maybe 

if there hadn't been an NDP defeated candidate, maybe they 

would have valued the whole setup at about $20,000. 

 

Somebody was really helping this individual.  Someone was 

helping to pay off a candidate.  And I feel sorry for you, Mr. 

Minister, to have to be the one to take . . . And this isn't just 

something brand-new in lands branch.  This kind of stuff has 

been going on for years.  And I'm sorry to say that the nine and 

a half years we were there, we never got the mess cleaned up.  

We tried.  It's going to take a lot of many years.  And you got 

some good officials around you; ask them tomorrow, tonight.  

Ask them, help me clean this mess up.  Stop somebody from 

going out and doing what they did.  Stop these things.  This 

isn't the only one in the province. 

 

If it wasn't getting hours, wasn't getting late, and I got some 

more questions, and my colleagues want to ask . . . I'd get into 

some more because you're great at it.  There was nobody 

greater than the NDP as to how they favoured people and 

paying them off.  You've been doing it for ever. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, one of the items you sent over was the employee . . . 

(inaudible) . . . report.  And I wonder if you'd mind explaining 

a little bit of the figures and numbers and codes on this for me.  

Where it says "job" on here, it's rated one, two, or three.  Now 

what does that mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that is simply 

tracking people through to the department.  The ones with a 

one, that's their first and only job.  If they moved to a new job 

in a department, then they're a two, and the three and so on if 

they moved to another job. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Further on it says position, type, number 

and then VW hours.  What does VW hours mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those with the designation of 100 

are out-of-scope employees who have no defined hours of 

work. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under 

appointments you have CD, and then it has a whole bunch of 

letters like double A's or NA's or double M's.  What do those 

all stand for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's the Public Service 

Commission coding.  We don't have the code for it here.  We 

can get it for you tomorrow if you like, but it's a Public Service 

Commission code that's on the employees. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd appreciate 

that if you would, please. 

 

Further over it says, PS  class M O D.  What do those stand for 

and what do the numbers under the PS stand for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's the Public Service 

classification of different jobs and salary ranges.  That's their 

job classification in the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, would you mind 

providing some sort of information as to how to interpret all 

these numbers then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As I looked 

over this form, I come up with, I believe, 54 new employees.  

Now they're not all permanent; some of them are part-times. 

 

I'm wondering what these employees are hired for.  I don't 

mean the individuals, but I'm wondering if perhaps a number of 

them are summer employment, if that's what it is, because 

there's quite a number of them that were hired in May. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those would be seasonal workers, 

mostly pasture riders and ferry operators, I believe. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When 

I look over the list, the salaries range quite a bit.  Would the 

higher-paid salaries be also in the class of pasture riders or 

ferry operators, or would they be more administrative staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The higher ranges are in the 

professional classes.  As a general rule, the higher ranges 

would be agrologists, or land agrologists, and that sort of thing 

rather than seasonal employees. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would it be safe to assume that those at 

the lower end of the pay scales would be the seasonal 

employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No. It would depend on the 

classification.  There may be permanent employees who have 

lower salary ranges than some of the temporary ones, 

depending on their classification. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, there are a few 

positions on here where they have starting dates, dates they 

were hired, but there's no name beside them.  And then below 

them in a number of cases there's a term, encumbering job.  

What does that mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those are . . . Sometimes when we 

have permanent employees who are not available, we hire 

somebody on a temporary basis to fill that position.  That's 

called an encumbered job because it's only temporary until the 

permanent person is available for the position again. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well for what period of time would 

these jobs be classified as encumbering jobs?  Would it just be 

for a one-month period, or a three-month period, or could it be 

an extended period of time?  Could you be looking at 

potentially a year or longer for these part-time positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In addition to the situation I 

described, those positions could also be where the permanent 

employee quits or retires, or whatever, and we fill them on a 

temporary basis.  So until we get the permanent employee, the 

position filled, or for an example if somebody's away on a 

maternity leave, then 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

it's encumbered until that person comes back or until we fill the 

position.  And in many cases, if that is a position that we need 

to fill permanently, the temporary person may well have the 

opportunity to apply for the permanent position. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can understand 

keeping the position open in the case of a maternity leave.  But 

when the position is open for an extended period of time for 

other reasons, is it not incumbent on you and your department 

to fill that position with a permanent employee after some 

period of time?  It's very well to hire a temporary employee 

initially while a search is perhaps in place to find an employee.  

But at some point in time, Mr. Minister, is it not proper to fill 

that position with a permanent employee, rather than simply 

carrying on a temporary employee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There is a time limit on it. Two 

years is the longest that we can do it.  We try to do those on a 

very short-term basis.  I agree with the member that it is 

incumbent on us to fill them as soon as we possibly can.  And 

generally, we try to do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On the list 

here you have locations, and all locations are under code 

abbreviations of the names.  I wonder if you could also give us, 

when you're giving us the other information, what some of 

these codes mean.  I'm looking at MCD.  I think it's MCD.  It 

could be MOD C.  And to me that means nothing.  I wonder if 

you could supply us with information to interpret these 

abbreviations that you have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we can do that.  Just the 

computer print-outs to keep them on a nice, neat line.  We can 

fill out those names for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

I'd like to go on to a different topic now, concerning wildlife 

lands and how Rural Development treats them in dealing with 

the RMs.  And I have a letter here from an RM in my 

constituency. 

 

 We have been notified that lands within our municipality 

may be designated as critical wildlife habitat.  These lands 

are . . . (And they go on to list about 8 or 9 quarters.)  Council 

are opposed to these lands being taken for wildlife.  We 

understand that 30 quarters have been purchased along the 

Moose Creek and Alameda dam for wildlife.  Why then do 

we have to donate more of our taxable land to wildlife? 

 

This concern has been ongoing in that area for quite a while, 

Mr. Minister, because of the Alameda dam project.  And 

because of mitigation involved in that project, a fair amount of 

land -- 30 quarters -- was picked up as wildlife mitigation land.  

Because it's wildlife land now, the RM does not receive any tax 

monies for that and they are very interested in receiving grants 

in lieu. 

 

Not only is this RM interested in receiving grants in lieu for 

any wildlife lands within their tax area, but a number of the 

other RMs in my constituency are also concerned about the 

various pieces of wildlife land -- it's designated 

wildlife land, it may be owned by lands branch -- around the 

area that they do not receive grants in lieu of. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you make any comments on that and will you 

be prepared to provide grants in lieu for those wildlife lands 

within the RM tax base? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- All the land that's designated under 

critical wildlife pays taxes to the RMs.  It's treated no 

differently to the RMs than any other leased land.  It's not taken 

for wildlife, it's used for grazing and just maintained in some 

natural state so that wildlife can co-exist there. 

 

The lands that are purchased on the fish and game development 

fund, the municipalities get grants in lieu of taxes for that.  The 

only land that I'm not sure about is the 30 quarters that was 

purchased for mitigation in the Alameda area and I will check 

into that on whether or not there are grants in lieu of taxes for 

that land. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  Does 

your department, the Rural Development, through lands 

branch, own the land surrounding the Alameda project there, 

those 30 quarters?  Is that property held by your land, by your 

department, excuse me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That land is presently held by 

Souris Basin Development Authority and may well be 

transferred to either lands branch or more likely to Natural 

Resources when SBDA (Souris Basin Development Authority) 

is wound down some time later this year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And at that time, Mr. Minister, or 

perhaps even currently because the municipalities may not be 

receiving any tax money off of that 30 quarters or any grants in 

lieu, will they then be receiving a grant in lieu for those 30 

quarters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think it's somewhat uncertain as 

to how that land will be treated.  If it's put into a natural 

resource and treated as a park, there may well not be grants in 

lieu of taxes if it's indeed used by . . . transferred to Rural 

Development.  It probably would be.  I think that's something 

that we need to talk about with the RMs about, with the local 

people, as we work to get a lands-use policy around that. 

 

And I think we need to look at the possibility of, at some time 

in the future, possibly doing the same sort of thing we do with 

critical wildlife land, is that it may well be that we can sustain 

some agriculture and grazing or haying on the same land and 

thereby get some agricultural use out of this land at some point 

and then have taxes raised by lessee.  So I think again I'm not 

aware of what the current situation is, and the future of that 

project is still somewhere up in the air, still controlled by 

SBDA.  I would be unable to give a commitment as to exactly 

what the future of that land will be. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you anticipated my 

next question when it comes time to talk about use of that land.  

In talking with the RM council in that area, they are very 

concerned about having that land indeed used for some purpose 

rather than leaving it sit there without 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

doing anything with it -- simply calling it wildlife land.  If I 

look around the various pieces of wildlife land that we do have 

in our constituency, what's happened to it is -- because it's not 

being used, it's not being grazed -- it becomes more or less a 

one species, one grass type developed becomes dominant 

throughout the whole piece of land.  And you actually end up 

with very little wildlife living on those pieces of land. 

 

I was discussing with the grass specialists, with the stock 

growers' association this very issue and that studies that he has 

done have proven that that if you leave a piece of land without 

utilizing it, without having hoof action on it, without breaking 

up the sod through the use of animals on it, you do develop a 

system where you have one grass type growing on it and 

nothing else grows.  You don't have a diverse ecology on the 

piece of land.  You have one-species land. 

 

And so the 30 quarters that is in the Alameda area does have a 

very diverse ecology on it.  And if you don't utilize that land in 

some manner, either haying it or using it for grazing land, then 

you will develop an area where the wildlife itself will not 

utilize that piece of land. 

 

So I would really encourage you to take that land into the lands 

branch rather than going to Natural Resources.  If Natural 

Resources is not prepared to have that land utilized for 

agriculture in some means, then I think it should be in the lands 

branch area. 

 

And that is the feeling of the RM in the area.  They feel that 

that land should be used for agriculture in some way or 

manner.  And then the lease payments, either the sale of hay or 

the grazing lease payments, could then be used as taxes in lieu, 

if they could receive a portion of that commensurate with what 

the tax would have been paid on that piece of land under 

private ownership. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment here today to try 

and seek that land for lands branch to use it in some sort of 

agricultural purpose, either as hay land or grazing land, and 

perhaps the lease payments or a grant in lieu from the 

department to compensate those RMs (rural municipality) for 

that loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We'll certainly commit to taking 

the member's suggestions into consideration.  I think we have 

to remember that with our licence to build a dam, we have 

some legal obligations to mitigate wildlife.  And we are now 

planting some trees.  And I don't know what our specific legal 

obligations are in whether or not it may be possible to get 

multiple uses out of this land. 

 

I think . . . I certainly take the suggestion to heart.  I think that's 

the way that we use our critical wildlife land.  We set aside 

land just . . . and the only restriction on it is that we don't sell it 

or allow wholesale clearing or breaking on it.  And it has 

worked very well over the period since 1984 when it was 

brought in.  It allows the continued agricultural use, keeps . . . 

has a productive value for agriculture and at the same time, as 

you have pointed out, does a very good job of maintaining a 

wildlife population.  So certainly the suggestion is well taken. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

in your department do you have anyone who is a grassland 

specialist?  Not a specialist in crop production, but somebody 

who specializes in grasses rather than in wildlife? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have in our department four 

range-land management specialists. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And those specialists would be . . . their 

specialty would be grasses, would it not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would hope, 

in the planning the . . . where this 30 quarters of land will be 

placed, either in parkland or in lands branch development, that 

you would consult with these people as to the effects of not 

utilizing this land for agriculture, just simply leaving it in one 

block for wildlife.  And I believe that it will create a serious 

problem in the whole area if that does happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other lands that are owned by lands branch 

throughout the province that are designated as wildlife lands, 

are you paying grants in lieu on those properties now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those lands are taxed as are all our 

lease lands are . . .  The lessee pays the tax on the land.  So the 

RMs . . . They're taxed the same as any other land in the RM. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps I'm thinking 

of the wrong type of land.  What I'm thinking of here is land 

that is not used for any agricultural purposes under most 

circumstances.  There is the odd time some grazing leases on 

those lands, but in a lot of cases there isn't.  And perhaps I'm in 

the wrong department here.  I'm not sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think what you're referring to is 

the fish and wildlife development fund lands.  There is part of 

hunters' licence fees that are set aside to purchase land.  We 

purchase those with consultation with the Wildlife Federation, 

and those lands are indeed, as you say, often not used for 

agriculture.  Those lands we pay grants in lieu of taxes on. 

 

(2230) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we have a few 

pieces of land like that around our area.  And when you travel 

through that land, if you walk through there in the fall you 

would normally consider this to be hunting territory.  But 

there's very few deer in that area because it's the wrong type of 

grasses.  It's the wrong type of habitat that has developed there 

because no one is using that land.  And I would believe on 

those lands also that it would be very worthwhile if you would 

allow grazing leases on that.  Will you give some consideration 

to that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, we will consider those.  

Those lands are held by Natural Resources.  But I guess you 

may have the wrong department; you have the right 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

minister so I can answer that.  We have biologists who, of 

course, watch that.  We're concerned about not only game 

animals but birds and others as well.  And certainly I think we 

do have, as you say, grazing leases.  We use them sparingly but 

if there is a benefit to agricultural use, and as you say, at times 

they can actually enhance the wildlife potential of it, we'll 

certainly take those into consideration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when you walk 

through these pieces of land, the ground cover is so thick, the 

grass is so thick, that there are very few of the ground-dwelling 

animals that live within those pieces of property.  Basically it's 

only the mice that live on the ground underneath the grasses, 

that are left there.  Most of the other animals avoid these 

places.  The deer hardly ever travel through them. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you're handling lands branch lands, what is 

the procedures that a client would have to go through to acquire 

a lease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is the process, you apply for a 

lease of land that's available.  It's the same process that I just 

described to your colleague whereby you make an application 

form; there's a point system based on age and distance and so 

on, and you acquire the land in that manner. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, once you have that lease in 

place, would it be a normal practice that if you wish to 

maintain the lease, that you would be allowed to renew it every 

year or every three years or whatever the term of the lease was 

for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  The standard lease that we 

give is a 33-year lease.  So unless it's a situation where we have 

land that's temporarily vacant and we don't have time to 

advertise or, I think in the past, land that has been temporarily 

held to be put up for auction, for sale, was leased on a 

short-term, one-year contract.  And then that was tendered and 

probably re-tendered each year.  But once we do permanent 

leases, they're normally 33 years in duration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So anyone who held a short-term lease, 

as a year, that would normally be land that you would be 

prepared to move in some manner or another -- you're planning 

on selling it or you're planning on changing the manner in 

which it is being handled.  You could be switching it from 

grassland to grain land or vice versa or something like that, you 

mean, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that is correct.  The example 

in point, case in point, was the case that your colleague made 

with Mr. Oster's land whereby a lease is let go close to seeding 

time or close to spring, and there isn't time to tender the land 

and to find lessees and go through the process or whatever.  For 

whatever reason that we have some land that's not in a 

long-term lease and we need to look after it in some way for a 

year, then we tender it out on a one-year basis. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, if in the case of a piece of 

property that a client had been leasing on a one-year basis, and 

that client wished to retain the lease 

on a longer term, would it be possible for him to approach the 

department to gain a longer-term lease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No.  In a case that we wanted to 

have a longer-term lease, then we would have to post it.  The 

short-term lessee would certainly be eligible to apply, but he 

would have to apply through a competition and go through the 

same point system as anybody else in order to get it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, under what circumstances 

would you normally sell land?  Why would you dispose of 

lands branch property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Any Crown land that's not under 

some restriction such as critical wildlife is available for sale at 

any time if the lessee applies to buy it, gets it appraised, and 

we'll sell it.  And as I say, we're reviewing that policy.  The 

rent-to-own is not being used at the present time but we are 

reviewing our whole land-sale policy.  But basically any land 

that doesn't have a restriction on it, if a lessee applies to buy it 

and has it appraised, it is for sale. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm thinking of a 

piece of property down at Kisbey which is hay land.  There are 

three farmers leasing the quarter section of land.  They each 

have a block of it.  As far as I know those three farmers would 

like to continue leasing it, continue using it as hay land. 

 

They have been leasing it now for a couple or three years as 

hay land, but they've been informed that the land will now be 

put up for sale next year.  And I'm just wondering why the 

department is selling this particular piece of property at Kisbey. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm not sure on that particular case.  

I have a case in mind; I'm not sure if this is the same one.  

There was some fish and wildlife development land that was 

bought for a project to raise ducks on.  It was low land that was 

going to have a Ducks Unlimited project or some such thing on 

it.  The land had dried up, and therefore the fish and wildlife 

development fund wants to sell that land. 

 

That's a particular case which is not Rural Development land, 

not lands branch land.  Now if you give me the particulars of 

that particular situation, I can look into it, but it may be 

something along those lines. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you may 

know the piece of land from your description because it was 

indeed purchased.  It has been, at some point in the past, a 

fairly large slough.  And the farmer had broken it up and was 

cultivating at least a portion of it, and it was expected that at 

some point in time water would again arrive in Saskatchewan, 

and this piece of land would fill up and become a slough again 

for duck use. 

 

That has not happened.  A few years ago it was seeded down to 

grass, and one of the farmers that seeded it to grass has a piece 

of the lease along with two other farmers in the area.  Now I'm 

told that the original owner of the land who sold it back in 

about 1980 or '81 would now like to repurchase the land.  And 

he has been inquiring 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

about such and has contacted your office about trying to buy it 

back. 

 

There was thoughts at one point in time that he would get the 

grass lease this spring.  The farmers who have had the grass 

lease for a few years told me that they normally would get this 

lease set up by at least mid-June, so they could start planning 

whether they were going to have any hay off of that land at all. 

 

What happened this year, is they were pushed back into July 

before a decision was made whether or not to lease them the 

land so that it was very late for them.  In fact, one farmer went 

out and leased other land because he didn't know whether or 

not he was going to have access to this piece of property that 

he'd been getting hay off of before. 

 

So the individual who had owned the land previously, I 

believe, Mr. Minister, is putting pressure on you to sell that 

land so he can re-acquire it again, to open it up for tenders.  Is 

that indeed what is happening in this particular case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think, without having the details 

for the case and run the risk of confusing it with some other 

situation, I believe this is fish and wildlife development fund 

land which has nothing to do with the particular department.  

But again, you do have the right minister. 

 

I believe fish and wildlife development fund does not want to 

hold any agricultural land -- again that's money that comes 

from hunters' licence fees and is administered jointly with the 

Wildlife Federation.  So this is a particular case where they 

bought land for a purpose which is no longer suited and they 

want to sell it and buy other land.  So that particular case -- and 

I believe, if I'm not mistaken, it is the same case -- probably 

that land will be tendered for sale within the coming year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, thank you, Mr. Minister.  In one 

way, I'm sorry to hear that because of the pressure being put on 

you by this particular individual, who is well-known within 

your political party, to indeed get . . . again gain access to this 

land, whereas the other farmers in the area were quite happy 

with the arrangement.  Three farmers had access to this 

property to cut the hay on it, whereas I'm not sure what this 

particular farmer now wants the access for, why he wants it.  I 

don't know that they run cattle or not. 

 

But it seems to be political pressure, Mr. Minister, to dispose of 

this land, rather than perhaps in the best interests of the fish and 

wildlife lands.  Because at some point in time, water will again 

be in that slough, and it will be suited only for the raising of 

ducks.  And I would encourage the fish and wildlife people 

who are administering this land to seriously think about this 

before they do dispose of this land. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you mention that there are 52 rural service 

centres around this province.  Can you . . . Will you make a 

commitment tonight that those 52 rural service centres will 

continue to operate in the foreseeable future in this province. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The foreseeable future is a fairly 

long time.  I've said earlier tonight that we have no plans to 

close service centres in the . . . at this time.  There certainly . . . 

Given the budgetary restraints we are at, and the shifting 

populations and so on, in rural Saskatchewan, I think it would 

be foolhardy to make a commitment that we would not close 

any rural service centres.  Certainly there are no plans at the 

present time to do so. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I am informed that 

one of my colleagues wishes to pursue the rural service centre 

issue with you.  So I'll go on to another issue -- bull purchases 

for lands branch lands.  Would you mind explaining what the 

policy is now on that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The current policy, as I've, I think, 

pointed out in the House before, is that we were caught in a bit 

of a bind because the previous administration slashed 

completely the money for bulls from the budget and left us in a 

bit of a bind.  We are, again, reviewing that policy.  We have a 

questionnaire out this fall to patrons.  We find some 

community pastures where the patrons prefer to buy their own 

bulls; we have other community pastures where the patrons 

prefer government bulls.  I think we've done a very good job in 

the past of supplying bulls. 

 

We raised the breeding fees this spring to come closer to cost 

recovery, and I think that has given some pastures pause to 

reconsider whether or not they can more economically 

purchase their own bulls.  And so I guess where we're at with 

the policy is we're reviewing it for talking to patrons this fall, 

and we will in one way or another have bulls in community 

pastures for the next season. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think the program 

to purchase bulls for community pastures was a very important 

program because what it allowed was those farmers who did 

not wish to purchase a bull for their own particular use, 

especially those that were running small herds, to have access 

to animals and, under the previous program, animals of good 

quality because they were good-quality bulls that were being 

purchased. 

 

Now what can happen is you can have X number of farmers 

putting their animals into a pasture and they may be putting in 

the proper number of bulls, but there's no guarantees that those 

bulls are going to be all of the same quality.  You may have 

somebody purchasing a $500 bull and somebody purchasing a 

$5,000 bull.  Now that's a bit of an extreme example, but you 

can have that kind of a spread in there between the qualities of 

the bulls being purchased and put into those pastures. 

 

Once the animals are in the pastures, there's no guarantee 

which bull will service which cow.  So the person who put in 

the high-priced bull may actually not be receiving the benefit 

of that animal.  So, Mr. Minister, I think it was a worthwhile 

program to have the government purchase bulls within the 

pastures.  Mr. Minister, when a bull had been in that pasture for 

a period of time, was it transferred to another pasture or was it 

disposed of in some manner? 

 

(2245) 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I agree that purchasing bulls was a 

good program or at least a reasonably good program.  I would 

like to point out that when the members opposite were in 

power, they reduced the number of government bulls to about 

half.  We're now at about 700 government-owned bulls and 900 

patron bulls. 

 

As to the rotating of bulls, one bull feeding station services 

several pastures, so by just switching the bulls around at the 

bull station, they're able to keep bulls for five or six years as a 

useful life of a bull.  And with the culling and so on, that hasn't 

been a problem. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, under the previous 

program, what would have been the cost recovery for breeding 

fees and then for sale of the animal at the end of its useful life?  

And what would the same cost recovery be under the method 

you're presently using? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have exact cost centres 

around bull purchases.  My department Estimates that 

something like 44 or $45 per cow that it costs the department to 

purchase bulls.  The breeding fees that we charge now are $35, 

and so, you know, that leaves a small shortfall of costs, but it 

certainly is not a costly program in terms of the government 

because we cover a large portion of our costs from it. 

 

The question then becomes whether patrons think that they can 

provide the services either through bringing their own bulls or 

having a bull committee hire somebody to purchase 

good-quality bulls from or whatever.  They may indeed be able 

to do it cheaper and they may like the quality of bulls that they 

can do better and so on. 

 

So there are advantages and disadvantages to both sides.  Again 

we're not trying to force one or the other on patrons.  I think we 

will, with the questionnaire we do this fall and with talking to 

patron bodies, we will try to determine what the wish of the 

patrons are. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand my colleague from Arm River did get into a few 

questions on the amount of leased land that is administered by 

the Department of Natural Resources.  And he also got into a 

few questions regarding the farm purchase program.  I'm 

wondering how many acres of land actually sold under the 

lease-to-own or the rent-to-own program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The grazing leases, there was 

127,000 acres sold; cultivated leases, 12,000 acres sold; and 

former land bank leases, 35,000 acres for a total of 174,000 

acres and a value of $17.5 million. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Of those acres, how many farm units would this 

have involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that number here.  

We can get it for you tomorrow.  I would, just a wild guess 

would probably be in the 500 range. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Now, Mr. Minister, we're all aware of the fact that 

following the election there was a decision made by new, 

present government regarding the rent-to-own program.  There 

also were a number of individuals who 

did have projects approved.  And in some cases, some money 

had changed hands or a cheque had been sent, a deposit or 

down payment regarding the rent-to-own program.  And I'm 

just wondering, Mr. Minister, did the department honour all the 

commitments they had made to farmers at that time even 

though they had decided to discontinue the program?  Or the 

government, did they make a commitment to those that they 

already had in progress?  Or were there any farmers who were 

left out in the cold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think I answered this question 

earlier but we honoured all the commitments.  All the contracts 

were honoured.  The sort of line we drew was that if an 

appraisal had been done or money had been paid to do an 

appraisal, even though there was no contract yet signed, we 

considered those to be in progress and we completed those 

sales. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's obvious that a number of 

farmers felt that the program was an appropriate way for them 

to establish or re-establish a farm base.  And certainly people 

across Saskatchewan are quite individualistic and would like to 

run their own farm versus continually lease all the land that 

they presently farm. 

 

And you indicated before that the government is basically 

reviewing the program.  I'm wondering where the government 

stands today.  Whether . . . if there's any kind of a commitment 

or whether you as a minister would take a serious look at 

maybe a similar form of program.  Or if indeed, how many 

inquiries have come since the program has been cancelled, 

from people who were sitting back . . . and I know I've had 

people call my office asking if the program is going to be 

reintroduced. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As we've said earlier, we are 

reviewing it.  I think we may well come up with a similar sort 

of plan, I think.  Some of the objections we had to lease to own 

were not philosophical objections; they were technical ones.  

The Department of Justice was questioning whether they were 

legal contracts.  There was no interest rate in it as such.  It was 

a program whereby the lessee continued to pay his lease and 

principal only, and over a 20-year period. 

 

And as a new government we naturally wanted to review some 

of our land policies, and that one was just frozen until we have 

a chance to review it and it may well be replaced with 

something similar. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would just encourage you to 

indeed pursue this matter.  And certainly I'm sure there are 

other options that can be looked at and I would encourage you 

to do that. 

 

Another question and this comes in light of the fact that, Mr. 

Minister, yes you indicated you are wearing two hats tonight, 

other than the fact that we're with Rural Development.  Another 

issue that is before us right now and certainly I understand 

some department officials from Parks will be meeting with 

people who have a definite interest in The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Act. 

 

How many acres of the land that is presently assigned or  



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

scheduled to go under the critical wildlife Act is actual Rural 

Development land?  How many acres and is that land being 

transferred to the responsibility of Parks and Renewable 

Resources? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There's 1.5 million acres which is 

all Rural Development land.  It will all stay Rural Development 

land.  None of it will be transferred anywhere.  There's 2.5 

million acres that's been in there since 1984 or some was in '84 

and some '86 and '88 and down the line and this land will 

continue to be treated in the same way. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then is just that the land 

falls under the parameters of The Critical Wildlife Habitat Act 

which restricts the breaking up of the land or indeed changing 

the use of the land unless it gets ministerial approval. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, one of the major concerns certainly that 

the stock growers have was the fact that they perceived that 

once this land went under the Act that it immediately fell into 

the parameters of Parks and Renewable Resources.  And there 

are many producers out there who then felt they would be 

dealing with two departments. 

 

They'd have some land that they'd be leasing which would be 

under Rural Development, some land that would be under 

Parks and they felt it would be very inappropriate and not an 

efficient way of dealing with their land leases.  And so I think 

the fact that you've indicated that land continues to stay under 

the control of Rural Development, that Rural Development is 

going to administer that land and collect the leases on it and 

draw up the leases or whatever, is something that the stock 

growers will certainly be glad to hear about. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to mention as well.  We've been 

discussing a few questions regarding the meeting tomorrow 

and later on.  Just before you leave, I'll just send some 

information over so that you can be kind of brought up to date 

on some of the discussions we've had. 

 

Another area Rural Development is involved in is in ferry 

service in this province.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, how 

many ferries continue to operate in the province at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thirteen ferries operating right 

now in the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And all the ferry service in the province falls 

under the role of Rural Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What's the cost to the department to operate these 

ferries, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The cost to operating ferries is 

shown on page 75; it's $1.29 million. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess I was looking at another brochure.  

Supplementary Estimates and we have . . . are these . . . on 

page 11 of the Supplementary Estimates, 1991, indicates 

that there's an additional amounts provided for ferries of 

$71,000.   Is that . . . are you looking for additional funds 

needed to maintain the ferry service?  Or what amount are we 

looking at over here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That amount is part of the '91-92 

budget that was covered by a special warrant.  It was part of the 

budget.  We had two appropriation Bills under special warrants 

somehow last year.  It's part of the '91-92 budget. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 p.m. 

 

 


