




















































Hansard: July 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1581 

 July 20, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Senior Citizens' 

Heritage Program Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move it be read a third time and 

passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Products 

(Saskatchewan) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Pest Control Act and to 

enact a consequential amendment related to the enactment 

of this Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Justice 

Vote 3 
 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me this evening Darryl Bogdasavich, Q.C., who is the acting 

deputy minister and is the executive director of the civil law 

branch; Mr. Ron Hewitt, Q.C., who is the assistant deputy 

minister; Doug Moen, who is the co-ordinator of legislative 

services; Twyla Meredith, the director of administrative 

services; and Betty Ann Pottruff, the director of policy, 

planning and evaluation. 
 

Item 1 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I welcome the 

officials and thank the minister for coming tonight.  And 

maybe we can keep this place kind of calm and cool and 

collected.  I'm afraid some of my colleagues figure that when 

the minister and I stand up here we don't tend to be the type 

that become very raucous or rambunctious.  But there are a 

number of special questions that we certainly want to raise with 

the minister and with the department regarding the Justice 

Estimates. 
 

I'm going to begin tonight by some general questions, Mr. 

Minister, a number of questions that . . . I believe that my 

colleague laid out general questions for most departments and I 

think it was indicated a little earlier on that some of these 

questions, maybe if we gave them in writing, but we 

understand that they'd like to have them given verbally.  So I 

will go through the general questions. 

 

First of all, I just want to clarify a couple of points and I have 

to apologize for the fact that maybe some of the noise was 

coming from this side of the . . . from my colleagues.  I was 

trying to listen to the minister regarding the introduction of his 

officials and I'm not sure if I caught the deputy . . . acting 

deputy minister is Darryl Bogdasavich -- is it Bogdasavich? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I'll be pleased to go through it 

again, Mr. Chairman.  That's Darryl Bogdasavich that's seated 

beside me.  He's the acting deputy minister.  His regular job is 

executive director of the civil law branch.  Also accompanying 

me tonight is Ron Hewitt, Q.C., who is the assistant deputy 

minister; Doug Moen, the co-ordinator of legislative services; 

Twyla Meredith, the director of administrative services; and 

Betty Ann Pottruff, the director of policy, planning, and 

evaluation. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  First question is, when 

did Mr. Bogdasavich start acting in the position of assistant 

deputy minister of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Bogdasavich became the acting 

deputy minister of Justice on April 26 of this year.  He's been 

an employee in the department for almost 20 years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I wonder 

if you could give us a run-down of your own staff, giving us a 

list of all the persons' names working in your office or 

otherwise who are directly . . . report directly to you.  And, Mr. 

Minister, if you could give us their titles, their salaries, job 

descriptions, education and employment history, including 

their last place of employment.  I'd also like to know if any 

worked or were paid by any other government before being on 

your payroll or if they had worked for the party.  And have any 

of these members in your staff been reclassified since joining 

your staff, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, can I ask the member: do 

you want this verbally or do you want it in writing?  It's 

entirely up to you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I think if the minister has it handy and it's . . . if 

he can give it verbally, we can have it both ways.  Verbally, I 

think would be on the record for everyone. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Right.  Well the first name is Tanya 

Byrnes.  She is a ministerial assistant C; it's a stenographic job.  

She was employed from the period April 13, 1992 to May 12, 

1992 at a salary of $2,141.  Debra J. Hartung is a ministerial 

assistant 4.  She began employment on January 2, 1992 and her 

salary is $4,221 per month.  She is presently on maternity leave 

and will be until the end of this year. 

 

Diane Tremblay is a ministerial assistant E, which is a . . . I 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

think that's a senior secretary classification. She commenced 

work in my office on February 1, 1992 at a salary of $3,344 per 

month.  She had previous government experience beginning in 

August of 1971 with the Attorney General's department.  And 

then a period in the Executive Council and back to the Attorney 

General and then the Executive Council.  Just a moment . . . 

Diane Tremblay has worked continuously in the minister's 

office for something like 18 years or so through changes of 

government and she continues in that position. 

 

And Sheena Weir has been hired to replace Debra Hartung 

while she is on maternity leave.  She's a temporary employee 

until Debra returns on January 8, 1992.  She's classified as a 

ministerial assistant 2, and she's paid a salary of $3,282 per 

month.  She had previously worked in a minister's office in 

Ontario and her husband got a job in Saskatchewan.  And I 

learned of this and I contacted her and asked her if she would 

take this temporary position.  I actually didn't do it myself, but 

Debra Hartung contacted her and arranged for her to come into 

my office on a temporary basis for this period.  She's working 

for me now. 

 

Those are the people in my office who are connected with the 

Department of Justice there. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I noticed, . . . I'm not sure, I think a 

couple more officials joined us.  I'm not sure if you'd just like 

to take a minute and introduce the rest of the officials to the 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Murray Brown, Q.C., is the director of 

appeals, and he is in the Chamber now.  Curtis Talbot is the 

executive assistant to the deputy minister.  Dick Till is the 

executive director of corrections. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when you're appointing your staff, 

not having had the privilege of being a minister, I'm just 

wondering does the minister have direct input or is the staffing 

of ministers' offices handled directly through Executive 

Council or what's the process?  Do you have involvement in 

that process, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I selected all of my staff, and I . . . yes, I 

selected all of my ministerial assistants.  In the case of the 

secretaries, they were selected by Debra Hartung who was my 

chief assistant -- my chief of staff as it were, although we don't 

use that term -- by my ministerial assistant for.  She selected 

the candidates for the secretarial positions and brought them in, 

and I interviewed them and together we made the decision. 

 

But as far as my ministerial assistant staff, the rest of them 

were all chosen by me, but in the case of Sheena Weir in the 

manner that I've just described to the member a few minutes 

ago. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, when we 

look at the department, your department, the department that 

you're responsible for, I wonder if you could give us a list of all 

positions or job titles that have been eliminated in the 

department since November 1, 1991, and a job description of 

each position eliminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 

the department has . . . We have abolished 83 positions due to 

fiscal restraint -- 83; eight, three.  I have a summary, and I'll 

give you the summary.  I also have very detailed information 

which I am confident you don't want me to read to you but 

which I can make available to you if you like. 

 

The permanent in-scope positions abolished are 33; the 

out-of-scope positions are 12; for total permanent positions of 

45.  Now those were encumbered positions, had somebody in 

them.  You know what I mean by that.  There were 24 non 

_permanent positions abolished and there were 14 vacant 

positions that were abolished.  Eleven of those were in scope 

and three of those were out of scope.  That gives you a total of 

83.  Now that's the overall summary. 

 

I have a breakdown, branch by branch, position by position, 

listing of positions that were abolished and it goes to something 

like five pages.  So you probably don't want to take the time of 

the committee to go through those.  But I'm certainly pleased to 

share the information with you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that would be 

appropriate to pass the information across to us.  I realize it 

could take a fair bit of time to go through it page by page and at 

least would give us the opportunity to peruse it ourselves. 

 

In the information you're sending over, Mr. Minister, does it 

include complete compensation details including salary and 

expenses, allowances, special payments, and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, the document I have gives the 

position number and the name as well as the branch in which 

the employee is employed.  It gives the classification, which 

gives you an idea of the salary range and the location of the 

employment.  It also gives the effective date of the abolition.  

Many of these positions are still in effect.  The abolition doesn't 

take place until September in the case of many of them, but 

there is no salary information as such on what I'm sending over 

to you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I wonder 

if you could inform the committee with the number of jobs that 

have been eliminated in the down-sizing of the department?  

No doubt some of the jobs, or some of the individuals that were 

working in the department at the time, either had their 

employment severed or their jobs were terminated, or possibly 

maybe moved to other areas of other departments in 

government.  I wonder if you could inform the committee how 

many jobs would have been terminated, whether all the 

employees were maybe moved to other areas of government?  

Some jobs probably were terminated on the basis of maybe not 

having anyone in the position and just eliminating a position 

that wasn't filled at the time.  And maybe in the process you 

could inform the Assembly about the compensation that was 

arrived at, say early retirements or some of those positions, 

when jobs were eliminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, as I 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

said, there are 83 positions being abolished and 14 of them are 

vacant, so that 69 actually have people attached to them. 

 

The in-scope employees -- and you'll recall there were 33 of 

those -- are all entitled to bumping privileges under their . . . 

bumping rights under their collective agreement, and they're 

doing that.  And some of these abolitions were effective July 3 

and some are effective September 30, to name two dates I can 

recall.  And that process is going on and it's not finished yet, so 

we don't know how it comes out. 

 

But they are not entitled to severance payments as such. 

 

There are also 24 non-permanent employees, and of course 

they're not entitled to any severance payment either.  And they 

don't have a right to bump under the provisions of the 

collective agreement. 

 

There are the 12 out-of-scope employees whose jobs have been 

abolished, and they are entitled to a severance payment.  And 

six of them have settled to this point, and the total cost of those 

severances is a little more than $99,000.  They range from a 

payment of a little over 2,600 to 42,800.  And the others have 

not yet -- how will I say? -- have not yet pressed for severance 

or have not yet settled their severance claim.  They're still 

outstanding. 

 

I just, before I sit down, might mention that some of them of 

course are still working for us because their abolishment date 

has not yet arrived. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you mention 33 in-scope positions 

wherein these positions right now are in the process of 

bumping and exercising their privileges as in-scope personnel. 

 

The non-permanent positions, though, you mentioned there is 

no severance package.  When you're talking of non-permanent, 

are these temporary positions that are available?  What would 

be the length of time of employment, say, for a non-permanent 

position?  Or is that a type of position that it comes open, and 

people just move in and out and . . . or if the jobs were 

eliminated, was any offer made to at least help compensate, 

especially if a person has been hired on and they're looking 

forward to maybe working through or working into the 

department and then to find their job has been eliminated.  Do 

they find any kind of compensation at all, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- These non-permanent employees are 

temporary employees, and they are supposed to be employed 

for a maximum period of one year, but some of them have been 

around the system for longer than that, moving from one 

position to another. 

 

They're in scope in the formal sense of that term.  They are 

covered by the collective agreement.  And as I said earlier, 

under the collective agreement they have no bumping rights.  

Temporary employees don't have bumping rights under the 

collective agreement, and they are not entitled to severance 

payments.  And in those circumstances we 

are not able to give them bumping rights nor are we able to 

give them severance payments.  It's all spelled out in the 

collective agreement, and we simply have followed that.  I 

would point out that they received a minimum of eight weeks 

notice, so it wasn't a matter of being fired out the door without 

having an opportunity to sort of get their lives organized and 

try and find other employment. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, for the 12 out-of-scope employees, 

I understand they're entitled to severance.  What would be a 

normal severance settlement?  And I'm not looking for 

specifics, but you indicated that to date six have settled in the 

neighbourhood of some $96,000.  Would it be in the 

neighbourhood of two months wages in the severance, or in 

some cases would there be an early retirement that would be 

available, Mr. Minister?  How would these 12 out 

_of-scope employees be covered?  And I realize that I think 

you indicated some of the employees continue to work until 

their job termination, their date arrives, and in the process I 

would imagine they would have been informed about the type 

of severance that would be available to them.  Can you give us 

in general terms what they would be facing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes.  As I said, there are six employees 

that have settled and the total cost of those settlements were 

$99,000.  Two of the employees took an early retirement and 

their severance benefit is low as a result.  But the average 

would be 99 divided by 6, whatever that is, 16,000 or 

something like that.  And the amount of the severance benefits . 

. . Well let me just give you the . . . I'll give you the amounts 

without the names, and I think that would be appropriate.  The 

highest was 42,000; 21,000; 16,000; 11,000; 4,000; and 2,600.  

So that's the range.  And the amount depends on a formula that 

they took into account -- years of service, and age, and that 

kind of thing.  I can't give you the exact formula but it was the 

same one that was applied across the public service generally.  

So that those are how the numbers came out.  And with the 

others who have not yet completed their negotiations, the same 

formula will be applied to them. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, could you give us the names of the 

employees at . . . whose jobs were terminated or whose jobs 

have been reclassified, specifically the out-of-scope employees 

and their length of service in the department, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

list that I sent across, the first page and the first name on the 

second page were the out-of-scope people.  They are in the ML 

(management level) classification.  And I am prepared to read 

the names out if you like, or send the list back to  you, if you 

like.  Perhaps you can indicate which one you want; either way 

is all right with me. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well if all the information is available, then I just 

don't happen to have it right in front of me right now.  Mr. 

Minister, we'll certainly accept that, and we can peruse it and 

get through. 

 

Mr. Minister, the number of jobs that were . . . or the jobs that 

were terminated, the positions -- how many of those positions 

were reclassified, and how many employees have been rehired 

under reclassification? 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- None. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, does the department have contracts 

with employees?  And if so, I'd like to know where contracts 

exist, and we'd like to have a copy of the contracts of 

employees who have contracts with the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 

have a list of Saskatchewan Justice contract employees and 

there are 18 of them.  And I'll be glad to provide this 

information which shows their name and their classification 

and their monthly or hourly rate, depending upon the kind of 

contract they have. 

 

Now I have no objection to producing the contracts themselves, 

although I don't have copies of them here, but I can; that's easy.  

So I'll send that across.  And we also have a number of contract 

consultants who are not employees but are paid for the service 

that they provide.  There are quite a number of these including 

computer consultants and that sort of thing. 

 

There are also a number who were employed in the 

constitutional unit for the constitutional negotiations.  And I 

don't know if your interest includes those but they are people 

that we brought on for the period of negotiations.  And for the 

most part their work is completed depending on what happens 

on the constitutional front in the next week or two. 

 

But it's that . . . I can provide that information to you.  I don't 

have that in the form that I've just sent across to you but that is 

something that I could easily provide to you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and we certainly would 

appreciate that information being sent over. 

 

When we're talking about contracts, Mr. Minister, and 

especially in light of new positions, what I would like to see, 

and we would like to see, is a copy of the requirements that you 

were looking for in letting out a contract or applying or laying 

out notice for a job description.  And then, of course, you'd 

have people apply for it.  You'd be looking for . . . asking for a 

résumé, their educational abilities, and where they had worked 

before. 

 

What I'd like to know is what information you were looking for 

and what the contracts . . . of course if you send the contractual 

information over, we'll know where people come from and the . 

. . I don't know if that includes the educational background or 

the requirements of the job, but maybe, Mr. Minister, if you 

could fill us in. 

 

And certainly regarding the constitutional team, we'd be more 

than pleased to have that information as we are quite well 

aware of the fact that the constitution has taken a fair bit of 

time.  And no doubt I don't think it's over.  I think we both 

believe there's some negotiations, some time needed yet to try 

and reach a final consensus, as we've seen in the news lately. 

And certainly Mr. Bourassa from Quebec has indicated he's 

waiting. I think it appears to me he is holding his cards as close 

to him as he can and just seeing how far we can go.  And it 

might be worth 

noting that even though we reach out our hand in peace to him, 

I'm not sure how you let him know that we've extended our arm 

as far as we can and it's time he started reaching his arm and 

extending it this way as well.  Maybe if you would pass that 

information back to us as well, Mr. Minister, it would be 

appreciated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll provide you with that.  I just might 

say that in the staffing of the constitutional unit, we reached out 

to people who were available.  And I mention that because 

there was a great demand for constitutional experts this spring 

right across the country as government staffed up for this 

intensive period of federal-provincial-aboriginal negotiations. 

 

For our part we were successful in bringing Professor Donna 

Greschner from the law school at Saskatoon, and Merrilee 

Rasmussen from a local law firm who has been the clerk of the 

. . . or at least the legislative Law Clerk here in the past, and 

Jim MacPherson who had worked here until 1986 and now is 

the dean of the Osgoode Hall Law School.  Those are the 

names that occurred in the . . . 

 

I might also mention Howard Leeson.  We borrowed him from 

the university for a period of time and then that borrowing 

expired.  That secondment expired and then we had to put him 

under a consultant contract for the period from June 1 on 

because of our arrangements with the university.  But I can 

provide the member with details of that. 

 

I might mention -- I think I told you this during the constitution 

committee -- that we had a very . . . we had an excellent staff 

who participated in the working groups to the multilateral 

ministers' process.  It was the second-smallest staff, second 

only to Prince Edward Island, but they made a tremendous 

impact on the negotiations.  I was very, very proud of them 

indeed and we were well served by their efforts.  That's all by 

the way.  I'll provide you with the information on those 

contracts and other contracts. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, when I 

talk about contracts, we're well aware of the fact that the 

accusations that fly around when governments change and 

personnel changes, and certainly I think personnel within 

ministerial offices.  I think the public in general expect that 

there are certain positions and certain individuals whose jobs 

will be terminated. 

 

And I'm not exactly sure how all the details of whether there 

are contracts for a number of positions that . . . I'm just going to 

throw this out as an idea.  When it comes to contracts it would 

appear to me that it might be appropriate in light of the fact that 

there are certain positions within government where, when 

governments of different philosophical backgrounds change -- 

that certain positions will be . . . replacements will be made in 

those positions.  It would seem to me that a contract in that 

position would be appropriate, probably a yearly contract. 

 

That even a government -- if a person wasn't quite fulfilling the 

requirements of the job that they were given 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

-- would have the ability to reassess the position.  But also at 

the contract reading as such that on the due date of an election 

or two days . . . two weeks following, that contract is null and 

void, and it then opens the door for an incoming . . . If the 

government should happen to change, it would open the door 

for an incoming government not to have this political turmoil 

you face all the time. 

 

And I just toss that out as a thought that's certainly been on the 

back of my mind in relationship to the fact that -- regardless of 

whether it happens to be a Conservative government or a 

Liberal government or an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government -- we're always going to have that.  And it might 

be something positive so that the general public would realize 

it's not always a vindictive attitude that takes place when 

governments change hands. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I believe very, very strongly in a 

professional public service.  I had the honour to be a member 

of the public service at the federal level for three years, at the 

international level for one year, and at the provincial level in 

the 1970s here in Saskatchewan for five years -- from 1974 to 

1979. 

 

And I came to understand very, very clearly the enormous 

value of a professional public service, where people who are 

qualified get jobs on the basis of their merit -- not on the basis 

of their politics, but on the basis of their merit -- where they are 

evaluated and promoted on the basis of their merit and where 

they look forward to long and secure careers as long as they're 

doing their job and doing it properly and serving the 

government that they're employed by. 

 

And I believe that it would be in the best interests of this 

province, manifestly to the best interest of this province, to 

build such a public service.  I believe that it is entirely wrong to 

do otherwise. 

 

The problem I have with the idea of having employees under 

contract that would expire with an election defeat -- if I 

understood your proposal correctly -- would be a dreadful 

mistake because it would mean that you'd have this turnover of 

the public service after each election.  And I really sincerely 

and passionately believe that this is a mistake and that we 

would be far better served if we hired on the basis of merit, Mr. 

Member, if we hired on the basis of merit; if we promoted on 

the basis of merit; if we provided secure employment; and if 

we refrained from judging people on the basis of their politics 

rather than their ability. 

 

Now that's what I believe.  I believed it for many years.  I saw 

it in action and I think the system is the only one that's worth 

having.  I think it's a mistake to go to any other.  So my 

response to your question is that I would not favour that kind of 

an approach at all, that is to say contracting with the public 

service or even the senior public service.  I think rather we 

should be aiming at long-term employees whose interest is the 

province of Saskatchewan and serving the Government of 

Saskatchewan regardless of which political party is in power. 

 

Now I apologize to you in advance if I've misunderstood your 

question but that's how I did understand it so I 

thought I would let you know how I feel about those matters. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I think maybe 

we did just have a bit of a misunderstanding there because I 

certainly am not going to speak out against the public service.  

I think people serve the public and serve it well. 

 

I'm talking of people directly affected within a ministerial 

office or direct appointments by government, not the public 

service.  And I apologize too because I may not have been as 

direct.  And on that basis, Mr. Minister, because I believe 

certainly that if we were to do what I had indicated and just 

point the number of people and it was a continuous revolving 

door, there's no doubt turmoil would exist.  And really, how 

could the public or anyone . . . why would they want to get 

involved in the public service? 

 

So I think it's very important that we make sure people realize 

that they've chosen a profession in the public service that we 

treat them as professionals.  But certainly within a ministerial 

office or higher offices where government and cabinet are 

directly involved, I think that area needs to be open so that we 

try and work our way around that -- the political bickering that 

certainly is involved on job replacements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I apologize to the member, Mr. 

Chairman, because I clearly did misunderstand his question.  

And I agree with the member that the ministerial staff, political 

staff are just that, and on the fall of a government the staff falls 

also.  And I believe in the last two transitions, there has been a . 

. . at least the last two, probably longer than that but the last 

two that I know something about -- the last two transitions have 

seen the political staff, the ministerial staff, being terminated 

by the outgoing government, leaving the new ministers and the 

new government free to hire their own political staff.  So I 

think the member and I are of one mind on that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

my question and my only question relates to something that 

was raised just a moment ago by the member from Moosomin.  

I'm wondering about your constitution committee that went to 

Ottawa.  Did anyone fly to Ottawa whose flight was paid for by 

your department, but who is not in the employ of the 

Government of Saskatchewan or an official with the 

constitution committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, I don't think so.  I'd know if there 

was.  The people who went . . . At the first meeting a member 

of my staff, Debra Hartung, came along with me because we 

practically had nobody working for us at the time, and we 

needed some bodies to be able to handle all of the things that 

were happening in that one- or two-day period.  Debra is not 

employed by the constitutional unit.  As I said she is a member 

of my staff. 

 

But apart from that, I think everybody was either a minister -- 

me -- the Premier on a couple of occasions, or a person who 

was a member of or under contract with the constitutional unit. 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Mr. Peacock is an employee of the Department of Justice.  He's 

not in the constitutional unit itself but is in a separate category. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm just wondering if I heard you correctly 

then.  What you're stating is that there was no one who 

accompanied you or your officials to Ottawa who was not 

either there as an official or as an employee of the Government 

of Saskatchewan.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right, yes.  I was just thinking as I 

sat down, we took a press officer to many of the later meetings 

because the crush from the press became quite huge, and we 

needed somebody to manage that.  But that's right.  If you 

know otherwise, I'd be pleased to hear.  But I think you're quite 

right.  They're employees of the Government of Saskatchewan 

or people under contract with the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, what I'd 

like to know at this time is all the space that is leased or owned 

by the department, and not just here in the city but how many 

locations around the province where you have offices of Justice 

or judicial offices, Mr. Minister.  How many there are, where 

they're located, and the space, and whether there's a lease 

agreement or whether the department owns or who owns the 

space, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have a list . . . I have a document in my 

hand that is probably 20 pages long.  It shows the . . . It's a 

document that is produced by the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation and it lists the buildings and the 

addresses and the location of those buildings for all of our 

office space.  And, for example, in Assiniboia we have the 

court-house, and in Beauval we have a lease on the LCA (local 

community authority) community hall for purposes of holding 

court, and in Big River we have a lease on the Legion hall for 

the same purpose, and so on.  It's quite a long list and I've got 

an extra copy here I'll just send over to the member and you 

can keep it.  It also includes the amount of space, it includes the 

amount of space in each location.  So I'll send this across to the 

member and you can have it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, would that material that you're 

forwarding to the opposition at this time, would it include all 

the costs associated with the space, rental agreements or leases, 

the operating and maintenance costs of all space occupied by 

the department, broken down by whether it's owned or leased 

or rented space, and as well, Mr. Minister, the names of each 

principal leasing or renting space to the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, we lease 

from Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. As the 

member knows, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) leases from whoever are the building owners.  I 

am advised that this kind of information is simply not provided 

in this forum that we're in right now.  And that being the case, I 

have given you all the information I can. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're indicating to us that the 

Department of Justice leases all their space, or rents their 

space, from the Property Management Corp. 

And if I'm not mistaken, some of the debate we had with the 

minister responsible for Property Management, some of the 

questions we were asking when we got into specific 

departments, we were always told to go to the departments to 

see if we could glean that information.  And we're trusting, Mr. 

Minister, we're taking your word at face value that you're 

willing to provide us with that information.  I know it may take 

a bit of time.  It may.  But I think it would be appropriate.  

We'd certainly be more than happy.  We'd like to have that 

information, Mr. Minister. 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I can give the member 

totals in a summary way.  Let me do that and see if it helps.  

For the courts, we pay 5 million and a few odd dollars -- 

$5,061,952.  In connection with corrections, we pay 

$5,785,855.  For the various kinds of registry services that we 

provide, including the land titles offices, we pay $918,550.  For 

administration or departmental administration, we pay 

$1,423,647.  And for all the boards and commissions that we 

have in our budget, we pay a total of $919,016 for a total of 

$14,109,020.  That's how much we pay to SPMC for the space 

that we lease from them. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, how many courts do we have or 

court facilities do we have in the province or lease or rent in the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we can work up that 

information for the member probably as we sit here tonight, but 

we just don't have the answer off the top of our heads.  We're 

talking about the whole provincial court system as well as the 

Queen's Bench and Court of Appeal.  But we'll try and figure it 

out as we sit here tonight, and then I'll provide the information 

to the member when it's ready. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Maybe while you're working at that, Mr. Minister, 

your officials, maybe the number of correctional centres . . . 

and I forget the other list.  And it probably will have to take a 

bit to peruse all the information that is available and you're 

making available as well so that we can feel that we have 

adequately addressed the questions. 

 

And I know the questions I'm giving you right now are kind of 

detailed and fairly tedious, but certainly we, as I indicated 

earlier, have been asked to make them verbally too.  And I 

guess it's for the public record, and I believe we all understand 

that. 

 

One question before I move on.  Going back to this list of 

terminations, the information you sent over, the effective date, 

is that the date that the job or that position officially is 

terminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes that's right.  That's the . . . Just 

before I take my seat I might mention to the member that the 

information we're compiling, we're compiling from the list that 

you already have, showing the names of the buildings here, 

there, and everywhere in the province.  So we'll try and 

summarize that for you.  But you've got it all there in detail. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

Mr. Toth: -- Well if that's already included in this list here, Mr. 

Minister, I don't think it's . . . I can go back through the answers 

and throw the dollar figures in there and figure it out.  I didn't 

realize that. 

 

I want another question, coming back to these employees and 

these job terminations, these job positions that are being 

terminated.  There's a list of a number of employees here, and it 

gives the termination date.  Would you also have, or could you 

give to the committee, a position like -- I'm just going to pick a 

name out of the blue -- Meadow Lake Camp, Jim Wenzel's job, 

September 30, '92.  What I'd be interested in noting is when 

these employees were originally hired and how long they've 

been with the department prior to their termination date.  And 

the dates really vary, as you indicated earlier.  They vary 

considerably.  And if you could provide us with that 

information, it would be appreciated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We cannot provide that information 

tonight.  We haven't got that along with us.  We'd have to look 

at the personnel files of the individuals involved.  But that's 

quite doable, and if you have individuals or groups of 

individuals in respect of whom you want that information, if 

you let me know I'll get it for you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, for your information, the ones 

I'm specifically interested are the individuals included in this 

information that you've forwarded to us tonight, specifically the 

83 or the 93 positions that have been terminated or reclassified. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you please provide the committee with a 

list of all the vehicles being paid for by the department either in 

maintenance costs or actual purchase deals; whether the vehicle 

is owned by the government or whether it's privately owned; an 

explanation why the vehicle is being paid for by the 

department; and the actual costs of the departmental 

expenditures in relation to each vehicle; and the breakdown of 

those costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll give the member the information I 

have, Mr. Chairman, and then see where that takes us in terms 

of what further information you require. 

 

The department provides a car for the Lieutenant Governor and 

for the deputy minister.  Those are the two people, two 

individuals, to whom a car is assigned. 

 

The other 138 vehicles are in the nature of pool vehicles.  

There are, for example, 94 of them at the various . . . spread 

across the province at the various correctional centres, and 

they're used for moving prisoners and for the use of people at 

the jail having to go somewhere and come back.  But the car is 

not assigned to any individual; they're assigned just generally 

to the departments' pools. 

 

Let me go through the list of these assignments: administrative 

services has a car at their disposal; police complaints, one; 

consumer protection, one; the sheriffs in the province have 17 

cars at their disposal.  The provincial court judges, and there 

are I think 43 or 44 of 

them, have 16 cars, and they use them when they're on circuit, 

and they draw a car from the pool when they have to go out to 

a circuit point.  Court services has a car; prosecutions has two 

cars.  As I mentioned, corrections has 94 cars, or vehicles I 

should say; I mean they're not all cars.  The Public Trustee has 

two; the Human Rights Commission has two; and the Farm 

Ownership Board have one. 

 

That's a total of 140, and the total dollars spent in '91-92, the 

past fiscal year, to CVA (central vehicle agency), which would 

cover the cost of maintenance and servicing and licensing and 

whatever else you pay for, is $1,042,368. 

 

Now I hope that answers your question, although it doesn't give 

you the sort of car-by-car detail that your question suggested, 

but I think that gives you the general picture. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So I take it, Mr. Minister, that the department 

actually leases the vehicles.  They don't own the vehicles in 

particular, but they lease from the CVA pool and they cover the 

costs through operate . . . or reimburse the CVA pool for the 

cost of those vehicles. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you please provide a list of advertising 

done by your department since November 1, 1991, including 

production and distribution of direct mail, pamphlets, any 

news-letters, print ads, broadcast ads, speaking tours, public 

displays and exhibitions, promotional items such as pens, key 

chains, media relations, and all other communications vehicles 

that may have been used since that time.  And I'm actually 

interested in all news-letters, internal and external, and the 

names of persons responsible for these news-letters, as well as 

the other information relating to all communications activities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have the numbers for November 1, 

1991 to March 31, 1992, and I'll give you those.  The total 

spent was $7,880. 

 

The print ads for things like tenders, tendering of services, 

career ads, and notice of public meetings was approximately 

$5,120.  We made up a pamphlet in connection with the 

freedom of information Act, and that was $1,910.  And there is 

a news-letter for employees of the corrections division, and the 

cost of that news-letter was $850.  That news-letter was . . . the 

editor was Garth King who works in the corrections branch as 

the executive assistant to the executive director.  And the 

editorial advisor was the director of communications, Lisa Ann 

Wood. 

 

The print ads were produced and placed by advertising 

agencies, and I'll give you those.  I think you asked for those.  

Brown & Associates Advertising was one, and the second was 

Palmer Jarvis communications.  The print media used was the 

Leader-Post, the Star-Phoenix, and the Prince Albert Herald, 

as well as major weekly newspapers in each region of the 

province. 

 

The pamphlets were typeset and printed, tendered, through 

SPMC.  And the printer was Western Litho, and the news-letter 

was set up and printed by the Queen's 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Printer. 

 

There was some internal cost in drafting the initial copy, but I 

haven't tried to quantify those, and for editing and liaising with 

the ad agency and proofing the final copies.  On the freedom of 

information pamphlet there was again departmental staff time 

for drafting it and editing it and then arranging for the tender 

through SPMC and proofing the final copy.  So it's not a very 

significant amount.  But if the member requires further 

information, I'll be glad to provide it for the period after March 

31.  There would be some expenses after March 31 -- not a 

great deal -- and we could provide those if the member wished.  

But this is what I've brought with me tonight. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Regarding the information, and the media 

information, the pamphlets that were put out, Mr. Minister, I 

understand that you did tender, put out a tender, invited a 

tender from anyone who would be interested in working or 

placing a tender to provide or do this information for the . . . do 

these pamphlets for the department.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, 

could you explain the process of the tender, how many 

companies or corporations would have tendered to provide this 

work and whether or not the low bid was the tender that was 

accepted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As I mentioned, the tenders were 

handled by SPMC and I just don't have any of the information 

that the member requests.  We assume that they would award 

to the low tender but I'll be pleased to follow up on this matter 

and provide the information to the member, if that's 

satisfactory.  But I just don't have that information tonight. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, we would appreciate it if you would 

take the time to follow up and follow through the process, as 

I'm afraid if we get back to your colleague in SPMC we might 

be asked to come back to you.  So I think we'll accept your 

response and your willingness to bring that information 

forward.  So when you have it available, if you wouldn't mind 

passing it on, Mr. Minister, we'd appreciate it. 

 

Mr. Minister, has your department conducted any polls or 

opinion research since November 1, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No we have not. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I wonder 

if you could provide us a list of all trips paid for by your 

department since November 1991, whether in the province or 

outside the province, and include the names of all persons on 

the trip, indicating which persons were paid for by the 

department and which were not; a breakdown of the costs of 

each trip by person, including transportation, meals, 

accommodation, and any other costs; the destinations and dates 

of and purposes of each trip; method of travel, and name of the 

travel supplier; name of hotel or other institution that provided 

accommodation; and the results of each trip, including a copy 

of any tangible evidence showing a benefit to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can provide the member with a 

detailed list of the department officials who have travelled out 

of province from November 1 of last year until the end of the 

fiscal year.  That's what I have with me tonight -- that's March 

31, 1992 -- and we'd be pleased to update it. 

 

This is quite lengthy and in each case the destination is given, 

the purpose for the trip is included, the airfare, the travel, the 

per diem expenses, the lodging, is all included in the list and I'll 

send that across to the member.  You can have this and I will 

just assume that you want this updated and we'll be providing 

you that information in due course. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In light of the 

questions we've just posed, and certainly an update would be 

appreciated as well, but I just want to touch a little bit on the 

constitutional trek that we've had and your involvement over 

the past number of weeks, if I'm not mistaken. I don't think we 

can say it's days.  Days has turned into weeks.  Certainly we'd . 

. . I'd like to know a list, and I just don't remember if the 

member from Greystone had asked for a list, but I'd like to 

know who attended the minister.  And maybe if you could just 

fill us in with the list of names and the time spent in Ottawa or 

away from the province in discussions with other ministers 

regarding the constitution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's travel costs that you were concerned 

with, I think.  Travel costs?  Yes. 

 

We've calculated it to the end of June.  And I'll come back to 

that because there have been some trips since then, but to the 

end of June would be the bulk of it. 

 

And the total travel expenses of the constitutional unit to the 

end of June was $88,681.02.  And we'd be able to provide you 

with the breakdown of that but tonight I can give you that 

global number, 88,000.  In addition, my own travel costs 

should be included and those are about 9,300, including plane 

fare, hotel rooms, meals and the like. 

 

Now since the end of June we have had the premiers' meeting 

in Toronto on the Friday in early July -- 3rd, I think -- and then 

the follow-up meeting in Ottawa for two days the following 

week.  So there'd be three days of travel and there'd be the 

Premier and I and three or four, five officials, something like 

that.  I think there were three the first time and five the second, 

so there'd be an additional amount for that.  So probably we're 

up to 110,000 or something like that to this point. 

 

It's been an expensive process.  And it was a very, very 

difficult process as the member knows and yet it was 

successful.  At the end of the day we reached an agreement.  

And it's that very agreement now that seems to be on shaky 

ground.  And I sincerely hope, and I know the member shares 

this view, that that agreement is respected and supported fully 

by all of the actors and that it will, as it was intended to, form 

the basis for a settlement of the constitutional issues in this 

country. 

 

Sorry to get away on that other speech, but it's very much in 

my mind these days.  But in answer to the member's 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

question, I give you these numbers and offer to provide you 

with a detailed breakdown of them. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you're 

indicating that these numbers include the accommodation, 

meals, and the travel, if I'm not mistaken.  And certainly you'll 

be forgiven if you get off on a little bit of a speech on the 

constitution because we probably will on this side as well. 

 

And we can certainly go back to the debate that took place in, I 

believe it was '88 or '89, regarding the Meech Lake question.  

The constitution is something that I think, as I indicated earlier, 

is going to be with us for a while.  Certainly it is difficult, I 

believe, in our own province, and I just want to come for a 

minute to the Constitutional Committee that has been formed in 

our province, in light of the fact that many people across this 

province have indicated that they would like to have more of a 

say and an involvement.  And I don't think it's just 

constitutional questions. 

 

I think there are . . . people themselves would like to be a little 

more informed and at least have the feeling that they had some 

involvement and some say.  And at the end of the day, who 

knows whether they'll agree with whether the recommendations 

placed forward by the Constitutional Committee, or whether it's 

an agricultural committee, as we'll get into discussion on the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) question a little later 

and the implications of the justice system regarding that 

question.  But when it comes to the constitutional question, 

there's no doubt that there are a number of views out there, and 

certainly we are well represented in this province by a number 

of groups. 

 

One of the large groups and involved peoples in our province 

happens to be the aboriginal community.  And as the minister 

is aware, prior to last fall's election, there was an agreement in 

principle with the aboriginal community on some land 

settlements.  And in the process in the mean time, we have had 

. . . and I'm not sure whether there's been some further 

negotiations or whether the agreement has been changed 

somewhat.  I'd be interested in knowing where that agreement 

stands at the present time. 

 

And on the constitutional question, certainly we've had . . . As 

you indicated last Wednesday morning when the Constitutional 

Committee met that there are a number of complex questions 

that will be addressed or will need to be addressed and 

certainly placed before the general public.  I believe, Mr. 

Minister, it would be appropriate if the general public had at 

least some information of and a bit of a knowledge of the 

process, not just the process itself, but some of the 

constitutional . . . the deal that's in the package, so that when 

the committee does take the time and meet with the public, the 

public are a little more informed and can maybe come with 

some very comprehensive ideas that the committee can weigh 

over so that when they give their report to the Legislative 

Assembly, it's a report that we can look at. 

 

I think it's going to be very difficult compiling a report by 

which all parties will be able to really agree on, but certainly I 

think we need to work at that.  I think if people 

are going to put forward any ideas at all or feel they've had an 

opportunity for input, they need to have a little bit of an 

understanding of where the constitutional process is today. 

 

Certainly I think . . . I was going to say they probably have a 

fair bit through the media, but sometimes I'm not exactly sure 

that maybe the media may not have a little bias once in a while 

and it depends how it's laid out to the general public.  On many 

occasions their interpretation of the process may be somewhat 

skewed as to what actually has taken place. 

 

So I think it's going to be imperative that we lay out some of 

the structure and some of what we're looking for, and as well, 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering in light of the Constitutional 

Committee that's been established and set up in this province, if 

the minister as well has a rough idea of the type of expenses 

that this committee may incur, what you're anticipating the 

committee may incur, and how many public meetings you are 

going to be asking the committee to be involved in. 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The question that the member poses 

with respect to the committee should not be posed to the 

minister.  We're reviewing the Estimates for his department and 

not Estimates for the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question of . . . I respect the 

Chairman's ruling and I am not going to address that part of it.  

So far as the process of informing the public is concerned, it's a 

very, very important point.  And I must say that I do not know 

how to do that.  We are banking heavily upon the standing 

committee to find a way to do that, or to advise the government 

with respect to how it should be done. 

 

The member will know that the meetings of the ministers has 

been covered extensively by the media, by lengthy briefing 

sessions at the end of each day's work.  And all of that's been 

carried in the media.  So if one were to gather together all of 

the television clips or all of the newspaper reports over the last 

few months, you could put together the constitutional 

document.  Because it really has been a very open and frank 

process. 

 

And it would typically start with Mr. Clark giving a briefing, 

and then every other minister who was approached by the press 

would then come up to the microphone and discuss, and 

discuss, and discuss what had been discussed in the meeting 

that day.  So it was a . . . by the end of all of those interviews, 

everything that had been said behind closed doors had been 

reviewed and rehashed and said again in public. 

 

(2030) 

 

But you're right, that doesn't mean that everyone knows what 

was agreed to.  And indeed, nobody knows all of the things that 

were agreed to because nobody keeps track of these things day 

by day.  The Globe and Mail published quite an extensive 

summary of the agreements that had been reached.  But then, 

who reads The Globe and Mail?  And having read it, who 

retains it?  So I agree with the member that there is a need to 

get the information out. 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

 And I frankly don't know how to do that myself.  But I think 

it's a matter that we should discuss at that standing committee.  

I think it's very, very important that all political parties in this 

House are able to support the deal that is struck.  And I do hope 

that that will be the end result of the committee's work, and I 

speak here to all parties, including my own.  I think it very 

important that there be support for this package. 

 

And I believe it is such a package that will attract the support 

from all sides of the House, and I think that will be important 

in terms of its acceptance in the province. 

 

A word on the treaty land entitlement negotiations.  Those 

negotiations continue, and we're down to a very fine point or 

two, as between the parties.  Chiefly it's a question of 

agreement between the federal and provincial government on 

one or two fine points under the agreement.  But it's at a very, 

very late stage and is practically a done deal, but not yet.  It 

still remains to be done.  It is a historic process and an 

extremely important one, and I think all members of the House 

would hope that it would be completed very soon and that it 

could be signed and delivered. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And just for a point of 

clarification, the . . . I'm not sure the Chairman had mentioned 

the fact; I don't know if he would.  The Chairman was referring 

to the Constitutional Committee and talking about costs.  Is that 

under a different jurisdiction?  I realize . . . I believe the 

constitution comes under the minister's responsibility, and I 

think any discussion on the constitution is part of the whole 

process of Justice Estimates here.  So just so that I'm clear here. 

 

I believe my colleague from Morse has a few questions 

regarding the constitutional . . . 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have some 

questions about what we have to expect in the process of time 

to get the resolution of the Canada agreement.  What kind of a 

time line are we looking at in the province?  For example, I 

know that Quebec has got to have a vote this fall.  Are we 

looking at a time line that is going to give us sufficient time to 

have all of the legislatures put into place their willingness to 

participate in the agreement?  Or are we going to have a 

stand-off like we had the last time around where one individual 

group or one individual province or one interest group is going 

to have the capacity to deliver what I would call an imbalance 

in what's going on.  And a lot of us agree with what's going on 

but is there some . . . Can you foresee someone putting a 

road-block in the way of things that are going to happen, 

because we have a very narrow time line.  And that is itself at 

risk, or a risk. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that is also a very good question.  

Quebec is working towards a referendum on October 26.  We 

don't yet know the question.  It may be a question approving of 

a package or it may be a question of approving a document as a 

basis for negotiation or what have you.  The Quebec 

government has control over the question that they ask. 

 

There are also a number of provinces who, by law, must have 

referenda -- British Columbia, Alberta.  Premier 

Wells has indicated that he plans to have one in Newfoundland.  

Manitoba has a process spelled out in legislation involving 

their standing committee, and it is very extensive and very 

thorough and very time-consuming. 

 

In this province we have the referendum of last October 21 

whereby a vote of something like 2:1 the people indicated that 

they wanted to have a chance to express their view.  We have, 

on the national level, parliament having passed legislation that 

permits a referendum and conflicting views over time about 

whether or not they'll actually have one.  If they have one on 

the national level then that may affect the decision to have 

provincial referenda. 

 

Whether we have one in Saskatchewan is a good question 

because it sort of depends on the package, I think, and the 

public reaction to the package and whether the legislature and 

the standing committee feel that in light of all those 

circumstances we should actually proceed with a referendum.  

I'm not saying one way or the other for tonight, but the member 

will know that it has cost implications and we'll have to size 

that up at the time to see whether we need one here or not.  

And if we have a national one then it may not be necessary to 

have a provincial one, but if there is no national one then what 

do we do?  Anyway, all of that will take some time. 

 

A lot of lessons were learned in the Meech Lake debate and 

one of the lessons was that too much time is too much time.  

You've got to get at these questions and get them decided early, 

or else the ground gets eroded and eaten away and 

misunderstandings arise.  It's the kind of a question that 

requires some debate but it doesn't have to be debated for ever 

-- it should come to a head sometime. 

 

Now what have I said there?  I think we're probably into a 

process that will occupy us until at least the late spring of next 

year, by the time all the legislatures have considered the 

package and done their internal things and voted approval or 

non-approval.  But that's just a guess.  I mean they're . . . and 

no one knows.  No one can calculate this.  One subject that is 

discussed by the Prime Minister and the premiers always is a 

review of what the internal processes will be within a province, 

and what steps they plan to take, and how long they'll take.  

Because everybody has their eye on the Meech experience and 

are determined not to drag it out that long.  So it's obviously 

tricky and I'm sorry I can't be more definite than that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I appreciate your answer.  I know that it is 

difficult and delicate and there's a lot of concern in each one of 

those areas. 

 

Between now and the next spring . . . and what makes the time 

line even more difficult is that the possibility of elections in the 

process of that time, and that makes it even more difficult to 

determine what's going to happen.  Is Nova Scotia at the point 

where they would be causing a problem because of that, if you 

waited till next spring to do that? 

 

And I'm not here to have you do an assessment.  I don't know 

that and that's why I raise that question.  Ottawa 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

itself is running out of mandate time, well not seriously, but 

they do have a concern there.  And I think that that's something 

that needs to be very carefully considered because I'm not sure 

whether, if the major players change in the process, that you'll 

have the same kind of empathy on certain points.  And that 

raises a great deal of concern on our part, and mine in 

particular as being a Canadian and wanting to have the 

Canadian opportunity to express ourselves. 

 

So I hope that you can do those things in the time line that are 

required.  How much importance do you place on the role of 

the vote in Quebec in determining what other provinces will 

decide to do, and should we have that discussion on our 

process after the Quebec decision is reached?  Would it be 

better to wait until that period of time or would it be better for 

us to do it before?  I'd like to have some assessment.  I'm not 

sure.  I probably have an opinion, but I'm not sure whether 

that's accurate either.  But I'd like to know what yours is 

because you're leading this province into some very crucial 

discussions.  I think we need to seriously consider those. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the Nova Scotia situation is as 

follows -- the most remarkable way for a province to approach 

these discussions.  The Premier represented the province.  The 

number two person in the Nova Scotia delegation was the 

Leader of the Opposition, and the number three person in the 

delegation was the leader of the third party, the NDP.  And on 

several occasions, the Premier of Nova Scotia was unable to 

attend because of the mine disaster in Nova Scotia, and the 

head of the delegation for Nova Scotia was the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, the Leader of the Opposition.  As a result, I don't 

think it would matter what would happen in the Nova Scotia 

election.  I think all parties are committed equally to this 

accord.  All of them had a full participation in the discussions, 

and it's quite a remarkable thing.  I'm sure there's no precedent 

for it in federal-provincial conferences in this country.  It's 

quite fascinating to watch, and it indeed worked very, very 

well. 

 

So far as parliament is concerned, it will be interesting to watch 

the debate on the package in parliament.  I think that you will 

find that the Liberal Party and the NDP in parliament will be 

supportive of the package.  We spoke to Mr. Chretien when he 

was in Saskatchewan recently, and that's the clear impression I 

had, although he hadn't finished his work on it -- it was still a 

fresh package.  But Mr. Clark had stayed in quite close contact 

with him, and I believe that the NDP will be supportive of the 

package also, when they finish their work.  I think those are 

certainly the signals that I have so far.  So unless something 

really radical happens in the next federal election in terms of 

either the Bloc Québécois or the Reform Party emerging as 

major players in parliament, I think that this package will 

remain intact. 

 

Now to the Quebec part of your question.  This is very, very 

difficult to predict.  They're heading towards a referendum on 

October 26.  We don't know what the question put to the people 

will be -- could be almost anything.  Could be a question on the 

one hand that asks for approval of the package, or otherwise.  

Could be a question that asks for approval that the package be 

the basis of further constitutional negotiations -- a sort of a 

fence-sitting interim procedure not unprecedented in Quebec 

constitutional history at all.  Or it could be an outright 

separation question, an outright sovereignty question.  One 

doesn't know at this stage. 

 

(2045) 

 

The state of play at the moment is very, very, very delicate, as 

Quebec reacts to the package, as the Prime Minister deals with 

it in the way that he has been dealing with it, and as the other 

provinces try and respond to what we know of the Quebec 

reaction.  And it's a very, very delicate point as we speak 

tonight, and the next few days are going to be crucial to that. 

 

I think, though, as follows:  I think if we can arrive at a final 

package in this country, say in the next three or four weeks -- 

and I think we must do that -- then I believe that our standing 

committee should begin work right away on the basis that the 

people have to know what's in the package and have to be able 

to start thinking about it so that they can react; and not wait for 

Quebec's answer but just proceed on the basis that it will be 

acceptable in Quebec, or at least it will be seriously considered, 

and we must seriously consider it here.  I don't think we should 

wait until we get a reaction.  I think we should begin our work 

at once because there's a lot of it to do. 

 

This question earlier of how you get this package out to the 

people is a very, very difficult question.  It's a complex 

package.  As members know, it's pages long and that's just a 

description of the text.  The legal text itself is likely to be 

longer than that.  And it's going to take a lot of very, very 

sophisticated communication to be able to put the package to 

people so that they can properly react to it. 

 

And that leads to the interesting question of how you'd design a 

referendum question with a package like that.  I mean, it's not 

simply, do you approve of A or not.  You know it's not a 

simple thing.  It's do you approve of this package, which goes 

to 36 pages, or not.  And makes it awfully hard to frame a 

referendum question, either in Saskatchewan, or Alberta, or 

Newfoundland, or nationally at the level of parliament.  But to 

repeat myself, I think that in this province we should start 

seriously to work on it as soon as it's in final form.  And 

indeed, the committee has started to work on the subject on the 

basis of the sort of rolling drafts or summary documents that 

are available up to this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, in the role of what you're 

getting back from Quebec at this point, are they dealing with it 

through Joe Clark?  Or are they dealing with it through the 

Prime Minister's office?  Or are they dealing with it as a part of 

Bourassa negotiating typically like the Premier of Nova Scotia 

is?  Or what is their role now in response to what has happened 

so far?  Can you give us what your impressions are.  And if 

there's a direct fact involved, we wouldn't mind hearing about 

that too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There is contact at different levels.  

Certainly the Premier of Quebec is talking to the Prime 

Minister and the Prime Minister's staff.  And certainly there is 

contact with Mr. Clark as well.  That would probably be the 

Premier and the constitutional minister, Mr. Remillard.  There 

is also a lot of contact at the official 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

level . . . at the officials' level.  The Quebec officials are, for the 

most part, the same officials that were involved in the Meech 

Lake discussions.  And they are expert beyond description.  

They know this file like no one else knows this file.  And they 

are working with the Ottawa officials and with some contact, 

we believe, with other provinces.  So discussion is taking place 

at various levels. 

 

There is discussion going on about whether the deal that has 

been struck achieves the substance of the Meech Lake accord.  

The member will be familiar with that term.  It's often used -- 

the substance of Meech. 

 

We heard over and over again from Mr. Bourassa, the point 

that he could not return to the constitutional table until the 

provinces had agreed upon the substance of Meech.  We 

thought, that is the provinces thought, that we had achieved 

that in these negotiations.  Substantially, we accepted the 

Dobbie-Beaudoin formulation of the distinct-society clause 

which was different than Meech, but yet in substance was 

Meech.  Similarly, we thought we had arrived at similar 

conclusions with respect to the spending-power clause and the 

immigration clause.  And we thought we had achieved the 

substance of Meech and the debate that's going on now is 

whether that's the case or whether some further adjustment 

could be made to the formulations of those items that would 

bring the situation closer to Meech and thereby satisfy the 

Quebec government on that point. 

 

And when I referred to delicate stage, it's delicate in that area 

right now.  And I have no hesitation though in sharing that with 

the member and we're watching with great interest over these 

days and participating as we're asked to, to move that question 

along. 

 

What does it all mean?  The Quebec media and the 

intelligentsia, if I can use that term, have reacted negatively to 

the idea of the Triple E Senate.  I can tell the member that I 

spent the better part of a week in Montreal this year and I took 

advantage of my opportunity there to talk constitution with a 

lot of people that I just met casually in a restaurant, or a taxi 

driver, or someone staying in the hotel -- whoever I could talk 

to.  And I was as bold as I dared to be in approaching them and 

asking them what they thought of these discussions.  And 

without my raising it, but only because it was the subject of so 

much play in the media, I think everyone of these people said 

to me that the Senate is not a big issue in Quebec.  It's not a 

deal-breaker in Quebec.  I get that from the common folk in the 

city of Montreal, all French-Canadian I think.  Yes, all of them 

were French-Canadian and this was the reaction that they 

volunteered to me. 

 

So I was a bit surprised when I saw the editorialists, Lise 

Bissonnette and other people, reacting so powerfully to the idea 

of an equal Senate and how this is totally unacceptable to 

Quebecers.  And I thought to myself, well, she hasn't talked to 

the Quebecers I talked to anyway, because they didn't give a 

darn about the Senate. 

 

So I . . . and I might also say to the member that I don't hear the 

word Senate in the discussions that are taking place on the 

telephone across the country now as being something that 

Quebec is ranting and raving about at the 

level of the government and government officials.  It is rather 

now a question of how the essential requirements of Quebec -- 

I refer to them as the Meech items and they're not --but what 

they are, are the minimum requirements of Quebec to adhere to 

the Canadian constitutional instruments.  They haven't changed 

their position in 20 years on these points. 

 

There was a formulation of them in Meech that the sizeable 

portion of the Canadian public reacted to in a negative way, 

and so different formulations have been sought which would on 

the one hand meet these requirements, and on the other hand 

not raise all kinds of problems across the country.  And I 

thought we had arrived at such a package but that's what we're 

trying to deal with on the telephone these days. 

 

If that can be settled away, then I think a first ministers' 

conference would follow very quickly at which it would 

become clear whether the package, as it is, is acceptable to 

Quebec or whether they would require some further discussion 

-- and we'll take it from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll not be 

completing the Estimates we're now involved in and I ask to 

move to Rural Affairs. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member from Saskatoon Wildwood 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce a woman who's sitting in the Speaker's gallery -- a 

woman who is a leader in the women's community in 

Saskatchewan; a well-known Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

columnist, and the very patient spouse of our well-travelled 

constitutional affairs minister.  I would like to welcome to the 

Assembly Ms. Sandra Mitchell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Vote 43 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his officials 

to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me tonight I have Bill Reader, who is the deputy minister; 

Ernie Anderson, who is the executive director of transportation 

services; Lloyd Talbot, who is the executive director of 

revenue, administration, and financial services; John Babcock, 

who is the director of Crown lands; and Walter Antonio at the 

back, who is director of transportation planning.  Thank you. 

 

(2100) 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you.  It's indeed a pleasure at last 

to have this opportunity to see this minister in the hot seat that 

we've been waiting to get him in for so long.  Finally at last we 

may get an answer or two to questions that we've asked many 

times in this Assembly over the past several months -- 

questions that have been dodged deliberately, totally, and 

completely. 

 

And now we are intending to be here until we find out the 

answers.  And we have a choice of being here a little while or a 

long while.  I consider a little while until the end of August and 

a long while till the end of Christmas season.  So whichever it 

takes. 

 

How such an important department in this government could 

go on this long without answering the questions that rural 

Saskatchewan is asking is beyond me.  In what is supposed to 

be a free and democratic country and a free and democratic 

province, it has been a shock and amazement to me -- the 

trickery that has gone on in this department in the past months.  

So maybe we'll find out some of the answers. 

 

I want to tell you that we're going to be asking you, minister, 

questions about how, not only the Crop Insurance department 

runs, but how your department operates -- things to do with 

rural municipalities, all the way from the gravel that's on a road 

to the kind of cost sharing that's done with every kind of 

project in rural municipalities. 

 

I want to warn you that we intend on finding out once and for 

all how your department operates, who operates it, and why the 

things are done within it. 

 

There are too many secrets in this province.  And in this 

department we intend to ferret out each and every one of them, 

one at a time for as long as it takes to get to the bottom of 

everything. 

 

I had a constituent with me today who particularly asked me to 

ask a few of the questions, and we're going to get to those 

questions and we're going to find out things.  Why the 

philosophy of this government, for example, has determined 

that farmers and ranchers can no longer own their own property 

or buy land that they had transactions begun on.  We will be 

finding out from you how you feel about those kind of things 

and where you intend on leading this province in the next few 

years.  We're going to find out what makes you tick as well as 

what makes your department tick. 

 

It is our intention to discuss with you all of the things that have 

been talked about in Rural Development with regards to cost 

sharing over the last months.  We determined from your 

department and your statements that there was supposed to be a 

7.4 per cent decrease in funding to rural municipalities, when 

in fact we haven't been able to find one rural municipality in 

the province that's willing to admit that they had that 

percentage or anything less -- only more.  And we want to 

know from you, and we're going to find out from you, exactly 

how you do your mathematics. 

We have several questions to ask you, but I do want to ask one 

direct question before I preamble very much longer because I 

know that you just can't wait to get to your feet to answer this 

question.  In the department you had an employee for a very 

short duration, named Harold Ellis.  Mr. Ellis was very ill and 

it is my understanding that he was on disability.  Is it true that 

when you had Mr. Ellis fired you had the termination notice 

delivered to his hospital bed by an agent of the Public Service 

Commission? 

 

Now I'm told that we have witnesses prepared to swear to 

dispositions of this fact, and we want to know if you feel it is 

compassionate to send your agents of employment and how 

you will justify sending those agents to a hospital to terminate 

the job of a disabled and very ill man.  How can you justify this 

totally, utterly, disgusting action?  What is your reply, 

minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I am glad to 

be on my feet to answer this and other questions and I'm sure it 

won't take till the end of September.  There's no desire to hide 

any facts from the opposition, so I'm sure we'll be through this 

in a very short order. 

 

As regards to the question at hand of Mr. Ellis, yes you are 

indeed correct.  Mr. Ellis was quite sick.  The reason the 

termination was delivered to the hospital was because he had 

asked for it to be delivered to the hospital.  His position was 

abolished in the reorganization, and he went on permanent 

disability at that time.  He had asked us to deliver the notice to 

the hospital. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I sort of wonder how many people 

believe in the tooth fairy as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have another very pointed question that I want 

to ask you tonight to get this thing set on the right stage.  Is it 

true that Brian Oster, the NDP candidate in the Maple Creek 

constituency, recently turned back land bank land after 

receiving a cash monetary consideration for the improvements 

on that land -- money that he has reported to have taken to 

Alberta and specifically to Medicine Hat to buy a home from 

which he now resides and commutes to the rest of his farming 

operation here in Saskatchewan.  Is that a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, 

we're not certain who the . . . what particular case the member 

opposite is referring to.  If he would care to give us the name or 

some information on it, we will certainly dig up the 

information for him. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The name of your candidate was Brian Oster; 

I already said that, and he formerly lived at Golden Prairie, 

Saskatchewan.  Does that help you, minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, we 

are not aware that Mr. Oster had any Crown land, or any deal 

was for making.  But we will certainly . . . we can get that 

information, as much as is not privileged information that 

involves individual clients.  But we will certainly research that 

and get you what information we can on that. 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How soon could we expect to get that 

information, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We could have that information 

probably by tomorrow, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well we will determine to keep you here long 

enough to make sure that the information is delivered, and we 

will give you till tomorrow to deliver it.  And then we will ask 

you again and again and again, as many times as it takes. 

 

There's so many things on my desk that people have offered me 

as suggestions for questions, I hardly know where to start. 

 

But I want to start with an article in The Western Producer that 

directly stimulates questions.  It says in here that agriculture, of 

course is . . .  the preamble is that agriculture is hit by budget 

cuts and so on, and then the writer unfortunately is not 

informed that there is a difference between Rural Development 

and Agriculture.  So I have to pick and choose to try and pick 

those things that relate to your department rather than the 

Department of Agriculture.  So I'm sure that if I hit some of the 

ones that don't concern you, you're going to tell me right away 

so that I can get on with next one that does concern your 

department. 

 

But in here it says, "The Farm Purchase Program is being 

eliminated."  I'm not sure if that's your jurisdiction or not.  My 

question is, first of all, is it?  And why was it eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, the member opposite is 

correct, that is Agriculture.  The farm purchase program was a 

subsidy of interest rate on purchase of land, subsidizing rates 

down to 8 per cent which is under the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, we'll ask the Minister of Agriculture in 

more detail on that. 

 

Now we've got . . . it goes on and says: 

 

 Interest rates under the Agriculture Credit Corp. of 

Saskatchewan will be set at a prime plus two percent for 

livestock cash advances and to cost plus one percent for 

capital loans. 

 

I would like to know two things here.  Why would there be a 

difference from one type of loan to another?  And why would 

any loan be as much as 1 or 2 per cent above prime when in 

fact people who joined things like feeder associations can get 

banks to finance at anywheres from a half -- sometimes I 

understand even less than that -- of a per cent over prime? 

 

Now why would these farmers in these categories have to pay 

up to 2 per cent over prime?  Why are they being penalized 

when other people can get credit a lot less? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the loans that the 

member refers to are under ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) which is a Crown corporation 

and also under a different minister. 

I suspect the answer to the question is that interest rates are 

varied depending on the security and the risk and the loan and 

the repayment conditions and so on.  And I expect ACS acts 

much as any other lending institution in determining its rates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would take serious exception to that, that 

they should.  Obviously they do if they're overcharging people.  

But you're obviously targeting the people that can afford to pay 

less than anybody else in this whole province, that's the people 

that have debt with the government on agricultural lending of 

any kind. 

 

But I'll go on because I'm going to get to ask that same 

question of the Minister of Agriculture as you've indicated that 

that's his domain. 

 

 In the department of rural development (it goes on to say) 

$241,000 in grants to agricultural and historical societies will 

be eliminated. 

 

My question right there has to be: how do you expect these 

societies to continue to operate, and don't you think that they 

provide a service for rural Saskatchewan?  Where's the saving?  

The grants ranged from several hundreds of dollars for local 

fairs to $7,000 for the Canadian Western Agribition.  And I'll 

stop there and let you respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the cutting of these 

grants of course was one of the tough decisions that we made.  

I think, as members opposite know, this was a very tough 

budget.  We were facing a basically bankrupt province.  We 

had to make some very tough choices.  I believe the ag and hort 

societies will continue to flourish.  They will do it as rural 

people have always done it, by their own means and will 

struggle on.  We'll create some problems for them but by and 

large we expect to see these survive. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, the Department of Agriculture 

and the Department of Rural Development, everything that has 

to do with agriculture, has either been increased in taxed or cut 

in grants.  My question to you is: what percentage has 

Agriculture in general been cut in this mad budget as compared 

to other departments in government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, of the questions 

we've had so far, I barely have had one that touches on my 

department.  The spending cuts in Agriculture would be, I 

think, best addressed to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, no use sitting down so quick.  

Address the question to Rural Development then, exactly, 

specifically.  What percentage of cut in Rural Development as 

compared to other departments, say Health, Education?  You've 

slashed rural Saskatchewan in every place you can and yet 

you've come up with a deficit of $517 million in your budget.  

You've cut all kinds of programs out of rural Saskatchewan and 

yet you've got this mammoth amount of deficit on top of 200 

millions of dollars of increased money coming in from 

taxation.  Where is all that money going as compared to what 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

you're cutting out of agriculture? 

 

My point is going to be simply this, that you have treated 

agriculture unfairly in the guise of an attempt to solve the 

problem of deficits and you haven't even allocated any dollars 

towards deficit control or paying off deficits.  In fact you're 

even running a bigger deficit than before.  So what percentage 

of Rural Development cuts as compared to the rest of the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, the Rural Development 

budget was cut approximately 15 per cent; about 300,000 of 

that would apply directly to agriculture, the rest to rural 

government and so on. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay you cut by 15 per cent to agriculture, 

but you didn't answer the question.  How does that compare 

with the cuts to other departments in government like Health or 

Education or some of those others? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the members 

opposite have the budget and the overall cuts from each 

department.  And I don't have the Health numbers and the 

Education numbers with me.  I think budgets were cut.  I think 

if you compare to Community Services and other departments 

of similar structure, they were cut very similar to those, in fact 

less I think than Community Services.  And I would quote 

numbers . . . I think Education cuts in the order of 3 or 4 per 

cent.  And I don't like to quote numbers on other people's 

departments that I don't have in my back pocket. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, with all due respect, you do sit 

around the cabinet table, and you have access to every bit of 

this information.  And I challenge you that you have this 

information, and you know it all too well. 

 

You know it all too well that in this province, your government 

has attacked agriculture and agricultural people through the 

Department of Rural Development as well as other places.  

You've attacked them with mammoth cuts where you haven't 

done the same thing to other places in the province.  We say 

that your government is treating rural Saskatchewan unfairly.  

That's my point, and your answers will verify that as we go 

along.  And the people who are watching will be the judge of 

that. 

 

"The government . . ." it goes on here, and I want to press 

through these questions so that we can get some answers. 

 

 The government has also decided (it says) to move 90 

extension agrologists back to the department of agriculture.  

They had been transferred to rural development in 1988 by 

the previous Conservative government.  Only one full-time 

job has been eliminated from the department of agriculture, 

although a number of term positions will disappear. 

 

 Thirty-eight full-time jobs will be eliminated from rural 

development, although 25 are already vacant.  The remaining 

13 include seven 

engineers, whose jobs will become part time . . . 

 

Now my question there is: having transferred all those people, 

is that an indication to the people that you are in fact following 

through with your promise at the last SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) convention that you will 

eliminate the Department of Rural Development, or that your 

government will, and that it will exist no longer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in regards to the 

whole raft of questions that I think were there, the members 

opposite seem to think that Rural Development pertains to rural 

Saskatchewan, and Health and Education pertain to urban 

Saskatchewan. I would like to remind the members opposite 

that we also have schools and hospitals in rural Saskatchewan.  

And so the cuts that were made across were . . . many cuts were 

made.  Community Services cuts which deal with urban 

governments were cut even larger than rural municipal 

governments.  So I think that, although the members opposite 

would like to continue to play the rural/urban split that they 

used to try to get re-elected, I think they should look on the 

success they had in the last election campaign before they try to 

pursue that tactic again. 

 

As regards to the extension agrologists, those people have the 

same mandate as they had before.  They are just now under a 

different department of reorganization.  The transfer has very 

little effect on the performance and the goals that were set out 

for extension agrologists. 

 

And as to the member's statement of promises that I made, the 

only promise that I've made to SARM and to rural 

municipalities is that we will not be forcing any structure on 

them and they will be consulted in planning.  And any changes 

that they desire, we would certainly help them to carry out 

those changes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't think I heard what I heard.  We didn't 

ask a question about structure.  We asked you whether or not 

this is the first step in eliminating Rural Development as a part 

of government.  I think I'll let you have one more shot at 

answering that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This was a step which was taken . . 

. we felt that the extension agrologists belonged in agriculture, 

never should have been moved.  And the division where we 

had the specialists who were in agriculture and the people who 

were below them in the Department of Rural Development, 

was not a very efficient way to run an extension system.  And 

therefore, the reorganization was done. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you still didn't answer the question.  But 

I'll get back to it later because I think you'll need some time to 

think about that maybe. 

 

You mentioned that you feel like there's a promotion of a 

rural/urban split.  Several thoughts immediately can run 

through your mind with a comment like that from a minister.  

The first one that hit my mind was, if you have no rural people 

left, how can there be a rural/urban split?  And the direction 

you are taking this government -- you and the rest of the 

ministers in this government -- there won't be any rural people 

left to split with. 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

If you continue to cut rural services . . . and you say hospitals 

and education are supplied to rural people. Some of my 

colleagues immediately echoed, for how long?  And that would 

have had to be my first thought if they hadn't said it first.  

You've got all kinds of plans to eliminate hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan.  We've seen the white paper.  You've got all 

kinds of plans to eliminate education out in rural 

Saskatchewan.  We've already seen a report last winter that 

indicated some of that direction. 

 

So I hardly think that the amount of money that you're 

spending in the cities on health care will be considered to be 

equal to that which you are doing to rural Saskatchewan by the 

rural people who lose a hospital or no longer have a school left.  

So I think maybe you should guard what you say about this sort 

of thing because the rural/urban split may in fact be more of a 

cause and effect of your doings than anybody else.  And it's 

your government now that's responsible for actions, not 

somebody else's. 

 

I want to go on with just with another little part in here.  It 

says: 

 

 (a man named) Lloyd Talbot, executive director of the 

department of rural development, said the cuts shouldn't have 

any impact on government services or the quality of life in 

rural (Saskatchewan). 

 

Can you believe that?  Mr. Minister, do you honestly think that 

cutting 15 per cent out of the budgets of Rural Development to 

rural Saskatchewan would have no effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, the member opposite 

talks about losing rural people.  I think if you look back over 

the past 10 years, we've had a very dramatic loss of rural 

population.  I think if he sticks around and watches us over the 

next four years, we'll see that trend reversed.  And I think we 

will see we won't go back to the '60s.  We'll see a new, vibrant, 

and flourishing rural Saskatchewan by the time the term of this 

government is up.  And that is the direction that we are clearly 

going to be going. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could we hold you to that promise that rural 

Saskatchewan is in fact going to bloom, flourish, and grow in 

numbers of people during your administration?  I think we'd 

better put a real big red X on the piece of paper beside that 

comment because, in fact, we are going to hold you to that. 

 

You absolutely are going to be held to task by the people of 

this province in three years from now, not four any more, three 

now.  It's getting closer to the deadline every day.  And they're 

going to remember that kind of remark -- the kind of a remark 

that says people who take money away from rural 

Saskatchewan are actually going to help it grow.  I see one 

fellow in the back row over there turn totally white and pale.  

He must be your back-bencher because he's not ours.  We 

know what's going on; he just discovered it. 

 

I want to press on because we've got a ton of questions, and we 

don't have till Christmas time really to ask them 

all. 

 

I want to ask you on behalf of my constituent who joined me 

today: what is your position on public ownership as versus the 

private ownership in the area of leased land, and the deals that 

were being struck by farmers and ranchers that were buying 

leased land, some of which were in the process of being 

negotiated at the time of the election. 

 

And even though the paper work hadn't been completed, even 

though in all of the applications the i's had been dotted and the 

t's had been crossed, everything had been done according to the 

law of the day, even though that had been done and other 

people had successfully completed their transactions, you cut 

that program off and you stopped those people because they 

had got caught up in the legal machinery of our province.  Do 

you have any intentions of correcting that situation for those 

people who got caught in the mix of the legal things in our 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are, and were, 

several land programs and sales policies.  There's a cash sale 

policy which continues.  There is a rent to own policy which 

we are reviewing at this time.  Justice has some problems with 

the policy.  Anybody who had an appraisal done, we continued 

with the sale.  Anybody who had not yet had an appraisal done, 

the sales were not carried through with if they were in the 

initial stages.  Anybody that had got as far as having an 

appraisal done, the sales were completed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you saying, Minister, if an individual 

could prove to you that he had done the right things, and then 

had not had his transaction completed, that you in fact would 

reconsider that particular situation and take the appropriate 

action and allow the transaction to go through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, if the individual had 

an appraisal completed then I think we would certainly look at 

that particular case because that was the policy, to carry 

through with all the sales that had an appraisal completed on 

them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I do believe that we have such a case.  And 

just to press that one step further -- and I'm taking you on your 

honour here -- you said that you will do the right thing if this 

individual has done his homework right and gotten the thing to 

that process, or gotten through the process.  So just for his 

particular case -- and there may be a few others; I think there 

are more than one -- you will then, and you're stating this now, 

you will go ahead and allow those transactions to be 

completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we are not aware of 

any appraisals that were completed where the sales were not 

carried out.  So if those cases exist, we would certainly review 

them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That wasn't my question, sir, that you would 

just review them.  Would you honour them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're not 

going to make commitments without seeing the 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

details of the case.  As I said, if the case is progressed and 

everything is in order as per policy, we would certainly carry 

them out if they are indeed to the appraisal stage, and the 

appraisal is complete and paid for that we would certainly look 

at honouring those contracts. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I certainly will 

pass that information along and the people that are involved I 

think will be in touch with you rather shortly. 

 

I want to go on and ask for my constituent another question 

that he was concerned about.  And that is to do with the 

increase in lease fees on pastures that has resulted over the past 

few months from your department.  I have reports of as much 

as either 67 or 68 per cent increases in some cases. 

 

My constituent says that this direction that you are taking, 

coupled with others, will bankrupt a lot of the people that are 

on those rather fragile grassy lands that are used for livestock 

production.  He asks the question: would you rather have those 

farmers off of the land and put on welfare than to see them 

make their own living? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the raising fees 

have been set by a formula for many years.  As of '87, I guess 

with the previous administration, froze those rents and the 

formula that was used to calculate them would have indicated 

much higher rents.  What we did was move the rents half way 

to the formula price for those rents. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, on the initial statement 

like that, it would appear that you have some justification, 

because you say rents were frozen for a while and therefore in 

order to keep up with the times and all that sort of thing you 

would be justified in increasing it. 

 

The reality of the real world, sir . . . and I suspect from your 

comment that you haven't had to depend on running very many 

cattle on government-leased land to make your living in the 

past.  The reality of the world is  . . . and you can check with 

your department, people that have worked with counselling and 

assistance programs, the farm debt process, the review 

processes -- all of those kinds of things -- those departments are 

available to you. 

 

And I think if you take the time to talk to them, you're going to 

find out that there was a very real reason why those rates were 

frozen.  And that very real reason was the fact that those people 

weren't making enough of an income to be able to pay any 

more if they were going to stay in business. 

 

(2130) 

 

If you continued to raise their rents and their taxes, they were 

bound to go broke.  The past administration recognized that, 

therefore they froze the rates because there was a need for them 

to be frozen.  Because I can show you if you can't find them, 

places in your departmental records where folks who have dealt 

with the government in different financial and institutional 

areas, had run up huge bills for feed during the drought years of 

the 1980s, and the livestock prices -- even though they look 

attractive to a lot of folks -- had never 

increased enough to pay off those past debts.  They were only 

enough to continue to function on a debt-free ranch that had no 

past debts as a result of drought and having to move cattle 

north or bring in feedstocks. 

 

And the reality of life was that those rates were frozen for that 

very reason, that the past administration had some sympathy to 

keeping ranchers out on the land and in the country, rather than 

to end up having it a barren wasteland with only antelope and 

deer and a few other wildlife. 

 

And of course that leads me to my next question that my 

constituent wanted to ask, and that is would you rather try to 

formulate a program where you eliminate all the ranchers off of 

the land in order to have the wildlife habitat lands all populated 

with nothing but deer and antelope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to point out 

to members opposite that I have run cattle on government 

lease, although a very small one.  I found the rates to be 

cheaper than private pastures.  I think they still are.  I think 

those rates are based on cattle prices and I think you need some 

logic in setting prices.  If the formula is wrong, then the 

formula needs to be changed.  I think in order to run a 

government in a logical way, you need to have some sort of 

formula and follow it, or some policy for setting prices. 

 

I suggest that the reason that the prices were froze was because 

the members opposite were afraid of the election that was 

coming and they postponed it like they did a lot of other rate 

hikes until after the election. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that, sir, is a comment that's absolute 

nonsense and you know it.  The ranchers in this country don't 

number enough numbers to affect an election any place.  The 

reality of life is that they are a very small number of our 

population, and you could quite easily eliminate all of them 

without affecting very much in terms of poll results at any 

election except maybe a municipal one in the town of Maple 

Creek in one or two divisions. 

 

Other than that, in the whole province those people simply are 

not in a position to carry a clout with the political ballot.  They 

have to depend on a balance of fair play and some of your own 

words that you just repeated, being used in some degree of 

fairness. 

 

And I suggest to you that your point of view of what is fair in 

determining what these folks need is out of balance with the 

realities of what the livestock industry's all about in this 

province in the last few years, and especially today. 

 

I think I will let the public judge you for what you said, on 

what you said, and move into the area of gas-well lease 

situations which have occurred over the past year.  Again, the 

constituent that I talked to today is concerned about the fact 

that you have cancelled all of the rents that were paid to the 

leaseholders of government lease.  He's concerned by the fact 

that you have broken leases by . . . and contracts with the 

ranchers in that you have . . . And other administrations have 

done this in the past.  They have allowed petroleum companies 

to come on to land 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

that farmers and ranchers hold a contract on.  The individual 

that holds that contract -- that lease of that land, that's a 

contract -- those individuals, when they are forced to allow 

petroleum companies on to that land, need to be either 

compensated or else their contract is broken and their rights are 

violated.  You are not paying for the use of the land only, you 

are paying for the right to go on to that land and to break that 

contract with that rancher. 

 

It was seen as wise and true wisdom by the past administration 

that the loss of the use of the land should also be considered to 

the farmer.  The loss of the privacy to the farmer or rancher 

should also be considered as a monetary reimbursement to that 

individual.  It was also seen that hazard to his operation, his 

livestock, his family, those kinds of things, should also be 

considered as a monetary reimbursement to the individual. 

 

Your administration has decided that a one-year payment is 

enough and that for all eternity the state should take benefit of 

all of that land and that those contracts then are, in effect, null 

and void.  That we believe to be unfair and my constituent 

makes that point.  He wonders if you would reconsider that 

point of view in light of the tough economic conditions that go 

on in the province today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I am very glad the 

member opposite asked that question.  I thought he would 

probably avoid asking that question.  It was indeed a dastardly 

deed that was done by the previous administration.  Those cuts 

were made in the previous budget.  When I came to office as 

the Minister of Rural Development, one of the first problems I 

had to deal with was the fact that the oil and gas lease revenues 

had been cut from 800,000 to 150,000.  Nobody had been 

notified.  None of the patrons had been notified.  And the 

people who should have gotten their cheques in April had not 

got a cheque and had not got any notice. 

 

And certainly I think there should have been . . . there was 

room for changes to the policy.  We were forced into making 

those changes without proper consultation, without proper 

notification.  And right now we are in a process of reviewing 

our policy to see how we can in some way alleviate this. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I am sure that a lot of folks out in the country 

are glad that you are reviewing this particular program because 

it is your government first of all that implemented this 

program, even though the past administration was looking at it.  

You are responsible for the action that you took in 

implementing the program, of cancelling the leases outright.  

You could have chosen to do otherwise. 

 

As for what past administrations did, I think I've said it before 

in this House, and I'll say it again.  I wasn't here.  I don't agree 

with what was done here.  I don't care if the last guy did it or if 

you did it; it was wrong then, and if it's wrong now, it's wrong 

at any time. 

 

There is a definite, absolute argument why these people should 

get this compensation.  And some of the people who live on 

that land have talked to you, and they have told you that they 

can recognize some of your thinking, 

and they are willing to go along with negotiating a 

compromise.  I believe that that's fair ball.  And they have 

indicated that they are willing to look at a graduated system.  I 

think you're aware of what I'm talking about. 

 

And my question of course is -- if your parrots can tolerate 

listening to your answers long enough to be quiet -- would you 

consider going back into a program of an annual payment for 

those producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I told the member 

opposite that we do have this under review.  He is absolutely 

right.  I consulted with many people, and they make some very 

good points.  I have very few people asking for the 

reinstatement of the old program in its entirety.  All they are 

asking for is some concessions, and we are now looking at 

possible reductions in rent or some other means to compensate 

producers for having oil wells and oil companies on their land. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Does your answer, sir, suggest that if all of 

the people involved were to write you a letter or to phone you 

up that you would consider giving them back the old program, 

because you said you've had very little request for it?  Does 

that imply that if they made the request, you would give it to 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the members 

opposite have a fairly restricted view of what consultation 

means.  We talk to people and we talk to all the players 

involved in all the issues, and we listen to their concerns.  But 

as a government we make decisions.  We, as you say, are 

responsible for our actions, and we will in the end make the 

decisions that are best for the province overall. 

 

I was pointing out, Mr. Chair, that the people that I have talked 

with are very reasonable.  They have some legitimate concerns, 

and they've been very reasonable in presenting those.  And we 

are now looking at those concerns and how we can alleviate. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's exactly my point, Mr. Minister.  They 

are very reasonable people.  They're reasonable enough to 

understand that when you took the program away from them 

and came to visit with you at the SARM convention in a 

private conference, they are reasonable enough to recognize 

that you said no, they would not get the old program back, so 

therefore they have been lobbying to try to recover and salvage 

any part of the program that they could. 

 

Now you have suggested that because nobody has asked for the 

old program back, that's why you took it away.  That's what I 

heard you say.  If that's wrong, say so.  If these people can 

come to you and say that they want it back, en masse and they 

will be listened to, say that, and we'll see to it that they're here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the members 

opposite I think are . . . It must be getting late at night; they're 

not hearing what I'm saying.  I am saying that we did not take 

this program away in the first place, they took it away.  We are 

looking at not bringing back the program as it was, but in 

bringing back some measure of fairness to these producers. 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Once again, Minister, you implemented the 

program.  You said here now that you would reconsider your 

position.  You have suggested that nobody has asked for the 

old program back, therefore they're not getting it.  If they come 

to you and ask for it, will you reinstate the old program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I suspect the reason 

that they're not asking me for the old program is they suspect it 

was not a totally fair and reasonable program.  Knowing that 

the budget restraints that this government is under, that it's 

certainly highly unlikely that the old program would be 

reinstated.  Having seen that the previous administration 

chopped it completely, I think they will be certainly glad to get 

anything back. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I absolutely agree, they will be glad to get 

anything back.  But that is not the point, Mr. Minister.  I didn't 

ask you what you suspect.  I am suggesting to you that these 

people will come en masse and ask for their old program back 

if you give them any hope at all that it could in fact win the 

day, and that they could get it back.  Will you, if a lot of those 

people come in and ask, will you reinstate the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I say again, we are 

reviewing the program.  The chances of it being . . . We do not 

feel that under the financial restraint we're on that it's possible 

to reinstate the program as it was.  Obviously the previous 

administration chopped it completely, and without notice, and 

without consultation, and we certainly have at least engaged in 

consultation with many of these people and we are listening to 

their concerns and looking to alleviate their problem. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I'll just correct you in that.  The program 

was not chopped, it was under review.  It was under review at 

the time of the election, and the decision to cancel it was made 

by your administration and by you, sir, and nobody else.  And 

as you have floated around this question four times now, and 

I've counted very carefully, I judge that you are not prepared to 

stick to your word and allow the people to come and ask you 

for a program, and give it back to them. 

 

You have dodged what you originally set out and said, and I 

believe that you are retracting your word.  You suggested the 

other morning in question period, or the other afternoon rather 

in question period, that you consulted with farmers by flying 

over them.  Is this how you consulted with these producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that question 

hardly deserves an answer, but if the previous administration 

didn't cut this program, maybe he can explain why people who 

were expecting a cheque in April got absolutely nothing -- no 

notice, no cheque and no consultation from the previous 

administration. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Once again, I will repeat for the minister's 

benefit.  I really don't care who screwed this program up as 

long as somebody here straightens it out.  I didn't agree with 

what happened before necessarily, even putting it on hold and 

reviewing it. 

The reality though is that I have been assured the letters went 

out to individuals stating that they in fact would be getting their 

money.  And I have had producers say that they can supply 

those kinds of letters. 

 

And the point being though that you're the man that's in the 

driver's seat now.  I don't know if you fly the airplane yourself 

or not, but you're certainly the Minister of Rural Development 

and the decision of whether or not this money is going to go 

back to producers is your decision.  It has absolutely nothing to 

do with anybody in the past.  It is only you that can make this 

decision now. 

 

You are the one that is going to be judged for what you do 

here.  And you've rambled around it so many times that I'm not 

going to give you a chance to answer this specific question 

right at this point again.  You're going to be judged on the 

statements you've made.  And if the parrot in the background 

wants to listen he can and if doesn't want to he can continue to 

hum along.  I'll just shut my hearing-aid off and forget about 

him. 

 

I want to know, Minister, about the RM (rural municipality) 

formula, the one you've dodged all spring.  I would like you to 

tell me exactly how this formula works in cost sharing with 

rural municipalities. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are several 

formulas for revenue sharing.  There's the conditional grants, 

the unconditional grants, and some of the special grants.  If the 

member opposite will be more specific we could tell him the 

calculation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  In lieu of the flippant 

remarks of your colleagues in the background, I'm going now 

to ask you for a breakdown of each and every RM in this 

province, and you have them -- 298 of them.  I want to know 

both the conditional and unconditional grants. 

 

I want to know how much they were reduced, how many 

dollars they received last year, how many dollars they received 

the year before, and how many dollars they're going to get this 

year, for each RM under each of those categories, and any 

other grants or whatever that they get money for through the 

entire province for every municipality. 

 

Will you supply that information, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have the 

information here if the member opposite would like. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We will set our 

mathematicians to work on it.  And if by tomorrow we haven't . 

. . If we haven't determined by tomorrow that this in fact is the 

answer to the question, we will repeat it.  And again, we will 

repeat it until we get the proper answers. 

 

Mr. Minister, you mentioned a minute ago -- and I wanted to 

go back because this is important for the record -- that you 

consulted with people with regards to the oil and gas well 

leases.  Would you tell this Assembly who 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

those people were? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we talked to the 

stock growers association.  We talked to surface rights people.  

We talked to many individual RMs at the SARM convention 

and at other times, and individuals who came into the office to 

talk to us about it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It's nice to hear that you consulted with so 

many people and talked to so many folks.  How many of the 

SARM district meetings held this summer in Saskatchewan did 

you personally attend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I was unable to 

attend any of the RM, rural district meetings.  The six meetings 

were six days in a row.  Although the members opposite were 

busy on the golf courses and touring around the province, we 

had . . . as minister, as you know, was saving the people of 

Saskatchewan money on a small cabinet.  We were also very 

busy with things like GRIP and blockades, and I was not able 

to attend any of those meetings. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm quite sure, Mr. Minister, that you took the 

time to fly over the blockade while you were investigating all 

these things that were more important than rural Saskatchewan 

and SARM meetings, that are the most important part of your 

portfolio. 

 

Just to correct things for the people who are watching.  The 

meetings were held three one week, three the next week.  They 

were not consecutive.  There were three in one week, three in 

the next week.  You were well aware of when they were held.  

I suggest that you were afraid to go to those meetings for fear 

of meeting the people of rural Saskatchewan and facing them 

square on with the actions that you and your government have 

taken in this province of late . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

believe that is quite a fact. 

 

My colleagues suggest that this is the first time in the history of 

Saskatchewan that a minister has not attended at least one 

meeting.  Some members of our caucus attended every one, so 

we were quite aware of the fact that you weren't there. 

 

I suggest to you, sir, that this sets a trend to your answers when 

you say that you consulted with all of these people.  A few 

minutes ago you told us you consulted with everybody before 

you came to all of your decisions. 

 

Now you admit that you never went to even one meeting of the 

six held during this summer, a period of time when this 

Assembly was not even in session.  Everybody was out doing 

other work and you say you were too busy.  You didn't even 

have to fill your chair here.  That wasn't even an excuse you 

could use and you didn't bother because all you can do is fly 

over. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I think we better delve into some of the 

specifics so that we can get something on the record at least.  

Let's start with your own staff, Minister.  Would you please 

give us a list of all the persons working in the minister's office, 

or otherwise, who report directly to you -- each of their titles, 

their salaries, their job descriptions, their education, and 

employment history including the 

last place of employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have some of 

that information.  We do not have the employment history and 

the last place employed.  In consulting with the Minister of 

Justice, if he feels that that information is something we can 

release, we can add that to the information later. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now once again, Minister, we will peruse the 

information and we will await the rest of it.  If by tomorrow we 

haven't received it, we will continue to ask you. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to know also, each, if any, let's see 

now, who worked or were paid by any other part of 

government before being on your payroll? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, Deanna McIntosh 

who was on that list, was employed in Transportation Services 

in Rural Development previous to her employment in my 

office. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- If there are any additions to that, I will 

appreciate it if you will make that information available 

tomorrow as well.  It's always possible to forget one, and if you 

happen to think of something you forgot, I'd appreciate you 

letting us know so that we won't have to jump all over your 

hide tomorrow. 

 

Have any of them been reclassified since joining the 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Nobody has been reclassified since 

coming to my office. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now to the rest of the department.  Please 

provide a list of all the positions, job titles, that have been 

eliminated in the department since November 1, 1991. 

 

I take it that list was the answer to my question.  Okay, (b) I 

want a job description of each position eliminated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 

here, but we can certainly provide it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- (c) We want to know complete compensation 

details including salary, expenses, allowances, and special 

payments and so on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps the 

member could clarify his question.  For which people and for 

which list is he asking these details? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You'd like to know who I was referring to.  

Complete compensation details including salary, expenses, 

allowances, and special payments and so on of all of those 

people listed in (a) and (b) who were -- do you want me to read 

(a) and (b) to you? -- a list of all positions, job titles, that have 

been eliminated in the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think we can provide that 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay and if an old employee, the length 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

of time employed, including the date the person first started 

work for the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, we didn't hear all of that 

question.  It's the age and length of employment of the list of 

jobs that were terminated?  Is that the question? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- It says, if an old employee, the length of time 

employed including the date the person first started work for 

the department. 

 

These are questions that I am reading as an earlier request from 

some of your government people wanting this specifically laid 

out in terms that they can understand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not sure of 

the definition of old, but I think we can endeavour to supply 

that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would define an old employee not 

necessarily one with grey hair but one that had worked with 

your department prior to the last election.  Okay, if a new 

employee, the employment record including the place of last 

employment . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Including any old guys. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- If you can get them to be quiet you'll be able 

to hear better. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I didn't catch a 

question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I'll just repeat it and put it this way.  

New employees or people who were hired after the election, 

could you give us the employment record including the place 

of last employment.  If they've been terminated, we want to 

know why they were terminated and their employment record 

and so on. 

 

I've already asked the question about people who are employed 

from the election time and were kept on.  Now I'm asking about 

those that you may have fired who were hired in November and 

fired since, if there were any . . . just in case you found a 

dead-beat in the bunch and fired him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had no 

hirings in the department since the election. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you see it wasn't that hard, was it?  Now 

I'm supposed to ask employment qualifications including 

education.  Can you supply that for all those people that I've 

mentioned so I don't have to spell out each one at a time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, if he's asking for 

the particulars of people that we've hired and we didn't hire 

anybody, I'm not sure how we're going to supply them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would like to know, Mr. Minister, that 

question answered with regards to the people who you 

employed before November, before the election.  Obviously 

somebody hired them and they must have had employment 

qualifications and they must have had some 

degree of education.  I'd like to know what that is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: --  Are you asking for the education 

of all the employees in the department? Because they were all 

hired before the election that I know of. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Like I said before, Mr. Minister, I really don't 

care who did what.  I'm concerned about getting answers to 

these questions so we can find out what's going on in this 

department.  I wasn't here before and I want to know.  People 

expect me to come in here and find out what's going on, so I'd 

like to know for everybody. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member 

opposite is asking for the information on that list of people who 

have been released, I believe we can supply it, again with 

consultation with the Minister of Justice to determine what we 

can and cannot release about each employee.  We will certainly 

endeavour to do that. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's fine, Mr. Minister, and tomorrow we'll 

check those lists, and those ones that have some kind of 

security clearance or whatever, if you'd be good enough to 

indicate that to us, we'd appreciate that very much.  I would 

also like you to provide, where there were contracts that were 

in existence for people, could you supply us with copies of 

those contracts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have one 

contract which again, if we can legally do so, we will get a 

copy of for the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would also like to know, Mr. Minister, 

where the physical location of these persons' place of 

employment was, and where they actually did their work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can supply that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We'd also like to know, if there were new 

employees, the names and same details of the person. But 

obviously you said you didn't employ any, so we will skip over 

that one to the next one.  We'd like to know, if terminated, why 

this position was terminated as opposed to some other position.  

What was the process and the resulting rationale for getting rid 

of this employee or his position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We can provide that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't know if I asked you how many persons 

were fired.  Did I ask that?  Could you tell me anyway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Ten positions were abolished; the 

people lost their jobs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I indicated to you earlier that I 

have many, many questions.  I'm going to ask you some 

detailed questions about Bill 27 and the things that relate to 

SARM.  And I want to talk to you about some of the things that 

concern my constituents with regards to the wildlife habitat 

program. 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

It's come to my attention -- and I'm sure that you will soon be 

aware, and I don't think it's any secret -- that the ranchers in 

Saskatchewan who are connected with leased land from your 

department have become so irate over this particular program, 

along with all of the other little needles that have been driven 

in by this government, that they are in fact circulating a piece 

of paper that, when signed, commits them to withholding 

hunting rights this fall on their properties. 

 

And I want to discuss with you that whole situation and the 

ramifications that that will include.  And I'm sure you will 

realize on reflection that that's going to be a very major 

problem.  I believe in all fairness that you should have time to 

consider that.  That's why I'm bringing this up tonight before I 

plough into it.  And I'm letting you know this now because 

some of my colleagues are so anxious to get at you that I'm 

going to allow you to deal with their questions for the rest of 

this evening and ponder these other questions so that you can 

come up with the answers to them when I address you next.  

Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the people in the cattle industry 

in the province of Saskatchewan have been almost devastated 

by your government in one way or another, and lands branch 

has also decided to increase the fees charged.  Did you use the 

traditional formula that you had in place over the last, maybe 

even 15 years?  Did you use that formula in determining the 

rent increases that you were going to apply against the pastures 

for lands branch and for community pastures?  Did you use 

those same fee structures in determining what you were going 

to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is again, 

as I think I've answered this question -- perhaps the member 

wasn't paying attention -- but we used the same formula that's 

been in effect for 15 years.  The previous administration 

abandoned the formula and did not follow it from '87.  If we 

had used the formula, the rents would have been considerably 

higher.  What we did was we took a place half-way between 

last year's rent and what the formula would have given had we 

used the formula to do the calculations. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure that that's 

entirely accurate.  I know that there were decreases in the 

component of price for livestock last year.  There was a decline 

in the market.  Why didn't that reflect some of the changes in 

the pasture rents? 

 

And another thing that comes about in this, a concern that was 

raised a number of times, is that the volume of livestock on the 

pastures was increased to make the patrons and the lessees 

more uncomfortable yet with the amount that they had to pay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I will explain this 

one more time.  The formula would have gone something like: 

1991 the rent would have been 513; 1990 would have been 

415; 1989 was 401; 1992 would have been 469.  The rent that 

was being charged was frozen at 366.  We moved the rent to 

418 which is half-way between the 366 and the 469, which is 

what the 

formula would have given.  As to stocking rates, they have not 

been changed since we've been in power. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, one of the things that 

happened in the south-west is that a lot of the pastures were not 

even able to carry livestock as long as they would traditionally 

have been, given the fact that it didn't rain.  Now the North -- 

visiting with people from North Battleford this evening -- it's 

almost the same condition exists there in the pastures they've 

got there. 

 

Don't you have any compassion on people?  Do you always 

want to hide behind a formula that dictates that, oh, the formula 

said that we should do this or that.  The decision that you 

decided to take regarding breeding fees in pastures, there was 

no formula on that was there?  You increased it from 25 to $35 

a cow.  The price of the calf never went up.  Are you going to 

hide behind a formula or are you going to give the farmers a 

break? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it has never been 

the policy of lands branch to determine the grazing capacity 

from year to year.  Grazing fees are set on an average carrying 

capacity.  We would not have the staff to go out each year and 

say, well this year there's lots of grass so we'll increase the fees 

and this year there's not so much.  The fees . . . and again I 

point out that although certainly in the tough times we're 

having in the drought and the conditions in rural Saskatchewan, 

no increase is really palatable. But these rents are still cheaper 

than comparable private rents would be or for people who own 

their own land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I think that's an assumption.  Compare 

lease rates in Montana to what traditionally has been in 

Saskatchewan or Alberta, and in some cases we're paying 

higher.  If you want to go to individuals who have costs on 

owning their own land and leasing it out, that's a whole 

different ball game than if you're dealing with what some of 

these ranchers have been dealing with for four or five 

generations.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're dealing with 

here. 

 

You increased, without asking, without consultation.  You 

didn't consult with anybody when you went out to deal with 

these pastures and increasing the rates.  You didn't ask anybody 

about the breeding fee.  You didn't ask anybody about 

supplying bulls to the pastures.  As a matter of fact we went 

through that scenario in somewhere out in 1989.  In fact the 

people said over and over again, we don't want to run our own 

bulls; we want the pastures to buy the bulls.  Now you're 

changing your tune.  And I think you're out of step because 

that's what I hear from the pastures across the province.  That's 

what you're doing now, and I want you to explain why you did 

it. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, this is another 

surprising question, and another one that I'm very glad that the 

members opposite raised.  This was another program that was 

hoisted on us by the previous administration.  They cut the 

money out of the bull-buying program, took it out of the 

budget, and did not consult with patrons, did not even tell them 

that there was no money in the budget to purchase bulls with.  

We went, as a government . . . took over a commitment not to 

exceed 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

the already enormous deficit that we were facing and thereby 

lived within that. 

 

We are in a process right now of consulting with the patrons, 

and we may go to buying more bulls.  We may go to buying 

less.  Some of the patrons would sooner have their own bulls.  

Some of the patrons would sooner have government bulls, and 

we are currently in the process of reviewing that and coming up 

with a policy for the next pasture year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure I buy all of 

that.  I don't buy it for one minute actually because I don't 

believe you're accurate.  You've been saying those kinds of 

things here all evening already and say, well, I'll blame it all on 

the other government, blame it all on the other government.  

When are you going to assume some responsibility for the 

decisions you make on your own?  Because those are your 

decisions; they're not mine.  Those are decisions that you've 

made that you would cut the funding to the pastures in 1992.  

You decided you were going to do that, not me.  You decided 

that. 

 

You decided that after the election that you were going to 

systematically say, I don't want to have anything to do with the 

livestock industry.  Who cares about the livestock industry?  

Who cares about the hogs in this province?  Do you?  You 

attack them from every facet of this . . . every corner of this 

province and then you expect us to believe you when you come 

in and you say, no, it's not my responsibility; it was those guys 

that did it all. 

 

And it's time I think, Mr. Minister, that you assume that 

responsibility because you're sitting in that chair, I'm not.  And, 

Mr. Minister, there are a lot of people in the province that wish 

I was sitting in that chair to determine what was going on 

because it would be run a whole lot different. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And as far . . . and I won't get into GRIP, but I 

could sure do a lot of discussion on the GRIP program on top 

of that. 

 

How many bulls did you buy in 1992? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly we will 

stand by our decisions.  We will stand by our policy with rural 

Saskatchewan and with the livestock industry.  And we have a 

very tough fight, as the members opposite know, with the 

deficit that's hanging over our head that they left us, with the 

decisions that they made to cut the bull-buying program. 
 

The member opposite knows very well that bulls have to be 

purchased in the fall and winter for the preceding breeding 

season.  That money was cut out of the budget that we took 

over and was not there.  You left us with a very, very tough 

decision to make, and if you want to see our reaction and our 

decisions, just watch and we will make decisions where we will 

see the . . . You will see that we will, with the very limited 

resources that you've left us to work with in a basically 

bankrupt province, we will revitalize rural Saskatchewan, we 

will keep the livestock 

industry alive, and I'm sure that all the 10 people that would 

like to see you here will agree when they see the industry turn 

around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many bulls did you buy in 1992? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the breeding season 

that's on us was . . . The bulls would have had to have been 

purchased in the '91-92 fiscal year.  There was no money in the 

budget; we didn't buy any bulls.  We may still buy some bulls 

in '92 for the next season -- that's still a possibility -- or in early 

'93 for the next breeding season. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, how many bulls were bought in 

1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Approximately 200 in 1991.  The 

bull program, as we took it over, was, I think . . . the previous 

administration was on the way to doing away with government 

bulls.  There was a fewer number of bulls from over the period 

of years.  We were down to about half patron bulls and half 

government bulls when we took over this government, and 

moving more towards private bulls all the time over the past 

number of years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister.  You just 

made my point.  In 1991, 200 bulls were purchased and 1992 

none were purchased.  You buy them in the season when 

they're bought, and they were bought in 1991.  They weren't 

bought from November to February.  They're bought in the 

spring. 

 

And I think you're misleading not only this Assembly but the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan when you say it was 

our budget that did it.  I want to point out to you that the '90-91 

bulls were bought with this administration.  If you want to go 

back, you probably bought 200 bulls for the last five years. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is not a change.  You changed your 

mind about what you were going to do, because you didn't 

want to have any part of the livestock industry in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  Is that not a fact, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the bull is getting 

pretty thick here.  In 1990 there were 900 government bulls; in 

'91 there were 850 government bulls; in '92 there is 650 bulls.  

And that's the trend line that was on the way. 

 

The members opposite certainly should realize the difference 

between calendar years and fiscal years.  And the budget that 

we took over didn't end till March 31 and that was the year in 

which there was no money in the bull-buying program because 

the previous administration had cut it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well it's an example, Mr. Minister, of I think 

your incompetence to lead that department and lands branch. 

 

In extension services, changing the subject a little bit to 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard July 20, 1992 

extension services, have you provided any opportunity -- we 

were just talking about it earlier today in the pest control Act -- 

are you going to provide any opportunity for extension services 

to provide a pest control review so that farmers and rural 

municipalities will be able to have their pest control officers 

and people in their municipality meet the requirements that 

you're going to impose on the municipalities and in rural 

Saskatchewan, across rural Saskatchewan.  Are you going to do 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we will have some 

input into that decision but the extension, as I pointed out, is 

under the Minister of Agriculture, as is The Pest Control Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, are the ag boards under the 

Department of Agriculture also? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, their liaison 

through government is through Ag and Food.  And they will 

liaison with the extension people. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, are you prepared to say to this 

Assembly that you're not going to provide any initiative to 

those people you are requiring, in the municipalities, to provide 

pest control and licensed pest control because they sell warfarin 

and gopher poison?  Are you not prepared to at least extend to 

those people who are in the municipalities some initiative on 

that point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we are not 

saying that we will not provide extension.  I'm saying that the 

extension agrologists will do it as they did before and they will 

do it under the Department of Agriculture where they are now 

housed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you, Mr. Minister, be able to provide 

us with the information of your duties and responsibilities on 

the days when the SARM convention was going across the 

province in the last two weeks of June.  I'd like to have your 

itinerary so we would know where you really were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know that 

that itinerary is available or not, and I may well be able to 

provide that.  I may not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the people of rural 

Saskatchewan in the municipalities sure wanted to know where 

you were.  I visited with them quite extensively.  When it's in 

your best interests, Mr. Minister, you have the freedom to 

travel to Swift Current to talk with the president of SARM.  

When it's inconvenient for you, you'll thumb your nose at that 

organization.  And that, in my view, is absolutely disgusting. 

 

I don't know whether you've ever had anything to do with 

municipal business before you got involved in government 

business, but you have one clear . . . you've made one very 

disappointing jump into the political area in SARM and 

municipal government.  And that one very disappointing thing 

for all of them was that the minister, whether they agree with 

him or disagree with him . . . They're honourable people.  They 

are elected just like you are, and you didn't have the courage or 

the wisdom to go 

out there and find out what they were really talking about. 

 

And I would assume from that, Mr. Minister, that you didn't 

want to know.  You didn't want to know.  You sent your deputy 

minister there to defend all of your programs.  In parks . . . I 

was there in Swift Current, and the deputy minister took a lot 

of heat for you from people in the SARM who were angry and 

irritated about your program in lands branch, how you dealt 

with critical wildlife habitat in lands branch and in parks.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, was in my view disgusting. 

 

And SARM is going to tell you that, if they haven't told you 

already.  And they're going to have a letter to the Premier of the 

province because they said to us, across the board, that you had 

reneged on your responsibility.  That's why, Mr. Minister, I 

would like to know where you really were those days that you 

were not in those meetings across the South and across the 

North. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I assure the member 

opposite that we were not out on the golf courses as some of 

them were while the bells were ringing.  We were here and we 

were working hard. 

 

And I have been to the mini-convention of SARM.  I've been to 

the convention.  I met with many, many RMs individually.  I 

meet with RMs in my office and certainly I travelled last fall to 

a couple of regional meetings, and I do all that I can to liaise 

with and talk to SARM.  We were represented at those 

meetings.  The deputy minister was there.  I have a list of the 

resolutions from all of the meetings which will be responded 

to.  And certainly we have a whole passel of rural MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) who were out there 

talking to councillors and other rural people.  And certainly we 

are far from being out of touch with SARM. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it wasn't until we got the 

Bill in the House, and just by chance sent the new amendments 

of the Bill to SARM, that they began to read what was in the 

new legislation.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact.  We sent the 

Bill ourselves to SARM.  You didn't have the nerve or the 

courage to go to them and say, here is the Bill and we'll deliver 

it.  They didn't see it until we, the opposition, delivered it to 

them.  And that, Mr. Minister, I think is disgusting. 

 

I worked with a minister of Rural Development for years and I 

provided some insights into different kinds of areas.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, was a rule that we followed.  If there was a 

change in budget, if there was a change in the amendments, 

that was one of the things we did.  We went there and we 

consulted first. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I do not believe that you consulted in 

pastures.  I don't believe you consulted in the areas of the 

breeding program in lands branch.  I don't think you consulted 

with the stock growers on that at all.  As a matter of fact, I 

think you omitted them deliberately. 

 

Just like the other day, your Premier and your Minister of 

Agriculture deliberately omitted inviting the western Canada 

wheat growers to a meeting that could easily have housed 

them.  I honestly believe that, Mr. Minister.  And I don't think 

that you have any excuse for the things 



July 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

that you did, none at all.  I think it's disgusting. 

 

It's disappointing as a matter of fact, because you know what? I 

used to be a director on that SARM, and I understand what the 

rural people believe in.  And I understand what they are 

involved with.  And you, Mr. Minister, did not provide any of 

that kind of direction for them. 

 

I was there when Mr. Kaeding was there.  I was there when Mr. 

MacMurchy was there.  I was there when Neal Hardy was 

there, when Bob Pickering was there.  And I never saw any one 

of them do what you did in this last round of meetings that 

SARM had across the province.  I never, ever saw that happen, 

Mr. Minister.  And I think it's totally disgusting.  And I think 

we need to have an explanation from you about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite refers to the RM Act.  That Act was not only 

reviewed, was basically written by the SARM.  It was in 

response to resolutions passed by them, was consulted by them.  

They looked at that as he said.  It was approved in detail by 

SARM. 

 

We certainly . . . The only decisions that we made that we did 

not consult with people on were the decisions that were foisted 

on us by the previous administration who did not only not 

consult with them. They did not even tell them that they had 

cut the bull-breeding program and that they had cut the oil and 

gas lease sharing with them.  So I think certainly if we are not 

perfect in consultation, we are certainly a large improvement 

over what we had previously. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 

 

 

 


