




















































Hansard: April 28, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 

 April 28, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, five 

patients from the cancer lodge here in Regina in the 

Elphinstone constituency.  They are here in Regina, I believe 

all of them from out of town, from various places around the 

province, taking treatment at the cancer clinic.  And I know 

that we're going to be meeting later on for refreshments, and I 

wish them all an enjoyable stay here in the House, the first 

question period of this session.  And I know that all members 

will want to join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to extend, on 

behalf of the opposition, a welcome to the patients from the 

cancer clinic.  It's been a part of my history in my family that 

cancer has affected us, and I know that it's a very serious 

illness.  It takes a lot of courage to wrestle with all of the 

aspects of cancer, and we just wish you well in all of your 

treatments and then your diagnosis and hope you enjoy the 

afternoon here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to introduce today to you and through you, Mr. 

Speaker, to all members of the Assembly, five educators who 

are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, two from the Palliser 

campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) and three who are visiting from Thailand. 

 

First of all, from the Palliser campus, Marlyce Searcy and Lutz 

Streitel, who are accompanying our guests from Thailand.  The 

three guests from Thailand, Mr. Speaker, are educators from 

the Faculty of Management Science of Surat Thani Teachers' 

College in Thailand. And they come to Canada and to 

Saskatchewan sponsored and funded by CIDA (Canadian 

International Development Agency) and the Association of 

Canadian Community Colleges as part of an ongoing exchange 

for education between our province and Thailand. 

 

I would ask the three guests from Thailand to stand as I 

introduce them, Mr. Speaker.  An instructor of communications 

and public relations, Mr. Pongsak Sonsank. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- An instructor of management organizational 

behaviour and journalism, Mr. Thongchai Wankaew. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- An instructor of economics, Faculty of 

Management Science at Surat Thani Teachers' College, 

Miss Nantawan Changkit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with this 

visiting delegation after they finish their tour following 

question period. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too, on behalf of 

the official opposition, would like to express our warmest 

gratitude to the members from Thailand for coming and 

visiting us here today.  I can speak from personal experience 

from other CIDA projects, particularly one in northern 

Malaysia, which the Government of Saskatchewan has 

participated in, that it is very worthwhile when we exchange 

information between countries to the betterment of all. 

 

I'm looking forward to the opportunity that Mrs. Searcy and I 

have discussed earlier of perhaps even having a visit by our 

guests from Thailand to my farm later this week.  And I hope 

that that has the ability to come about.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- At this time I would like to introduce a 

former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the 

province of Manitoba who served from 1973 to 1977.  He was 

the legislative assistant to premier Ed Schreyer.  I believe he is 

seated in the Speaker's gallery -- Mr. Ken Dillen.  I ask 

members to welcome Mr. Dillen, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, after months of hiding, after months of breaking 

promises to the Saskatchewan electorate, it's nice to see that the 

government has finally screwed up its courage and has now 

entered the legislature. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this province, I 

believe the government opposite feels that it can be less than 

honest at times with its intentions about the future of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on September 20, 1991, the now Premier was 

quoted as saying: we will make no promises we cannot keep.  

Will the Leader of the NDP (New Democratic Party) tell this 

legislature why he has broken . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We do not recognize the leaders 

of parties.  If you have a question to direct to any members on 

the opposite side, I will accept your question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly I should 

have said the member from Riversdale, the Premier -- why he 

has broken his promise to 60,000 farmers in this province and 

rural residents by virtually 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

destroying the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program, just to save money on the backs of people who are 

already in a strict financial situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to recognize that the 

member opposite forgets the process by which this flawed 

program was established under their government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The committee which established the 

GRIP program had its recommendations ignored because they 

said such a program could not work without adequate federal 

support through a third line of defence. 

 

You, the members opposite, supported the introduction of a 

program that was fundamentally flawed from the outset and 

that costs farmers too much money with too little support. 

 

Farmers in Saskatchewan have been . . . have had, and the 

province of Saskatchewan have had, federal support on both 

crop insurance and other programs off-loaded onto 

Saskatchewan to the tune that we now pay 60 per cent of our 

own costs in our agricultural stabilization programs.  The cost 

of the program last year, as you will recall, in order to snooker 

farmers into joining it, was subsidized by the federal 

government to the tune of 25 per cent of farmers' premiums and 

10 per cent of the province's premiums -- $78 million that they 

have not put forward this year. 

 

There was a promise when the program was introduced last 

year, there was a promise that the federal government would 

have a third line of defence program.  So that when there . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we proceed to the next question, I 

want to ask members please not to yell "order."  I'm keeping 

time of the questions that are asked.  The member took 1 

minute and 35 seconds.  The member now has taken 1 minute 

and 40 seconds to answer the question, and I wish you'd give 

the minister time to answer the questions and I'll give you 

opportunities to ask the questions.  Next question.  Order.  Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thousands of farmers around this province 

have been rallying, telling you that they are not happy with the 

proposition put forward by your Minister of Agriculture. 

 

In your throne speech you say: 

 

 A community that has lost faith in (its) elected 

representatives will not flourish.  People want my 

government to be open, honest and fully accountable. 

 

And yet yesterday when they shouted down your minister, sir, 

you would not give them 5 minutes. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you now do the proper thing and say to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan before the courts force you to do it, 

that you will give them an option -- either 1991 

GRIP or 1992.  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Let me remind the members opposite that 

last year when the program was introduced it was promised, 

because they knew it was flawed from the outset, that it would 

be reviewed within the first year.  It was in the 

federal-provincial agreement that it would be reviewed within 

the first year.  That word was broken this winter when they 

concluded they would not. 

 

We re-established your review committee from last summer 

because you called the election late, which didn't allow us the 

time to re-establish a broader committee.  We re-established 

your review committee which gave to us the same report they 

would likely have given to you.  They represented the farm 

organizations across the province.  They heard the concerns 

farmers had expressed -- and you know as well as we do the 

flaws of that program in terms of cost and sliding prices.  You 

know the weaknesses of that program. 

 

And they suggested the alternatives which have been put 

forward.  And farmers know that this is going to be a better 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

when your Minister of Agriculture gave that response 

yesterday the farmers on that lawn of the legislature shouted 

him down. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have broken contracts with civil servants in 

this province; you appear to be breaking contracts with 60,000 

farmers. I wonder who is next. 

 

Mr. Premier, if your Minister of Agriculture is so sure of 

himself and the changes that he has made, will you not then, 

sir, say to the farmers of this province, I am extending the 

deadline and I will give you the option.  You can either take 

1991 GRIP rules or 1992.  Let's have the proof in the pudding 

from your Minister of Agriculture.  Let's see if he's done his 

homework, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite is very aware of the 

problems that were inherent in last year's GRIP program.  If 

you've been listening to the news in Manitoba the last couple of 

days, there is a potential cost of tens of millions of dollars 

because of a fundamental design flaw in the program.  We 

know you can't make a good program out of this mess that you 

created last year.  You can't make a . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's 

ear, and you should be ashamed for what you began. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We're going to have to try to fix this 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

bloody thing on the run because it's so badly flawed.  You 

know what's happening in Manitoba, tens of millions of dollars 

threat to the program, and all because of the design that you 

people forced through without thinking about it while taking on 

massive amounts of money for the province and letting the 

federal government off the hook.  Shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question for the 

Leader of the Government, the Premier.  And if the Minister of 

Agriculture wants to answer, that's fine. 

 

The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is that they have said that 

they don't want to give the farmers a choice.  Are you prepared 

to live under the observations that the representative of the 

Queen made here this morning?  Are you prepared to live 

under those kinds of observations that she made in your throne 

speech and allow the farmers a choice between '91 and '92 

GRIP? 

 

You're indicating to us in this Assembly -- and I don't think it's 

the truth -- that Manitoba farmers had an option the same as 

Saskatchewan on their lentil production.  You're misleading the 

people.  You misled the people out on the lawn there yesterday.  

And my question to you is this: are you prepared to allow the 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to choose between '91 

and '92 GRIP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite should familiarize 

himself with the programs both here and in Manitoba before he 

begins to speak. 

 

The fact is that when the program introduced by the 

government last year was introduced, a central part of the 

promise to farmers was a third line of defence commitment.  

That was the choice.  That was the choice farmers needed to 

top up a program which does not provide adequate support. 

 

You know about the fundamental flaws of the old program and 

you know that the delivery of adequate income support is what 

is the most serious problem of the GRIP program.  And the 

federal government has, with your co-operation and consent, 

off-loaded and reneged on its responsibility.  Put the heat 

where it belongs -- on your friends in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, this morning in a Melville court 

room the government displayed its incompetence for all the 

province to see.  In the hearing dealing with the GRIP contract, 

the government argued that the case should be delayed until 

Friday.  That just happens to be the day after the crop insurance 

deadline of April 30. 

 

When this was challenged by the lawyer defending the farmers 

as unreasonable, the judge agreed and only delayed until 

tomorrow.  When asked by the judge what the government 

wanted to do, either extend the GRIP deadline so the case 

could be heard or not delay the case, the government lawyer 

said he didn't know. 

Now the question is this: will the minister make the 

government's position clear by stating whether or not they are 

attempting to delay any consideration by the courts until after 

the deadline, or will they extend the deadline so proper judicial 

process can be determined? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 

knows full well that I am not about to comment on a matter 

before the courts.  You might want to just check your legal 

advice though when you get back home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a community without 

compassion will not know true progress.  Compassion deals 

with what you saw out on the lawn here yesterday.  Talk to 

them about whether they want '91 or '92 GRIP. And I want to 

challenge you to go out into the country to talk to the farmers 

like I did a year ago and ask them what they want to have.  

Will you be prepared to change your agenda so that you have 

'91 and '92 GRIP, a choice for the farmers?  Will you allow that 

to happen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I've been out in 

Saskatchewan from one corner to the other for the last 10 days 

talking to farmers and listening to farmers and hearing their 

concerns. 

 

You know what their concerns are and they're all related to the 

fundamental design of a program you've put in place against 

the advice of your own committee and you should be ashamed 

of it. 

 

The cost of this program is determined by methodologies to 

which you agreed. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I will ask the members please, if you 

want the minister to answer, not to interrupt and let the minister 

speak. 

 

And the same thing applies to the government members when 

they're asking questions.  Let's have quiet so that people can 

ask their questions and we can receive the answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The cost of the program is determined by 

formulas that you agreed to last year.  And you know that 

farmers have experienced premium increases and it's as of 50 

per cent this year.  The pay-outs from this program -- you talk 

about cash flow -- farmers aren't going to get the last of their 

money from last year's program for a year yet.  And you look at 

the April payment -- according to the formula you agreed to, 

they got bills instead of cheques. 

 

You talk about fundamental design flaws.  You designed a 

program that's left farmers hanging and you better bloody well 

participate in the fix of it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I want to caution the minister that 

those are very unparliamentary expressions that he uses. 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

And I ask him to refrain in the future. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Yesterday Her Honour read this: 

 

 A community divided will not succeed.  People want my 

government to rekindle the Saskatchewan spirit of 

community and co-operation. 

 

You went around this province and you invited special guests 

of the Sask Wheat Pool to attend your meetings.  That's what 

you did.  That's what you did, sir, and that is not speaking to all 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is only a part of what he needs to do.  He needs to ask 

all of the people in the province of Saskatchewan: which do 

you want to have, '91 or '92? 

 

Now I'm asking you again -- you haven't answered the question 

-- are you prepared to choose . . . to allow the farmers to choose 

for '91 and '92? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know 

what it is to rule by dividing people and putting chips between 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- For nine years you create a division and 

you've got your appropriate rewards for doing it.  Now if the 

member opposite knows anything about rural Saskatchewan, he 

knows there is not a farmer in Saskatchewan that's not a 

member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  So when they're 

invited to meetings, people from all over can come and we talk 

to farmers across the province. 

 

I want to tell you about designing the programs.  The 

consultation process you put into your legislation and we 

continued because of the time frame, has resulted in the 

recommendations we've been given. 

 

We know that what farmers wanted from the outset was a 

program that was simple, deliverable at the elevator, 

cost-of-production based.  You designed a program that had no 

relationship to cost of production, no relationship to the market, 

no relationship to anything that every farmer knows to be 

sensible.  And again you should be ashamed for the design and 

the capitulation you did to the federal government in designing 

your program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the Minister 

of Agriculture.  In light of open, honest, fully accountable, fair, 

compassionate, community spirit and one of co-operation, will 

you do the proper thing and ask those farmers what they want 

to have -- '91 or '92?  And they will tell you overwhelmingly 

that they want '91.  They want it fixed, Mr. Speaker, but you let 

them have a choice.  And I challenge you to go out there and 

do that for 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Farmers of Saskatchewan are suffering 

from an income shortfall that results from an international trade 

war where the countries with whom they're competing are 

having their costs paid by the federal governments, both in the 

United States and in the European Community.  In Canada, 

we've experience an off-loading in the last four years of your 

term of $260 million to the province of Saskatchewan per year 

in agricultural stabilization.  Farmers want programs they can 

afford and that give them reasonable protection.  Your federal 

counterparts promised third line of defence when this program 

was designed.  They've come through with none of it.  So we've 

got a flawed program designed by you with a broken word 

from your federal counterparts. 

 

And you talk about integrity and co-operation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister.  Will you tell the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan and this Assembly 

how much off-loading you're doing by allowing the federal 

government to reduce its spending to the province of 

Saskatchewan on a '92 GRIP?  How much is that money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The committee that established the review 

for this process designed a program that delivered some 

improvements to a very flawed program you have already 

designed.  You, for nine years, created a financial ruin that 

every citizen of Saskatchewan, every farmer, every 

home-maker, every child still growing up is going to be 

participating and paying for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to suggest to the members opposite 

that last year there were program features that attracted 

between 50 and $60 million of federal money to Manitoba and 

Alberta that this government did not attract -- did not choose to 

put in.  Why?  Because they probably had the books in such 

rotten shape, they couldn't put the money forward. 

 

Well I want to know . . . I want you to realize the financial 

constraints you've put on this province.  The fact is that we 

have designed a program that's tried to fix some major flaws. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 500 farmers brought a 

hanging rope to the lawn and the steps of the legislature 

yesterday. 

 

Mr. Premier, your minister has obviously blown it.  He has no 

confidence in the Saskatchewan farmers' ability to do what's 

right, and they in turn are saying to you, Mr. Premier, that they 

have no confidence in your Minister of 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have been given choices by the Saskatchewan 

farmers on the steps of this legislature yesterday.  Mr. Premier, 

will you do the right thing and order your minister to give them 

a choice or give us a new minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are 

amongst the most hard-working, most innovative farmers in the 

world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Since 1990 they have been living on 

poverty wages on what you describe as a good relation between 

you and the federal government as you dismantle their income 

supports to the point where they were living on between 4 and 

5 and $6,000 per family. 

 

We are committed to a program that will be simple and 

understandable and deliverable, and we will invite you to come 

with us and design such a program.  I'm telling you from the 

base you've created within the time frame that we had for a 

review, you cannot fix this mess that you created last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  There is no question that the original 

GRIP program was flawed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, it was unilaterally negotiated 

by the previous government.  You, sir, have unilaterally 

changed the GRIP program and I want you to explain how two 

wrongs can make a right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'd like to remind the member opposite of 

the process that we engaged in, in review of 1991 GRIP for 

1992.  It was in the context of the federal-provincial agreement 

that the review was to occur this year.  The Saskatchewan 

legislation provided for a review committee which we 

reinstituted after the election. 

 

The committee representing Sask Wheat Pool, SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), UGG 

(United Grain Growers Limited), canola growers, wheat 

growers, barley growers, cattle feeders, National Farmers 

Union, and I don't know if I missed soil conservation 

association, participated in the review, invited farmers to 

respond, dealt with all the responses they had, and brought 

forward recommendations which were supported by seven out 

of ten provinces when the federal minister would not take the 

recommendations forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, what indeed has happened is this.  Because of 

the unilateral changing of the GRIP program we are no longer 

just in competition in the international trade wars, sir, we are 

now in competition with our neighbours in Alberta and 

Manitoba who are working on the old GRIP program, as 

flawed as it is. 

 

And I am asking you today: would you please consider to put 

on hold any changes to GRIP, work with our neighbours to 

work along side and go to the federal table and renegotiate 

changes on the old, flawed GRIP program for the benefit of all 

farmers across the nation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 

member of our intentions.  We intend to renegotiate good farm 

programs and GRIP is not a base for that kind of a 

renegotiation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to also remind the member of the 

mess that's created in the other provinces by some of the 

corrections that were done by not fixing some of the 

corrections that were made in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Manitoba lentil crisis translated to Saskatchewan alone 

could cost our program in excess of $200 million -- one crop.  

We simply cannot continue with a program that has that kind of 

serious problem.  I agree with you; it needs renegotiation.  We 

will. 

 

And we need to get the federal government to take financing 

responsibility.  We need to get rational market signals and 

rational support for farmers.  And we will work with you and 

anyone else who has got the courage to come with us to design 

a good farm program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Thank 

you.  Mr. Minister, I am wondering if indeed you are willing to 

put on hold this program and to work in concert with other 

people.  Because whether or not you are correct in the changes 

that you have made to this program, it is the farmers of 

Saskatchewan who are going to suffer when people in Alberta 

and Manitoba are going to be doing all of the things that were 

of concern to us with the old GRIP program, while our farmers 

here can no longer do it. 

 

And I also wish for you to be able to tell the taxpayers of this 

province how you can justify changing these programs.  And 

you're going to have to spend money on law suits as a result of 

changing contracts with people, in essence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to, Mr. Speaker, remind the 

member opposite that Saskatchewan farmers are suffering 

because of the changes that were not made in the other 

provinces.  Saskatchewan farmers are suffering in their lentil 

contracts which are now down to 8 cents a pound.  The 

difference between the twenty-one and a half cent guarantee 

and the 8 cents a pound costs the program -- net -- $11 million 

for 100,000 acres seeded.  Saskatchewan, if they had multiplied 

their acreage of lentils by the same proportions as Manitoba, 

would have had two million acres.  Twenty times 11 million is 

in 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

excess of $200 million on one program alone. 

 

Not only that, but we are now being threatened by the 

American Congress and by American farmers for interfering 

unfairly with trading practices with this program design.  This 

program simply cannot continue.  It is too seriously flawed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we begin with the next item on our 

agenda, I just want to . . . This is our first question period, and I 

simply want to indicate to members that I will not, I will 

simply not, accept the interventions that I have seen today from 

both sides of the House when a person is asking a question or 

when a minister is answering a question.  We simply cannot 

accept that, and I won't.  So I'm asking members to please keep 

that in mind when you enter question period tomorrow. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Day of Commemoration 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today, 

as the Minister of Labour, to report to members of this 

Assembly on the progress being made by the government in 

solving a major problem facing Saskatchewan workers: proper 

enforcement of The Workers' Compensation Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly preface my remarks 

by reminding members of the Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan that we recognize this day, April 28, as a day of 

mourning in remembrance of workers killed, injured, or 

disabled in work-place accidents. 

 

Flags on all government buildings are at half-mast today in 

remembrance of these workers and their sacrifice.  Mr. 

Speaker, that is right and proper.  A special day of mourning 

flag, a gift to the province from the Canadian Labour Congress, 

will fly at half-mast atop the Legislative Building today. 

 

It is unfortunate but true, Mr. Speaker, that each year thousands 

of workers are injured on the job in Saskatchewan alone.  

Many die.  That is, indeed, cause for major concern. 

 

The annual report of the Workers' Compensation Board which I 

have tabled today reports that the board settled more than 

32,000 injury claims last year, nearly 13,000 of which involved 

time lost from work.  And it reports that tragically 40 workers 

were killed last year in work-place accidents in this province. 

 

This need not happen, Mr. Speaker.  Most work-place 

accidents are preventable.  Safety education and increased 

enforcement of safety regulations are key to improving 

Saskatchewan's safety record. 

 

My government is committed to increasing safety in the work 

place and to ensuring that, when injuries do happen, workers 

and their families receive fair treatment from the Workers' 

Compensation Board. 

To that end, I am tabling today at the conclusion of my remarks 

the interim report of The Workers' Compensation Act review 

committee. 

 

The report outlines a number of concerns with the current 

administration of the Act.  It states that appointments to the 

Workers' Compensation Board are political in nature and that 

the board is not accountable to the group that it is meant to 

serve.  There are no well-defined and readily accessible rules 

governing board practices and procedures.  There are 

conflicting interpretations of the section of the Act dealing with 

injured workers who had pre-existing injuries.  And the 

credibility of the review process has been questioned because a 

significant number of previous recommendations have not been 

implemented. 

 

The review committee makes a number of recommendations in 

its report.  It recommends that workers and employers be 

involved in the appointment of board members and that the 

chairperson be neutral; the authority of the committee of 

review be enshrined in legislation; the current committee of 

review's mandate be extended until the next committee is 

appointed, to allow it to fulfil its obligation to assess issues and 

monitor the compensation system; and that section 50 of the 

Act, dealing with injured workers who have previous injuries, 

be clarified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee also made several financial 

recommendations urging that the compensation to dependants 

be adjusted to include $5,000 to pay for death expenses such as 

burial.  It is further recommended that the widow and widower 

pension at age 65 be increased from $530 per month to $630 

per month. 

 

I would like to assure this House that the government will 

review the committee's report with the view to making any 

appropriate changes to The Workers' Compensation Act.  We 

will also be consulting with workers and employers across the 

province to develop amendments to The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act.  Saskatchewan workers are an integral part of 

our province, and we must do all we can to ensure their safety 

as we all work together to build a better Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my sincere hope that next year, on our day of 

mourning for killed and injured workers, this Assembly will be 

able to say that we have taken concrete steps toward making 

workers' compensation a stronger, better plan for the workers 

of our province. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table for this 

Assembly the interim report of the Workers' Compensation 

Board review. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues and 

myself, we too would first of all like to express our deepest 

sympathy on this day of mourning to the workers and their 

families who have suffered and sacrificed so much as a result 

of injuries incurred through their efforts in the past year to 

build and create and work within our 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

province. 

 

This day, we take time to symbolically pay our respects for the 

tremendous sacrifice of the workers throughout the entire 

province in all sectors of all parts of our economy. 

 

The former government had a commission on the subject, and 

we're happy to hear today that the reports of that commission 

have come forward, and we are happy that they are going to be 

examined.  We want you to know that we have just a few 

minutes ago received the copies and we haven't had time to 

study them yet.  But we want the workers of this province to 

know that we heartily support any move that can be made to 

assist in preventing any kinds of accidents or injuries to any 

workers of any kind at any time. 

 

It is ironic this morning that as a new member we sometimes 

don't know exactly what's going on yet.  And I have to admit 

that when I walked up to the legislature this morning, I didn't 

realize that this important day was about to take place and that 

we were to honour the people who had been injured through 

the province. 

 

I walked from my car and the sun shone warmly and I had a 

good feeling in my heart as I approached the building and 

looked up at its magnificent splendour in the sunlight.  And in 

that warmth that came over me I looked up into the sky and 

noted that three flags floated at half-mast.  It touched me 

because of course I know that flags at half-mast indicate that 

someone has died, and so I stopped at the desk to inquire as to 

what had happened.  Then of course I was informed as to what 

we were about to do today, and I was just as deeply touched.  

Even though no specific person of grandeur had died, we 

symbolically were going to respect all of the people that helped 

throughout our province to keep things going and who suffer so 

greatly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- At this time of year, as all of you know, we 

have the biggest work force in Saskatchewan about to 

endeavour and begin their endeavours in another year of work, 

and that is the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The biggest -- and I'm not going to say that they're more 

important than anyone else -- but a very important segment of 

our society now hits to the fields to start their spring seeding 

operations.  What happens is that in farming timeliness of 

operation is extremely important in order to predict the results. 

 

As you sow you shall reap, it says in the good book, and it is 

exactly that way in farming.  If you get out and get the job done 

and get it done right and timely, then you will probably have a 

better chance at a bountiful harvest. 

 

These people go out and they work long, long hours -- hours 

they're not quite used to yet in the spring, and they become 

very fatigued.  And under the stress of fatigue along with 

today's pressures of mental anguish that the farmers are 

suffering as a result of debt loads and as a result of the 

confusion over our GRIP program and all those kinds of things, 

we find our farmers in a mental state 

of not concentrating perhaps on their work and thinking of 

other things while they handle this very big and dangerous 

equipment. 

 

I have personally had the experience in my lifetime of having 

my clothes caught in a grain auger and being wrapped up to the 

point where I thought I wasn't going to get out again, and only 

by the grace of someone else that I was able to survive without 

very much injury.  So many are not so fortunate. 

 

And because so many are not so fortunate, I have to conclude 

by saying to all of the workers of Saskatchewan that I have two 

words for you as we go into this season of work for another 

year, and those two words are, Mr. Speaker, be careful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I beg leave 

of the House to make comment, a brief comment, on the same 

subject. 

 

The Speaker: -- Proceed. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I don't see 

it as necessary to add many words to those made by the 

minister and the member opposite on this occasion.  I do want 

to say, however, that I see it as most appropriate that the 

minister this day in bringing to the attention of the members of 

the Assembly the day of mourning for workers killed and 

injured on the job, at the same time introduce the interim report 

on workers' compensation.  The reason being that this day, 

April 28, is honoured Canada-wide for the day of mourning 

because it was on April 28, 1914 that the first workers' 

compensation program was introduced in the nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, out of respect for those workers who have been 

killed and seriously disabled on the job and for their families, I 

would ask, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly and the members, 

as a statement of our commitment to work towards improved 

occupational health and safety, take a moment to pause in 

silence out of respect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is it agreed that we take a moment of silence? 

 

The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'd like to add my words if I may, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have leave to add a few 

words?  Agreed. 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On this day we 

really are talking about real people, and it is a day of mourning.  

My heart goes out to those such as Rhonda MacFarlane and her 

family who lost a loved one, and the many others who have 

experienced the tragedy of losing a partner, a parent, a sibling, 

or a child in a work-place accident.  And as we mourn we must 

acknowledge that we have a chance to bring about meaningful 

change that 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

will prevent similar accidents in the future. 

 

We can avoid the accidents that regrettably maim many of the 

working people in this province.  Times of remembrance are 

also times to chart new paths; they are times to take action.  We 

should use the opportunity to devise ways to prevent accidents, 

to better protect the working people who have so greatly 

contributed to our province. 

 

And much can be done to promote occupational health; much 

can be done to provide diagnostic services, information, and 

rehabilitation to those around us who suffer. 

 

I too would like to bring to the attention of this Assembly that 

many others are seriously injured or killed on the farms of rural 

Saskatchewan.  Five times the numbers of accidents and 

injuries occur amongst farmers than any other occupational 

group in Canada, Mr. Speaker.  That's five times on farms 

those who are in labour, those who work in forestry, mining, 

and so forth.  And I do pray that the courage will be with those 

families who face the spring seeding with the added burden of 

coping with an injury or the loss of a valued family member. 

 

I do commend the previous government for taking measures 

with groups like the Safety Council and our many talented 

agrologists who introduced programs to promote safety in the 

use of farm chemicals.  And I hope that similar work will 

continue with our current government and ourselves, with the 

talented persons and organizations who work to improve 

occupational health and safety for the workers of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, pursuant to section 

14(b) of The Provincial Auditor Act, I would like to table the 

Report of the Provincial Auditor year ended March 31, 1991. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 17 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, having dealt with a number of 

questions in question period this afternoon and feeling it a 

matter of urgency, I am going to ask the Assembly for leave to 

pursue to rule 17 and ask leave of the Assembly to discuss the 

gross revenue insurance plan and its various aspects. 

 

I have brought forward to you and to the Leader of the 

Opposition and the independent member, a copy of the motion, 

and I'm going to ask the Assembly for leave.  And the question 

that I would raise before the Assembly on the motion is: 

 

 That this Assembly recognizes the crisis in Saskatchewan 

agriculture and the continued high rate of farm losses, 

including in recent weeks alone hundreds of notices to realize 

security issued by the government itself through the lands 

branch; and recognizing in particular the emergency situation 

as it relates to the gross 

revenue insurance program, and fully realizing this is the last 

opportunity this Hon. Assembly will have to express its will 

in a vote, directing the government in this matter before its 

deadline of Thursday, demands that the government extend 

the deadline indefinitely, until the question of the 

government's illegal conduct be resolved. 

 

 Secondly, honour the contracts that it entered into in the 

name of all Saskatchewan people with farm families, and 

accept the request of farmers to establish a review 

commission directly elected by affected farmers to redesign 

the GRIP program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Assembly for leave 

to discuss this very important question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm sorry.  I'm ahead of myself one step here.  

I have to . . . He has asked for leave and I will have to . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Couldn't hear you. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The point of order is, Mr. Speaker, 

on this very crucial debate which we want to be involved in -- 

obviously, we have a problem if we give up a day of the throne 

speech debate. It will then mean a delay in the budget which 

we have many things in process and setting in place for May 7.  

It's been publicly announced. 

 

In receiving the letter a few hours ago, I by return mail gave a 

letter to the Opposition House Leader in which we said we 

would certainly agree to this debate if they would in turn agree 

to shorten the throne speech debate.  We have since had a 

conversation in which we intend to split the day:  part on this 

most important debate; part then turning to the throne speech 

debate.  I just want to give that indication, in giving leave, that 

this is based on the commitment given by the House Leader for 

the opposition that in that sense we then would give leave. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In response to the point of order that the 

Government House Leader raised, I did receive the letter, Mr. 

Speaker, where he makes the proposal as to how we could 

accommodate ourselves.  I received the letter at 2 o'clock as 

proceedings for question period got under way, and subsequent 

to that, did have a discussion with the House Leader opposite 

and the conclusion that we reached is by and large exactly as 

he portrayed it. 

 

My understanding, Mr. Speaker, if we proceed with this debate 

is that it would be approximately a 90-minute debate, where 

both sides would have opportunity to express their opinions at 

which time the debate would be drawn to a conclusion and then 

we would proceed back to the ordinary orders of the day, 

which I presume, in this case, is a condolence motion followed 

by the throne speech debate where I have given my guarantee 

that the members opposite will be allowed to have the mover 

and 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

the seconder speaking and we will put up one speaker as well.  

That is my understanding of the proceedings for the rest of the 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  If the members continue, you 

won't have to split the day; the day will be over.  The Speaker 

finds himself in somewhat of a quandary because we are under 

rule 17.  We either have to move out of rule 17 and proceed to 

rule 42 or the Speaker has to make a ruling on rule 17.  There 

has to be ruling.  And so either I have to have someone move 

that we go to rule 42 and move with leave, and then we can 

proceed.  We can't proceed under rule 17 unless the Speaker 

makes a ruling first . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I can't. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- This is a point of clarification, Mr. Speaker.  

We wanted this debate to proceed through rule 17 because that 

was basically the legitimate process under which we could 

pursue this.  And the only reason that this is developing this 

way is because of the point of order that was raised, and I can 

understand why the member opposite did it to guarantee his 

place in it.  But I would still prefer, Mr. Speaker, that you make 

the ruling on 17 and, if you concur with us, ask for the leave of 

the Assembly to develop this debate as outlined and then we 

can proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Pursuant to rule 17(6), I have reviewed the 

hon. member's notice and find the request to be in order and of 

urgent public importance.  Therefore, being no other ordinary 

opportunity in the near future for the House to express a 

decision on this matter, I ask the House, shall the member have 

leave to proceed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Then, under rule 17, I ask the members to skip 

one step in rule 17 and ask the member from Morse to go 

directly to the main motion and move the motion.  Before he 

does so, I am given to understand that at 90 minutes I will call 

for the vote.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I want to be sure, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the 90-minute clause allows for other speakers 

than one, or perhaps two, to be involved in the debate.  I'm not 

a suspicious person by nature, but there is the potential here, 

Mr. Speaker, of . . . And I guess what I need from the 

opposition is that we would have time to get into the debate, 

otherwise the operation is fruitless here today. 

 

And it's my understanding, again from our conversation, that 

we would be splitting the time, basically. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, all I can say is I'm very glad that 

the member opposite is not a suspicious person.  But having 

said that, 90 divided by two is 45 minutes -- we'll take 45 

minutes and put up two or three speakers.  Whether he wants to 

put up two or three or 20 with two minutes each is up to them.  

So it will be divided fairly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I begin my discussion today I 

want to reiterate, and based on the three points that we have in 

this motion, I want to point out to the 

people of the Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan that 

we would very much appreciate, and the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan would very much appreciate, the 

opportunity to have an extension of the '90-91 GRIP program 

in order that they would be able to deal with the concepts that 

they had in mind, and then be able to reflect in a way that 

would positively give them an opportunity to deal with the 

program and accepting some of the changes that are necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by saying that in opening some of 

the challenges in the court, some of the statements of claim, I 

believe, are absolutely accurate.  And I want to commend the 

people of Saskatchewan for their wisdom in determining that 

these statements of claim really are in fact accurate. 

 

And I want to point out that these claims deal with allegations 

that the waiver and the alteration of the program is illegal 

because it deals with a date in the contract that is on March 15. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, through their agents, were not notified of these 

changes in a real way, which in a legal terminology would be 

the vehicle of a registered letter.  They were not told that there 

were going to be changes made, and under an insurance 

contract in the province of Saskatchewan, alterations or 

adjustments must be made through registered mail on that 

basis.  And extending the deadline indefinitely until the 

government's illegal conduct can be resolved, I think, is a way 

to bring relief to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There have been people from all over this province who 

contend that the program as it was in 1991, Mr. Speaker, were 

not quite adequate.  But that didn't mean that they wanted to get 

rid of the program; they wanted adjustments in the program. 

 

And what we see in the program here today, in 1992 GRIP, is 

that the whole aspect has been totally turned upside down.  

Where people had a rigid agreement that they could go to the 

bank with, today they don't have that. 

 

We had meetings down in Shaunavon where people from 

Richmound were at.  They told me about land that they had on 

the Alberta side and also on the Saskatchewan side, and there 

was a $55 per acre difference on the guarantee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of things that we say to the 

government of the province of Saskatchewan, hold off with 

making those decisions until the court can determine whether 

in fact they are even legal and whether they can change it 

because of the way it was implemented.  Mr. Speaker, that's an 

important part of the changes that I think needs to be made. 

 

(1500) 

 

In dealing with the contracts as they related to the individual 

farmers, the Government of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan, made an agreement with the farmers 

of Saskatchewan.  And that's a 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

fundamental contract that the people of Saskatchewan made 

with the farmers of Saskatchewan -- to pay them on the basis of 

a program that was clearly established.  And this province, 

under the government of the province of Saskatchewan, has 

determined that they are going to change that.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why we don't feel that farmers are 

adequately listened to in what they perceive to be in their best 

interests. 

 

And I would say to the people in this Assembly that under a 

spirit of open honesty and fully accountable, fair and 

compassionate, with a spirit of community and co-operation, 

that we need to have this established by the government voting 

in favour of this resolution and thereby determining whether 

they really have the courage to listen to what the law will state, 

and then also to determine what the farmers' wishes would be 

in relation to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have travelled this province and listened to 

people phone me from all over this province.  This is not a 

problem that relates directly to those people south of the No. 1 

Highway.  Mr. Speaker, I have had phone calls from Porcupine 

Plain in the Tisdale constituency; I've had phone calls from 

Lloydminster, from Prince Albert, from Perdue, all over this 

province, asking me one very simple thing:  how can we get 

back to the '91 GRIP? 

 

And that is what they're asking and that's what they want to 

have.  And I can't understand why the government would 

decide to change.  In the meeting in Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker -- 

I want to point out this to the Assembly -- they showed that 

with the additions and the amount of money that the 

government has placed in the '92 program there is more money 

of the taxpayers' money going into this program in 1992 than 

there would have been in 1991.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

where, when I do the addition in the volume of announcements 

that have been made in relation to the '92 GRIP, that's clearly 

what it says.  And that's what the volume of dollars indicates.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why the farmers in the 

province don't feel comfortable with 1992 GRIP. 

 

And I want to point out a couple of things that I think are 

absolutely necessary.  And the changes made in the 1992 GRIP 

are absolutely the wrong way to go. 

 

Number one, farmers all over this province told me that they 

wanted individual coverage for individual crops on their own 

individual farm.  That's without a question that that was the 

fundamental belief that these farmers had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- They wanted their own farm covered for the 

reasons that they believe that they can produce better than the 

average.  And they will work to prove that they can produce 

better than the average by allowing themselves the freedom to 

do that on an individual basis. 

 

But what have we got in 1992?  We got area coverage; we got 

area averages; we've got area this.  And what does it do to the 

independence of individuals?  Not a thing.  Individuals will not 

have the freedom to become independent of all of the aspects 

of the production of their neighbour under '92 GRIP.  They 

can't; they won't. 

Because in fact, Mr. Speaker, the province has reneged on its 

responsibility in dealing with it fairly to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The volume of opportunity that is available to the government 

to correct it I think is there.  They have a real opportunity to 

identify with the people of Saskatchewan in allowing this.  

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the people that was standing out on 

the lawn here yesterday I believe said it fairly.  He said, this 

isn't a matter of politics; this is a matter of doing it right.  And 

he said his family had voted NDP all of their lives.  His father 

had -- in fact has been a strong supporter of the government's 

position for years and years, of that government's position.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what he said: it goes beyond politics. 

 

As a matter of fact, the people who led the meeting down in 

Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, did not vote for this political party.  

But they said, we want '91 GRIP.  And that's as fundamental as 

it gets.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we're discussing here.  

It's not a matter of politics; it's a matter of economics. 

 

I want to point out some other things that are very, very 

interesting in this whole debate on why farmers want to have it.  

They want to have 1991 GRIP because they could go to the 

bank and they knew exactly what their bottom line was going 

to be -- exactly.  And what do they do with this one?  Mr. 

Speaker, they don't know. 

 

In fact the government doesn't know what it will be till after the 

middle of July or the middle of August.  That's when this 

government is going to know the real cost of this program.  

They don't know it today.  They don't know it at all.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that's an important part of what they're trying to tell 

the people, the public of the province of Saskatchewan, that 

they know?  They don't know. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's an important part of the question that 

we have here before the Assembly today.  It's not bankable; it's 

not given an opportunity to provide to the farmers a way that 

they can identify what their volume of benefits are going to be. 

 

I noticed, Mr. Speaker, farmers aren't the only ones that are 

caught in this.  I want to read a letter that was written to The 

Southwest Booster dated April 20, a little over a week ago.  

And it says: "Chamber seeks GRIP revisions." 

 

This is addressed to the Hon. Bernhard Wiens, Minister of 

Agriculture, Room 348, Legislative Building, Regina, 

Saskatchewan.  And it's an open letter, and it says: 

 

 Dear Sir: 

 

 Re: 1992 G.R.I.P.  After a recent meeting with farmers 

representing Southwest Saskatchewan, we are deeply 

concerned with implications of the proposed 1992 G.R.I.P. 

program, specifically (in six areas): 

 

 1) Farmers were not given adequate written notice of the 

program . . . 

 

 2) The program has undergone major alterations . . . 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

And I noticed in the Speech from The Throne, Mr. Speaker, 

that the volume of interjections on the basis of GRIP said that 

these were minor alternations.  The public don't perceive 

them to be minor alterations.  They're an upheaval of the 

whole system.  Secondly: 

 

 3) The program only offers maximum coverage (on crop 

insurance) equal to 80 per cent . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, GRIP '91 covered for 100 per cent.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what the farmers are asking for. 

 

Going back to where this '92 GRIP came from, I want to show 

to the people of Saskatchewan where it came from.  It came 

from Ontario.  Ontario's program is based on two components: 

one is the yield component and the other is the price 

component. 

 

And if the members opposite don't believe me, they should just 

go and look in the GRIP advisory committee's report and they 

will find that the Ontario GRIP program is what they identified 

as the way that they wanted to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Ontario, they have had a constant increase in 

production over the last 20 years -- it amounts to 1 per cent a 

year.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why Ontario doesn't need a 

yield protection, but in Saskatchewan they do. 

 

When I have had calls from Porcupine Plain, they have clearly 

identified to me that the people of the farming community, for 

the first time in those areas, received a guarantee that they 

could count on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they said to me as a southerner, they said, 

up here we have frost that bothers us all the time.  This is the 

first time that I got a guarantee that was equivalent to a real 

value.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what this chamber of 

commerce report says as an open letter to the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

 4) G.R.I.P. premiums have increased drastically from the 

1991 levels.  Some areas of Southwest Saskatchewan are 

experiencing 60-70% increases due to high risk of drought in 

our area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the price went up and the coverage went down.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a part of the problem. 

 

This is from the Chamber of Commerce in Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 5) (The) provinces of Alberta and Manitoba elected to 

maintain the 1991 G.R.I.P. program as originally designed. 

 

Now if you wanted to have the farmer be protected from 

production over and above their average, then, Mr. Speaker, 

there was an easy way to do it.  Just go to Alberta and find out 

how their program works because the province of 

Saskatchewan had that program for irrigators in here.  And we 

did have that program right identified in crop insurance.  You 

could have easily taken that and identified what you needed to 

do and move from there. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the Chamber of Commerce 

says in Swift Current. 

 

 6) G.R.I.P. premiums are becoming the largest input cost for 

farmers at a time when grain prices are severely depressed. 

 

Seventy per cent up, 30, 40 per cent down in coverage.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is why the farmers of Saskatchewan don't want 

GRIP '92. 

 

 In conclusion, (Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on) we ask that 

the Government of Saskatchewan review this situation and 

we offer the following recommendation. 

 

And this is signed by the second vice-president of the Swift 

Current Chamber of Commerce. 

 

 1) The 1991 G.R.I.P. program should be restored in 1992 for 

those who wish to participate in the program. 

 

He didn't come to me and ask me what he should write, but 

that's what he was hearing all over and that's, Mr. Speaker, 

exactly what they wanted to have. 

 

 2) Farmers who wished to opt out of the G.R.I.P. program 

should be able to do so without penalty. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is also part of what I agree with. 

 

 3) A new review committee should be organized to consider 

further modifications to G.R.I.P.  This committee should not 

implement any policies until thorough public consultation 

with the farm sector have occurred. 

 

An open letter in The Southwest Booster.  Now, for those 

people in the province who don't know what The Southwest 

Booster is, it is in the volume of people who receive it, they 

have over 20,000 people, homes that they deliver this paper to 

in the south-west part of Saskatchewan.  And the Swift Current 

Chamber of Commerce is a vital part of that. 

 

And I'm going to ask the question this way: why are they 

concerned about it?  Because business men, people in real 

estate, people in small business, people who are bulk fuel 

dealers, people who are implement dealers, people all over the 

south-west in small town Saskatchewan and the city of Swift 

Current believe that farmers need a cash flow.  And GRIP '91 

gave them the cash flow.  That's why, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition today have asked this Assembly to consider the 

question of deferring the decision on '90-91. 

 

Let's have a review process.  If there was one thing that the 

Premier of this province could have done, he could have 

announced yesterday in the throne speech that he was 

reviewing his debate about whether he was going to implement 

this program at all.  That would have been a review committee 

commission that would have been very well received by those 

people who were standing out there yesterday. 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

But no, he didn't do that.  Instead he opted for other things, and 

they might be of value, but so does this.  And this, Mr. 

Speaker, for at least 60,000 farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is in a very important part. 

 

We also, on the third point, want to have the people of 

Saskatchewan be allowed to elect people to the committee.  

There are 23 crop districts in the province, and that, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly the amount of representation I believe there 

should be.  Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of points of view from 

all over the province that could be expressed by these people as 

a part of providing a depth of quality information.  And then 

they can turn around and say we've thought about this; we've 

said is this a good thing to do, and then go out to the people 

and ask them.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what is obviously 

been missing in the changes of the '92 GRIP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of the day can hide behind the 

fact they didn't have time.  Well we're allowing them an 

opportunity to give themselves time to do it right.  There were 

some things that the farmers wanted to have.  They didn't want 

to have a basket approach on their crops, and that's what you 

gave them.  I cannot believe that you would go against the 

wishes of producers and give them a basket. 

 

I spoke to them in Carlyle and in Maple Creek and in Kamsack 

and up at Lloydminster and Kindersley and Rosetown, and 

nobody wants the basket on the crops.  They have never 

wanted that. 

 

(1515) 

 

I fundamentally believe, Mr. Speaker, that this whole decision 

to do this was reflective of a budgetary component that said I 

have this much money to spend and I won't spend a nickel 

more.  And as many people as can get out of the program, I 

hope they get out and then we're done with it.  That's I think 

what the motive of this government was.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is wrong. 

 

I want to point out from what I've heard, and the minister can 

disqualify it if he wishes, but I've heard also that the '92 GRIP 

program reduces the volume of benefit to this province of $100 

million in a premium payment by the federal government to 

this province. And a hundred million dollars of money from the 

federal government, where does the responsibility of this 

government place itself when they are deliberately not willing 

to participate? 

 

The Alberta government's going to get it.  The Manitoba 

government's going to get it.  Their farmers decided they were 

receiving a good program.  Why weren't there rallies in Alberta 

and Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a very important thing about 

what was in the news the other day and what the minister said 

in his discussion in question period today.  He said that the 

lentils in this province would have cost $200 million all by 

themselves just the way they were. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 1991 GRIP did not allow for that kind of 

production increase.  It didn't.  And the cap was placed on after, 

Mr. Speaker, discussions with people from his 

constituency. 

 

I went down and I asked the people over in Rosetown, the lentil 

growers, the pulse crop growers, I went and asked them.  I said, 

what do you want me to do?  And they said, number one, don't 

interfere with the price.  Don't interfere with the index-moving 

average price.  Because that's jigging it once, and you'll have to 

jig it every time.  And they said don't do that. 

 

The second thing they said is put a cap on the volume that new 

acres can flow into the system.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what 

we did.  And if the minister would have the courage he could 

introduce exactly the same thing.  He's using this as a red 

herring to spread all over.  And what the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan have said is that they don't want to have a part 

of that program for 1992.  They want that 1991 GRIP. 

 

They want to have changes.  They want to participate in 

making those changes.  And if the government had the courage 

they would be able to identify with this rule or this motion and 

then we could move on with it. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I'm going to move this motion 

seconded by the member for Moosomin.  And I will just read 

the three points: 

 

 Extend the deadline indefinitely until the question of the 

government's illegal conduct be resolved; honour the 

contracts it entered into in the name of all of the people of 

Saskatchewan with the farm family; and accept the request of 

farmers to establish a review commission directly elected by 

affected farmers to redesign the GRIP program from every 

one of the areas in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is my motion to this Assembly.  And I 

want to thank the Assembly for giving me the opportunity to 

speak on this, but also giving me the opportunity to have leave 

to do it.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 

stand in this Assembly today and to speak on this motion, this 

very important debate we have entered into today, and in light 

of the problems and the dilemma that is facing many farmers 

across our province today. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the motion before us . 

. . and we will all recognize first of all that the GRIP '91, as it 

was introduced last year to the province of Saskatchewan, was 

a program that had a lot of questions, raised a lot of questions, 

didn't answer all the questions that were out there, the dilemma 

the farmers were facing, but certainly it offered farmers an 

opportunity to at least establish a bottom line and give them 

something that they could, as my colleague from Morse has 

indicated, take to the banks. 

 

And it was a bankable program; a program, Mr. Speaker, that 

allowed farmers to obtain the operating credit and the operating 

finances that were needed to put the crop in in 1991. 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

I guess one of the major concerns I hear from many farmers 

today is the fact that with the new program . . . and in fact 

many producers who had negotiated their loans on the basis of 

the '91 program, only to have the '92 program brought forward, 

taking away that bottom line, were in the unfortunate position 

of being recalled by the lending institutions to renegotiate or to 

come up with some other terms of support to establish their line 

of credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason we are asking for the extension of the 

deadline, and not just the motion in this Assembly today . . . 

and not just my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I understand many 

farm groups, including Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, as of 

Thursday last, sent a request, I believe, to the minister and 

publicly announced that they would be asking the government 

to extend the deadline of signing up for the 1992 program. 

 

And I believe, as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool indicated, that 

the changes that many producers are facing with the dilemma 

that they have been seeking, and certainly the dilemma that has 

surrounded them, the lack of finances, the problems we're 

facing world-wide regarding pricing and the low income 

problems or the major income problems that farmers have been 

facing . . . and now to have another program forced on them or 

introduced so soon, so close to seeding, when they haven't had 

a real good chance to look at it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it certainly would be responsible of and 

showing a responsible government for the minister and 

certainly the Premier and the government of the day to extend 

the deadline and give the producers not only the option of 

taking a closer look at the new program as it's been introduced, 

but I think also, Mr. Speaker, another question that we should 

look at and maybe we should address -- and as we introduced 

and addressed this afternoon in question period  

_- many farmers are also asking for that opportunity or the 

ability to choose the option that they would feel would be most 

beneficial and most supportive to their farming operation. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, there are some . . . the 1992 program may 

have some positive options to it, and I'm not saying it doesn't.  

But, Mr. Speaker, it certainly has many shortfalls and many . . . 

it certainly lacks in a number of areas.  As I indicated, the 

bottom line, many producers last year for once in their life 

knew if they had a crop shortfall, if it was severe drought hit 

their area or frost hit their area or if they had even hail hit their 

area, Mr. Speaker, or hit their farm . . . and we know, and there 

are many farmers in this Assembly today know that when you 

start looking at a broad area such as the new program 

addresses, then you can be sitting in a broad area where there 

maybe 90 per cent of the crop is in above-normal conditions 

and comes off in above-normal production and maybe 10 per 

cent of that area is in very severe drought situations or 

disasters, dilemmas such as hail or frost and you're the person 

in that 10 per cent area, is going to be really out in the cold. 

 

What are they going to have?  They're not going to have the 

option of that crop in the bin.  And so that 1991 program, 

despite its shortfalls, Mr. Speaker, offered the producers a 

bottom line that they knew that they could bank on, that they 

could cash flow their farm on.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest that many businesses around this 

province, business men and women also, as they looked at the 

1991 program and I thought, well it's another hand-out to the 

farmers of this province, also realized that once the program 

was in effect, it became a cash flow. 

 

It meant something to the person who was providing the fuel.  

It meant something to the small dealer who was providing the 

fertilizer and the chemicals.  Because they knew that that 

producer out there who was doing his best, his level best to 

produce a crop, now knew that he could come and go to his 

dealer, whether it was in the summer-time or whether it was in 

the fall, and make sure that his accounts were up to date.  And 

I'm sure many of the small-business dealers around our 

province were very grateful for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what happens with the new program is the fact 

that with our deadline approaching within three days, there are 

still many producers out there and some producers already in 

the field -- I know some of my colleagues have already put 

some crop in the ground -- many of the farmers in my area are 

just waiting and hoping within the next few days, week to 10 

days, to get working on the land.  That for those who have 

already been out there and the fact that the new program was 

basically announced in the middle or late March and the fact 

that there wasn't consultation given or taken to maybe really 

inform producers around the province of the changes to the 

program, many producers are left trying to decide what to do 

with the program. 

 

And the biggest problem they have is the fact that not knowing 

where to go, not having the bankability of the program, what 

do they do? 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly we could look at the new program and 

you'd say, well at least you've got some protection.  But 

comparing the new program to last year isn't really fair in the 

fact that all of a sudden the producer looks at the new program 

and says well, man, my premiums have gone up and what have 

I got for coverage?  About a third of the coverage less than I 

had last year, Mr. Speaker.  So you can appreciate the dilemma 

that farmers are facing. 

 

I believe, as Mr. Stevenson has indicated, it certainly would be 

appropriate for us, for this government, for this House, to 

extend the deadline and not only extend the deadline but give 

the farmers the option.  I believe that would be only fair, Mr. 

Speaker.  It would only be fair to give farmers an option of 

choosing either the '90-91 program or indeed choosing the 

1992 program.  And then indeed as was indicated by the former 

government and then I believe the minister mentioned it again 

today, and our motion brings forward, the fact that we should 

have a producer committee put in place to look at the present 

program, at the last year's program, the 1991 program starting 

today, Mr. Speaker. So that by early winter of 1993, Mr. 

Speaker, we indeed have, as the government indicated in their 

Speech from the Throne yesterday, a safety net program or an 

option that would give farmers the ability to establish their 

farming background that would give them the ability to go to 

their lender and negotiate their operating loans, that would give 

them a bottom line so that they would know from this day on 

that 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

if conditions are beyond their control, Mr. Speaker, they can 

operate, generate the income, the economy, so that their farm 

becomes a very viable operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that anyone, whether it's a 

farmer, whether it's a business person, whether it's a person 

applying for a job, whether it's a person who has received 

notice of a job, notification of a job, to be left with real short 

notice, it's a very difficult decision to make.  We all find it 

difficult to make decisions on the spur of the moment for the 

simple reason that if it's a job location, Mr. Speaker, and you're 

a married person with a family, it's difficult to decide.  You 

need some time to assess your situation and, say, moving a 

family. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the situation that farmers face here is no 

different.  Farmers are put in a position of where they are being 

forced to make a decision without having had the time to really 

assess the impact that it is going to have on their farming 

operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can argue in this House about whether the 

1991 program was good, and we all recognize that it had its 

shortfalls.  But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that with some 

minor changes to the 1991 program, the 1991 GRIP program 

could have been a very strong . . . become a very strong 

program, a safety net for the province not only of 

Saskatchewan but for agricultural producers across Canada. 

 

And it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the 

farmers in Alberta, farmers in . . . and the Government of 

Alberta and farmers and the Government of Manitoba have 

taken the 1991 and made some minor revisions, indicates to me 

that they agreed that the 1991 program -- though it wasn't 

totally adequate -- with minor changes could become a very 

beneficial and influential program in their farm sector and 

certainly become beneficial to the agricultural producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I believe the governments of Alberta, Ontario, 

and Manitoba have indicated that they are willing to support 

their producers.  And I have to question today the changes to 

the 1992 program and the fact that I would ask the government 

of the day, how serious are they in supporting agriculture in 

this province?  How serious was the Premier last fall when we 

were on the election trail and telling farmers that he would 

basically back them and he would support them and he would 

go to the wall on their behalf? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe when the minister announced what he 

called the new, improved changes to GRIP '91, I think he made 

the comment that it would save the treasury $17 million in the 

province of Saskatchewan -- $17 million when we have 60,000 

producers in this province? 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just take a look around our communities.  We 

don't have to look too far to realize that as the farms grow 

larger and fewer and fewer families end up on the farm, that 

certainly the infrastructure of our small rural communities 

begins to suffer.  Our schools, Mr. Speaker, 

our hospitals, our health care facilities, our small businesses, 

our main streets, right across rural Saskatchewan begin to 

suffer when producers do not have that safety net or that ability 

to generate the income they need to operate their farm and to 

keep their farm going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Morse also indicated, we 

see chambers of commerce across the province of 

Saskatchewan now becoming involved in getting into the act of 

lobbying the provincial government and asking them to 

reassess their position, reaffirm their commitment to support 

agriculture in this province by restoring the 1991 program.  

And in the case of the Chamber of Commerce in Swift Current, 

even offering to producers the opportunity to participate in the 

'92 program if they so wish.  Mr. Speaker, that's what we're 

asking of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no question that for us to try and 

demand changes to the program today as we're arguing right 

now, would not give . . . We're arguing right now that 

producers do not have sufficient time to assess the 1992 

program. To again change it would even cloud the program 

further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore we are suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that producers be 

allowed that option to choose the 1991, and if they so wish, not 

to take the 1991.  But in some cases I would suggest, in certain 

areas of the province, the 1992 program might be beneficial.  

Producers might accept that, might be more than happy with 

the 1992 program.  But there are many areas of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, where the 1992 program will not address the 

problems that farmers have faced over the years. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we realize that there are many farmers who 

may wish to opt out of the program, and they'd be given that 

opportunity.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think if given the option, we 

would find many producers would think seriously about opting 

out of the program.  If they were given the option of the 1991 

program or the 1992 program, they would reconsider their 

option of possibly opting out, as they would choose for their 

farm which would be the best program available to them. 

 

We also believe that we need a review committee composed of 

farmers, and as my colleague has suggested, elected by 

farmers. 

 

It would appear to me over the past number of years . . . and 

certainly the last review committee basically was made up of 

representation from major farm organizations in this province.  

And I guess we can all ask ourselves, do those men and women 

who are just representing farm groups, do they really speak on 

behalf of farm individuals. 

 

Maybe we need just individuals who are just strictly, totally 

involved in the farm, who are not tied into the beliefs or tied 

into the opinions of a certain organization, sitting on a review 

panel, making the recommendations so that the average farmer 

out there working on his farm was then going to be represented 

with a strong voice and certainly possibly have a greater input 

and involvement in the process. 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

Mr. Speaker, by extending the deadline we give producers the 

added option of carefully assessing the new program, looking 

at their farming operation, and deciding whether or not they 

choose the program, whether or not they opt out.  And as we 

suggested, Mr. Speaker, whether or not if the government gives 

them the option of choosing '91 over '92, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we would certainly give the producers of this province greater 

security in knowing that they have the option of choosing the 

program that would be most beneficial, that would support and 

strengthen their farming operation. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, why are we trying to put a safety net 

into place.  Why did the former government working with the 

federal government try to institute a safety net program?  

Because we realize we are fighting a global war that we have 

very little control over.  We realize, Mr. Speaker, that our 

ongoing expenses have increased to the point that we need the 

support to supplement our programs and to support the farm 

infrastructure so that we not only support our farming 

communities, Mr. Speaker, but we are offering support to our 

local rural communities as well. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to . . . and I want to 

thank the Assembly for giving me the opportunity to address 

some of the concerns as they have been laid out in this motion. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate, I support my colleagues 

and call upon the government to extend the deadline, as well as 

supporting the Sask Wheat Pool and many farm organizations 

asking the government to extend the deadline so farmers can 

more carefully assess the new program, and honour its contract 

with producers in this province and certainly seriously look at 

giving an open representation for farmers across this province 

in review of the GRIP process.  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

conclusion of my remarks I'll be moving the following 

amendment to this motion: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting the words "including 

in the recent weeks alone hundreds of notices to realize 

security issued by the government itself through the lands 

branch, and" and substituting the words "due to the federal 

government's continuing neglect and failure to live up to its 

commitments and responsibilities"; 

 

 and by deleting all the words after the words "its deadline of 

Thursday" and substituting the following: 

 

 "asks the government 

 

 (1) to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for the third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the 

recent first ministers' conference; 

 

 (2) to extend, with the federal government's consent, the 

deadline to a date which is mutually agreeable for farmers, 

the provincial government, and the federal government; and 

 

 (3) to accept the request of farmers to establish a review 

commission to design a long-term farm income stability 

program based on the needs of farm families and the actual 

cost of production." 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to identify with the concerns of farmers 

in Saskatchewan today.  There is a crisis in agriculture that has 

had its roots in a number of things, but most recently the 

international grain trade wars that has resulted in farm incomes 

dropping to historically low levels and resulted in a farm debt 

crisis second to none in Saskatchewan's history. 

 

Income for Saskatchewan farmers in the last couple of years 

has been reduced to numbers like 4 or 6 or $7,000 realized net 

farm income per family.  That's money to live on, to eat, to buy 

clothes for the kids, and to pay back your debts.  That 

happened under a theoretical regime of a federal government 

and a provincial government of Conservative construction 

delivering supposedly their kind of farm support. 

 

The debt crisis in Saskatchewan is deepening.  We now have a 

$5.2 billion farm debt in Saskatchewan.  The reason it's 

deepening in Saskatchewan, while in the rest of the country it's 

getting better, is that Saskatchewan depends so heavily on 

grains and oilseeds production in order for our agricultural 

system to function.  We have 45 per cent of the productive land 

in Canada.  We produce about . . . 20 per cent of the world's 

export grains come from Canada, and Saskatchewan has a 

major part of that.  Saskatchewan is dependent on the 

international grain trade, and those with whom we compete, the 

United States of America and the European Community 

principally, have their farmers supported by their federal 

governments. 

 

What's happened in Saskatchewan in the face of this income 

and debt crisis?  In Saskatchewan since 1988, the members 

opposite sat idly by, maybe collaborated with the federal 

government in taking on in excess of $200 million in farm 

income support from the federal responsibility. 

 

In 1988 we put in $75 million into drought support which we're 

beginning to pay back now at the cost of $15 million per year.  

In 1989 the provincial government took on from the federal 

government half of the cost of crop insurance -- a cost to the 

province of between 40 and $60 million annually. 

 

Up until 1990 we had a western grain stabilization program.  

Another program with serious design flaws, but it at least had 

the federal government paying 60 per cent of the cost of the 

program.  What the members opposite participated in, the 

design was for Saskatchewan to take on, instead of that 

program where we contributed nothing, the GRIP and NISA 

programs -- where for GRIP we contributed between 140 and 

$150 million dollars 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

annually and for NISA about $30 million annually.  And that 

doesn't count the program deficits that are run up. 

 

Those numbers in the last year cost the province of 

Saskatchewan $260 million in farm support, which was entirely 

federal a short four years ago.  And you talk about being 

worried about farmers and the ability of the provincial 

government to deal with the crisis in Saskatchewan.  You've 

voluntarily accepted a cost of program support that no one in 

his right mind would have done. 

 

Even the Prime Minister, at the recent first ministers' meeting, 

recognized the difficulty that's here. 

 

Your leader, the former minister of Agriculture, didn't 

recognize it.  The Prime Minister, who lives 3,000 miles away, 

recognized that the cost of program supports to provinces like 

Saskatchewan is a serious detriment to our economy and 

threatens our ability to function as a government. 

 

He also recognized that the third line of defence triggers -- 

which were part of the original recommendation of the 

committee before GRIP was accepted which the federal 

government and your provincial government, when it was in 

place, rejected -- that the third line of defence triggering was an 

important part of sound stabilization programming. 

 

Farmers in Saskatchewan took on a major program cost, the 

province of Saskatchewan took on a major program cost, in 

exchange for a commitment from the federal government to 

pay third line of defence money which they refused to put in in 

a predictable fashion.  Farmers are still waiting from last year 

for a half of a half of what the federal government said was 

money farmers deserved through their own national GRIP 

committee. 

 

The national GRIP committee said we needed $1.3 billion of 

farm income support here for the 1990 crop.  They haven't 

started talking, the feds won't let them talk about the 1991 crop, 

for the 1990 crop that we were short $1.3 billion. 

 

The federal government last fall announced 700 million of 

which they have not yet paid a good part of, and that's 

contributing to cash income problems and cash flow for 

farmers. 

 

Let's deal with the design of the old program.  GRIP is a flawed 

program.  It was flawed, so seriously flawed, that it's virtually 

unfixable.  The GRIP program, as designed by you, first of all, 

was based on a sliding price.  Farmers were supposed to accept 

a 15-year sliding average price for their support level -- had 

nothing to do with the cost of production.  On the other hand, 

had nothing to do with market values either. 

 

Farmers recognized those shortfalls and described to your 

government when it was in place and have described to our 

government that those things needed fixing.  And that the 

complex administrative structure that you'd put on the old 

program was a serious problem. 

 

Designing a program where the prices are guaranteed to 

fall -- and when it was first designed they were guaranteed to 

fall for two years, and now it's guaranteed to fall for three years 

-- where the premiums by the design of the federal government 

were designed to increase this year by in excess of 50 per cent, 

where the farmers had to look to the program to decide what 

crops to grow, how the members opposite could possibly ask 

that that kind of a program be retained is beyond me. 

 

(1545) 

 

The program flaws have accurately been identified by farmers 

through the process put in place by the previous government 

under previous legislation.  The legislation establishing old 

GRIP in Saskatchewan described a review process which 

involved all the farm organizations in Saskatchewan with the 

exception of the National Farmers Union, which the previous 

government refused to recognize as a legitimate farm 

organization.  We, when we took office, asked the 

organizations presently named in the program to confirm their 

membership, added the National Farmers Union 

representatives, and added two ministerial appointments and 

asked them to go and consult and come back with 

recommendations. 

 

They invited farmers from across Saskatchewan to respond to 

them.  They got in excess of 300 submissions.  They met with a 

number of farm organizations and many individuals, and as a 

result of those consultations came back with recommendations 

for a new GRIP design. 

 

The new GRIP design was taken before the ADD (agriculture 

development and diversification district) regional councils, 

before it was announced, and it was then introduced as a 

program for 1992 over a lot of game playing by the federal 

government.  1991-92 was to be the year of review for GRIP, 

because it was established in spring and they recognized when 

they established it that it had fatal flaws in it. 

 

We began our review process in accordance with the 

procedures.  The federal government, after we completed our 

review, decided no, let's not do this now; let's do this at a later 

time.  So we did not have an opportunity to create the kind of 

program that farmers want.  We simply had an ability to try to 

fix some of the major problems in the program. 

 

The process then resulted in the federal government putting 

road-blocks in our way.  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

have expressed concern about the short time in this program.  I 

want you to know that by mid-February this program was 

ready to be announced.  And for about a month the federal 

government played games with the regular process for 

introducing change.  The elements of this program that are in 

Saskatchewan exist elsewhere in Canada, without 

Saskatchewan's name on them, in this particular combination.  

They chose to force us to spend the time to get our consent 

from other provinces because they wanted to play politics with 

farmers' lives in Saskatchewan, as they've been doing for ever. 

 

The ad hoc-ery of the federal government in co-operation with 

your party and previous governments has left farmers with an 

inability to determine where they are 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

going in agriculture in the long haul. 

 

We are committed to looking at farm agricultural programs 

independently of the problems that are here.  The problems in 

old GRIP are so serious that we need to have a look at 

alternative approaches to farm stabilization, and it is our intent 

to do that before very long. 

 

You might want to remember what farmers are really saying 

out there about where they're at in terms of their farming 

operations and the issues that are really important to them.  

Farmers have talked about their cash flow problems and their 

lack of income security. 

 

GRIP offers income security at too low a level, and the federal 

government needs to meet its commitment of third line of 

defence which was part and parcel of the original package 

before farmers can have income security at an adequate level.  

The federal government needs to take on, in a more appropriate 

share, farm program costs before farmers can have the kind of 

income security they need.  And farmers need a 

cost-of-production formula in a farm program so that farmers 

can have the kind of cost of production . . . have the kind of 

income security they need. 

 

But let's look at the issue of cash flow around income security.  

The old GRIP program pays out its designed support, after all 

the increases and premiums and after all the slides, over a two 

year period.  Farmers have to make their seeding decisions 

now.  They get their first payment in fall, if there's a pay-out.  

They theoretically get another payment the next spring and 

they get their third payment about a year from now. 

 

Well what happened to farmers' payments this April?  Farmers 

expected a substantial payment from the program in April.  But 

what happened?  The interim wheat price increased, so farmers 

didn't get the money from the program; so many farmers got 

bills instead of cheques when the interim support should have 

arrived. 

 

Nor has the federal government yet paid out the increase in the 

Canadian Wheat Board prices that were named.  Nor has the 

federal government paid out the NISA (net income stabilization 

account) cheques that farmers have been waiting as long as 20 

or 30 weeks for. 

 

Nor has the federal government paid out the income support 

promised -- the inadequate income support promised last fall -- 

the last half of the $700 million they did promise.  And they've 

completely ignored their own committee's recommendation on 

the other $500 million where the committee said, just to get up 

to the last five-year's average income -- which would give the 

average Saskatchewan farm family 10 or $12,000 a year -- just 

to get up to that number they ignored the call for the $500 

million that was to be put in place for that. 

 

You talk, and we know about the issue of bankability for farm 

programs.  The old GRIP or new GRIP have serious flaws 

when it comes to bankability.  The banks have taken exactly 

the approach, the same approach to new GRIP as they took to 

old GRIP when it comes to bankability.  They looked last year 

at the guarantee; they came to this spring 

and they saw the money evaporate that was on their assignment 

from GRIP, and they said, whoa, where is this going?  They 

looked at their priority on the GRIP assignments that they had 

and they said, whoa, where is this money going? 

 

But you can go talk to any bank and every credit union in 

Saskatchewan -- and we've had discussions with them -- and 

they've assured us that in terms of the numbers that are 

guaranteed for farmers on the program, they have not taken a 

different approach to 1992 GRIP than they did to 1991 GRIP. 

 

The program is as bankable as old GRIP.  The bottom line is 

GRIP is a program that has design flaws of very tremendous 

proportions, and farmers do not want that kind of a program.  

They want a simple program that they can understand, that's 

deliverable at the elevator -- a program that gives them some 

response to cost of production and a program that responds to 

the market signals so you don't get into the kind of difficulties 

that are going on in other provinces in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Farmers want affordable premiums.  Since 

last year GRIP premiums have increased by 33 per cent 

because the federal government has withdrawn about $78 

million from the program.  The crop insurance premiums by 

the methodology determined by the federal government have 

increased by in excess of 50 per cent to farmers across the 

province.  That's a tragedy when they're already suffering from 

farm income shortages.  And that's the design that you people 

participated in creating. 

 

As I said, farmers wanted a simpler program -- a program that 

they could understand and afford -- and we are committed to 

that kind of a program. 

 

It's ironic that you should talk about co-operation and 

consultation in the design of farm programs.  You ought to be 

aware that in the original design of GRIP, the federal 

government did not listen and you did not listen to the farmer 

committee that was put in place to design it.  Your government 

and the federal government did not listen to the national GRIP 

committee when they recommended that farmers needed more 

support.  We have followed the recommendations of farmers 

from across Saskatchewan in bringing forward amendments 

that fix some of the problems in this very seriously flawed 

program. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  We have about two or three different 

debates going on.  I would appreciate it if those members went 

behind the bar or outside the House and continued on with that 

discussion.  All right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I want 

to simply say in conclusion that the members opposite need to 

work together with us, as we will call you to do, to work with 

farmers to bring forward a program design that has some merit 

and that is based on farmers' opinions and not on the kind of 

mess you brought forward last year to the farm program. 

 

We want a program that doesn't put the farmers in the 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

position like Manitoba farmers have been put in where for 

example on their lentil acreages, Manitoba lentil acreages are 

estimated to be increasing by a factor of four or five times, 

creating absolute havoc in the industry.  That is costing the 

program between 11 and $15 million for every 100,000 acres 

grown in Manitoba. 

 

That translated to Saskatchewan where we have a base acreage 

of four times that in Manitoba, would mean a cost to the 

provincial treasury out of the program in excess of $200 

million.  And that's the kind of design the members opposite 

support, Mr. Speaker?  I'm astounded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I'll tell you, the members opposite 

have a capacity to design disasters.  If you look at the 

provincial financial situation, it was a disaster designed by the 

members opposite.  And if you look at the farm income 

programs in Saskatchewan, they were disasters designed by the 

members opposite, and I think they should be ashamed of their 

approach to that. 

 

We are going to take a consultative approach beginning 

immediately to design the kind of program farmers have been 

talking about for a number of years, and the federal 

government and the members opposite have refused to listen. 

 

Farmers want a simple program, deliverable at the elevator, 

affordable, properly funded by the federal government that is 

responsive to cost of production and that is reflective of the 

market-place.  Farmers want to go out there and farm in a 

business fashion and we're going to work with them to help 

them do it.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In conclusion therefore I move: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting the words "including 

in recent weeks alone, hundreds of notices to realize security 

issued by the government itself through the lands branch, 

and" and substituting the words "due to the federal 

government's continuing neglect and failure to live up to its 

commitments and responsibilities"; 

 

 and by deleting all the words after the words "its deadline of 

Thursday" and substituting the following: 

 

 asks the government 

 

 (1) to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for a third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the recent first 

ministers' conference; 

 

 (2) to extend with the federal government's consent the 

deadline to a date which is mutually agreeable for farmers, 

the provincial government, 

and the federal government; and 

 

 (3) to accept the request of farmers to establish a review 

commission to design a long-term farm income stability 

program based on the needs of farm families and the actual 

cost of production. 

 

Moved by myself and seconded by Darrel Cunningham, the 

member from Canora, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- I just want to remind the member -- Order! -- 

remind the Minister of Agriculture that we refer to members by 

their constituency. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very 

pleased today to be speaking on this motion.  I think there is 

indeed an emergency in Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan.  

Across this province farmers are going broke.  Farmers cannot 

get credit to put in their crop this spring.  Farmers are losing 

their farms, losing their land, losing their livelihood.  This is 

not a problem that arose in the last six months.  This is a 

problem that has arose over the past decade. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of sympathy for those farmers.  I 

am a farmer and I do not like to see my neighbours going down 

the road and losing their land and destroying the very fabric of 

the community.  And I think there's a very serious problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this should not be happening.  The people of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, have had cheap food for the past hundred 

years.  They've had the cheapest, the most abundant, the safest, 

and the best food supply probably in all the world.  And they 

have had that on the basis of a vibrant and strong agricultural 

industry in all of this country.  And, Mr. Speaker, if those 

people intend to have that supply of food and that abundant 

supply of food, they must be prepared to support farmers 

through difficult times. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a national responsibility.  It is the 

responsibility of the people of this country.  And we need the 

support of our country, of our national government, to live up 

to their responsibility to get the farmers through this tough 

period. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we might be able to get through on a 

provincial basis, but we inherited such a financial mess that we 

cannot do it.  If we had 500 million or a billion dollars we 

could help the farmers survive for one more year, but we can't 

even borrow that much money, Mr. Speaker.  Our finances are 

in such a state that we cannot even borrow that money if we 

wanted to borrow that money to do that.  So we have no choice 

but to be as efficient as possible with the money that we have 

to work with.  If we're going to spend $200 million on 

agriculture programs, we must make them efficient and deliver 

the dollars in the cheapest and the best way possible. 

 

And I think, if you look at the changes in the program, that's 

what this is all about.  If you look at the old program, you spent 

$6 million measuring bins.  That's money that could have gone 

into farmers' pockets -- $6 million. 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

You look at the programs, the flaws that are in it, as Berny 

points out, where the shift of acreages causes a waste of 

taxpayers' dollars.  But we have to run this program as . . . we 

need to deliver a program that is cost-effective and will help 

the farmers to the best of our ability.  And we need to demand 

from the federal government that they live up to their 

responsibility to fund this province and this agriculture so that 

we can continue to have farmers on our land and cheap food in 

this country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that we've had in 

selling this program and delivering this program has been 

political interference.  Before the program was even announced 

we had letters from the federal Minister of Agriculture writing 

letters to producers with partial information and attempting to 

dissuade them from participating to the fullest in this program.  

And I think that is shameful. 

 

I think if there are producers who do not enrol in this program 

to the best of their advantage and to the way that is most 

advantageous and gives them the best coverage because they 

were persuaded by political interference not to do so, I think 

that if those producers are losing their land this fall because of 

those decisions that they made based on misinformation that 

was spread by people with a political agenda, I think that is 

shameful. 

 

And I think that the changes that we've done to this program 

are done to deliver it more efficiently, to make better use of 

taxpayers' dollars, and to protect the farmers in the very best 

way that we can with the limited resources that we have in this 

province.  And I agree with my colleague who says that we 

need a new program. This program is not adequate. 

 

When I campaigned during the election campaign, I kept a 

record of people in support of GRIP.  I found 97.3 per cent of 

the people were opposed to the old program and they wanted 

changes.  They wanted cost of production formula; they didn't 

like the sliding average; they didn't like the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They had a choice.  They chose us. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I don't recall when the members 

opposite were making their speeches that there was 

interference when they made their speeches, and I would hope 

that they would give the members on the government side the 

same opportunity to participate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this program is 

complicated.  It is not adequate.  It was a level of income that 

would not support farmers in this province.  It was a sliding 

average.  It was designed that the IMAP would slide.  We 

know already that under the old program that IMAP will slide.  

Even under the new program it will slide to 385 next year and 

probably to 360 the year after. 

 

We have a program that was designed to run a deficit which 

would create higher premiums in the future.  We had a program 

that would not work, would not support farmers in 

Saskatchewan, and we made whatever changes we thought 

were necessary in order to make the program a little bit better. 

It certainly is not the program that we would have chosen if we 

had had co-operation from a federal government who was 

really interested in designing a program that would provide 

adequate income support to our farmers over a period of time. 

 

And I think that that is the solution to our problem in 

Saskatchewan, is a long-term program with adequate federal 

support, not attempting to deliver a program in an agricultural 

province that's whole economy is based on agriculture to try to 

deliver a support program that will support that industry. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, that is part of the reason that we are a 

country.  And in Canada we have in the West contributed to 

other parts of Canada when grain prices were good, and I think 

it is incumbent on the rest of Canada to support the agricultural 

industry through these tough times. 

 

And where we go from here is that we are going to appoint a 

new committee.  I'm interested that the opposition party should 

. . . members opposite should criticize the structure of a 

committee which was the exact structure that they themselves 

set out with.  And this was a broad based representation and we 

will have a committee if it's elected or in some way 

representing producers. And we'll have public meetings and we 

will design a program which is adequate and not one which is 

put together on the fly and is basically unfunctional. 

 

I'm quite interested that members opposite should suggest that 

we make changes to the program at this time of the year.  I 

think that is indicative of the way that they ran programs when 

they were in power. 

 

I think, as a minister who took over the administration of crop 

insurance in October, I can tell you that making changes on the 

fly as they did last year is a total disaster, and as many as 

16,000 non-corrected errors . . . and was a program that did not 

adequately serve the farmers that it was designed to serve 

because it was impossible to administer because it was based 

on a program that was designed piece by piece as it was put out 

and designed on the run. 

 

The agreement for the last year's program was signed in 

September.  The federal-provincial agreement was signed some 

time in September, and that is not the way to operate a program 

that starts operating in March. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, that we do need to address the farm 

problem.  We need to work together. I invite the members 

opposite to join us.  We just try to design a program which is 

adequate for farmers across this province and one that is not 

complicated and does not waste money and not function 

properly. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to start off by saying that it's going to take a long time to 

correct the plunder and plague inflicted upon this 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

province by the last government.  What we have here is just a 

small portion of what they have inflicted upon the people over 

the last nine and a half years.  But as outlined in the throne 

speech, this government is going to take its responsibility in 

hand by offering fairness, new hope, and the ability for people 

in this province to maintain a decent style of life.  They have 

not had that in the past. 

 

The process that we went through on the GRIP program right 

from the beginning, Mr. Speaker, was absolutely ludicrous.  I 

see the sanctimonious lot over there standing and saying why 

don't you do this; why don't you do that.  This program was 

given . . . a program was given to them by the farmers of this 

province.  They were saying, put in a cost-of-production 

formula; keep spot loss hail; give an elevator delivery program.  

Three key elements of a program that in the beginning, when it 

should have been put in, were neglected by the last 

government.  And now they're sanctimoniously sitting over 

there and saying, well just do this and just do that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this doesn't work that way.  Because the 

farmers of this province remember the beginning of this mess.  

And one thing that many people don't know, Mr. Speaker, is 

you talk about the last government saying they were going to 

create a program that was going to be a great program for 

farmers.  The actuary of this program, Mr. Speaker, is over 

three or four years on the revenue side. 

 

Now I want to tell you why that's an important point.  Any 

other insurance program in this country has the actuary over 20 

to 30 years.  And you wonder why the premiums are so high.  

The premiums are so high because two Tory governments, 

while standing in their place saying I have this long-term 

program for you fellas and women farmers in Saskatchewan, 

put the actuary over three years. 

 

I wonder what they were really thinking.  Our accusation of the 

shortest long-term program in history has been proven now that 

we know the length of the actuary. 

 

The process was flawed right from the very beginning, Mr. 

Speaker.  And then the farmers demanded changes.  

Representation was made to committees and they demanded a 

change in program.  Program was changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then came in Mr. McKnight's politics. And this is 

so typical of Tories.  Just when we were trying to bring forward 

a program to help the people of this province, what does the 

opposition's Tory cousin in Ottawa do?  Well Mr. McKnight 

starts playing his jiggery-pokery politics.  Because we all know 

what the IMAP would have been at 385, and then all of a 

sudden after the fact he comes out and says well no, we're 

going to bring it out the . . . (inaudible) . . . But I mean, 

purposely trying to play his political games, not thinking about 

the farmers of the province, but thinking about how to mess up 

the NDP government in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that's the way these guys operated in Saskatchewan when 

they were government, and that's why they're no longer 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the program was set up on three 

lines of defence.  First line being farmers production; second 

line -- and everyone who read the paper, the green paper, read 

this -- the second line was the GRIP and NISA programs, Mr. 

Speaker; and the third line was monies from the federal 

government in times when there was a large drought or low 

prices or whatever, when times of dramatic shortfall.  That was 

what this program was built on - 

_ three lines of defence. 

 

The GRIP program was never designed to be the be-all to 

end-all as far as income was concerned, because the third line 

was agreed to by the federal government, by the farmers, by 

everybody.  But they did not deliver on it.  They play their 

typical Tory politics. 

 

In fact the recent first ministers' conference, where they also 

said they were going to talk about third line of defence, they're 

still talking third line of defence.  But that's all it is, is talk. 

 

The federal government is taking the same approach as this 

government did in their last desperate days.  They're thinking 

more about politics and survival of themselves than any farmer 

or living, breathing person in this country, including the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, and that's the problem. 

 

Our government was thrown a rotten tomato by the Tories, and 

we were forced to catch it.  And we know that, but I'll tell we're 

not going to duck the responsibility.  We will be starting, as we 

did right after the election, to rebuild this province, and part of 

the GRIP program is its rebuilding. 

 

If you talked to anybody out in Saskatchewan, they will say we 

have to come to a completely new design.  But they say for our 

sake please put in a cost of production.  Please put in a spot 

loss hail provision.  Please put in a delivery system that is not 

based on payments that are political or that is based on a 

payment that can be delayed by the federal government, but a 

payment based on an elevator delivery system and feed-lot 

system where the farmers can simply haul their product and get 

a decent price for it.  That's all they're asking, and that is the 

direction we're heading. 

 

As I said before, Mr. Speaker, it will take time to clean up nine 

years of Tory greed and plundering.  But I'll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, it will be done because we have a commitment on this 

side of the House to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- The current conditions of farm income and 

debt, Mr. Speaker, are devastating, and we know that.  We 

have plans to bring forward legislation as far as debt is 

concerned.  We have planned now to have a committee to start 

right now as soon as possible to get the GRIP program on 

track. 

 

The Speaker: -- As agreed to earlier his time has been 

consumed. 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the MLA for 

the largest urban  constituency in Saskatchewan, I do want to 

remind everyone that Saskatchewan people -- be they city 

people or those in the country -- understand the importance of 

finding a solution to the agricultural economic problems facing 

the province. 

 

Citizens want responsible leadership, and they want a 

commitment from all politicians regardless of political stripe to 

solve our problems.  There is no political party in 

Saskatchewan whose commitment to agriculture should ever be 

questioned.  That would be cheap politics and non-productive 

criticism. 

 

I have no question in my mind that the changes that are being 

proposed to the GRIP program by the current government are 

being done in good faith.  What is open to question are the 

tactics and perhaps what we would call the approaches by 

politicians in their efforts to deal with the crisis in agriculture.  

To date, all attempts in our province have met with failure in 

trying to address our agricultural problems.  And the most 

recent failure was the original GRIP program.  I think people 

do realize that this program was fundamentally flawed from the 

outset, and part of the reason for its weaknesses was the haste 

in which it was put together and the fact that farmers' concerns 

were indeed ignored. 

 

Now Saskatchewan is about to enter into another program 

which I believe has many flaws for precisely the same reasons.  

I wish to offer constructive advice in the hopes that we won't 

make the same mistake twice. 

 

Every farmer knows that if you want something to work 

properly when you need it to, you'd better build it right from 

the beginning and take the time to build it right.  In my opinion 

the way in which the original GRIP was initially introduced did 

put politics ahead of agriculture.  And rather than take as much 

time as was necessary to discuss the program and its inherent 

problems with the farming community before implementing it, 

the politicians of the day did rush off to Ottawa to sign the deal 

because an election was on the horizon. 

 

The result was a GRIP in Saskatchewan that did cost our 

taxpayers more than it did the people of Alberta, more than it 

cost the people of Manitoba or Ontario or Quebec -- a program 

which created a problem for taxpayers when some farmers 

could make more money farming the program than doing what 

was sensible for Saskatchewan farm land or for the markets. 

 

If only farmers on the advisory board, Mr. Speaker, had really 

been listened to before the original deal was signed, we could 

have played a leadership role in creating a national agriculture 

plan without all the pitfalls that surfaced in the original GRIP.  

Why create a panel of experts, experienced farmers, 

agriculturalists from whom to obtain input if they're simply 

going to be ignored?  Why create this panel?  Why have people 

come forward and then not listen to what they have to say? 

 

Well here we are and it's seeding time again.  And our hastily 

built revenue insurance program has broken down again just 

when we need it.  We are all interested in correcting the faults 

with GRIP, but this time there's no 

excuse for not doing it right.  And I ask, why the haste again?  

Why not stay with the original flawed program, work with 

Alberta and work with Manitoba who are indeed doing things 

that are going to cost the farmers of this province a great, great 

deal? 

 

We should be the people, we who farm 40 per cent of Canada's 

arable land, to take the leadership role, joining together with 

two other provinces who too have a base that's contingent upon 

making good decisions in agriculture, and take our joint 

recommendations to the federal table. 

 

Why not take the time to put new options to farmers this fall?  

Let them think about it for a change.  Hold hearings in 

November.  Come out with final forms so that people have 

enough time to know what it is they're really having to do.  

And this time let's allow people to really be heard when they 

raise concerns about new proposals.  Unless government learns 

to listen to people, there is never going to be an acceptable 

program. 

 

It is unfortunate that the same mistake is going to be made 

twice.  The new government has unilaterally opted out of GRIP 

as fast as the previous government opted in.  And just when 

we're in the position to negotiate major changes, the 

Saskatchewan government once again puts our farmers and our 

taxpayers out of step with the other producing provinces.  In 

spite of protests from many farmers, Ottawa's been told that 

this revised program has the full support of the Saskatchewan 

farming community.  And that is just not true. 

 

Is all this rush really worth it?  For all the changes that this 

latest Saskatchewan government experiment on farmers are 

going to produce, we should have gone to the table with our 

neighbours to the East and to the West.  The changes being 

proposed to GRIP by the government will really only save 

pennies per acre, but will now create a new competitor for 

farmers and new competitors for our taxpayers in 

Saskatchewan, namely the treasuries of Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Our federal income tax dollars are going to be supporting the 

growing of lentils in Alberta and Manitoba, contrary to market 

signals, and at the very same time we're going to be trying to 

subsidize low market returns on what we grow in 

Saskatchewan.  For very little benefit the Saskatchewan 

government will have added to the confusion with new forms, 

different rules, predictably, other people going out and trying to 

explain all of these things to beleaguered people who are truly 

at the end of the line. 

 

And although this experiment does offer an option of crop 

insurance over revenue insurance and eliminates the problems 

of moral hazard, it does not address farmers who cannot 

maximize yields due to such problems as drought or 

grasshoppers.  And many of those farmers were out here 

yesterday. 

 

Once again, we have people, our people, in a panic.  Therefore, 

I do urge this government, in particular the Minister of 

Agriculture, to leave the original program in place while 

intensifying efforts to renegotiate a deal which will serve all 

three prairie provinces more 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

effectively. 

 

Please, and I implore you, to get back in step with Alberta and 

Manitoba rather than making them our agricultural enemies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a national agriculture plan in Canada, a 

solidarity in our programs, a united front on global markets.  

We need a program which addresses input costs, farm debt, and 

world market pressures.  Saskatchewan cannot afford an 

every-province-for-itself approach.  And if we do not emerge 

from discussions with Ottawa with an airtight, GATT-able 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) program, then while 

others fight to remain distinct as societies in Canada, rural 

Saskatchewan will struggle to avoid becoming an extinct 

society. 

 

I implore the members in this House to do what is best for the 

people of our province, to do what is best for the farmers who 

want to do nothing more than to have a chance to farm, and to 

do what is necessary to save our agriculture industry.  In my 

view, what is the very best to do is to have the courage to 

extend the deadline, to honour the original GRIP until joint 

changes are established with the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba to take forward to the federal government table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On a 

point of order, because I'm not quite sure . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   I'm not quite sure 

how the logistics of this proposal is going to work, but I was 

impressed earlier this afternoon by the spirit of co-operation 

that was exhibited here by discussing and debating this very 

important issue, and now I can see us heading to a point where 

we're going to come at loggerheads. 

 

In the spirit of compromise, I'm going to make a suggestion, 

and I'd like to have the reaction from the government, and that 

is that essentially the amendments that are being proposed by 

the government is something that we feel in tune with and we 

would not primarily have too many objections to those 

amendments. 

 

However, we do feel that the information and the points that 

we were suggesting are also of paramount importance.  So 

rather than having the whole thing being negated here, we 

would suggest that we keep our original motion, the 

government can put their amendments to it, and then we would 

vote in favour of both the amendment and the original motion.  

Because I think, Mr. Speaker, it's very important for us to come 

out of here with one, single, united voice so that we can show 

the farmers on the steps of the legislature that we are speaking 

with one, single, strong voice in this legislature.  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll ask the members to give me just a 

minute to consult here. 

 

Order.  First of all I would like to inform the member from 

Rosthern, that was not a point of order.  The words may be well 

applicable to the discussion, but that's certainly not a point of 

order. 

 

I want to . . . What we did this afternoon was certainly not 

according to the rules and this is what happens when we play, 

you know, on a momentary basis we make decisions.  I could 

see this coming when we decided that we were going to go in 

this direction, but members must decide that.  But I would ask 

the two House Leaders to please find a different forum than the 

Chamber to do your negotiations and your consulting.  And 

those things really should not be done on the floor of the 

Chamber. 

 

I think I have no choice but to put the motion and the 

amendment as they are, and that is what I intend to do -- I 

really have no other choice. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate it if you 

could verify one point for me and that is, that the rules are there 

as guidance.  But my understanding is that when House 

Leaders agree on something, this House can do whatever the 

House Leaders agree on; so that even if it means the bending or 

the omission of rules at that particular point, if it's a unanimous 

decision of this House.  So I don't see really where there would 

be a problem in doing as I have suggested. 

 

The Speaker: -- I would like to inform the members that I am 

only carrying on the wishes of the House.  It was stated 90 

minutes ago that when the time was up that I shall put the 

question.  I am putting the question and until there is another 

motion before the Assembly, I cannot act otherwise.  The only 

motion that is before us is the motion and the amended motion 

and that is what we will take the vote on now.  I will put the 

motion and the amended motion to the Assembly and that is all 

we have before us.  Will the members take the question and the 

amendment as read? 

 

The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:32 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Koskie Draper 

Goulet Serby 

Solomon Whitmore 

Atkinson Sonntag 

Kowalsky Flavel 

Carson Roy 

MacKinnon Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger 

Upshall Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Kluz 

Lorje Carlson 

Lyons Renaud 

Pringle Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

-- 40 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:40 p.m. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Pringle 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Murray 

Wiens Hamilton 

Simard Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Solomon Flavel 

Atkinson Roy 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Koenker Langford 

Lorje Jess 

Lyons Haverstock 

-- 48 

 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

-- 9 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, I am honoured and humbled to 

be allowed to move the motion in support of the Speech from 

the Throne.  Although I'm a junior face in this Assembly, I am 

deeply aware of the tradition behind this moment -- intimidated 

and inspired at the same time by those who have stood in my 

place and given voice to sentiments of hope, challenge, and 

opportunity as I propose to do today. 

 

This is a new experience for me, but I am part of a 

continuum going back to the Walter Scott government, and 

before that the role of parliamentary history through the ages.  

We who represent the people perhaps sometimes forget that our 

duty is not only to the political, economic, and social whims of 

the present; we also owe an allegiance to those that served 

before us -- those who are our models of selfless, energetic 

devotion to the common good. 

 

This Chamber is alive with example.  We endanger our future 

if we dishonour their past.  So I am honoured -- I am honoured, 

Mr. Speaker -- that I can present my address to you. 

 

I know that I will be heard because you demonstrated during 

the last session that you not only revere this institution, you 

ensure that we will adhere to its rules.  And that's not an easy 

task, but one you perform with delicate severity. 

 

I am honoured as well, Mr. Speaker, because in selecting me, 

the Premier is also paying homage to the fine people of the 

Meadow Lake constituency who I am proud to represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, the Americans call the state of 

Virginia the mother of presidents.  Meadow Lake constituency 

-- more modest but twice as beautiful -- is, I suggest, the 

mother of MLAs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- As I mentioned last December, my 

constituency has five sitting members of this legislature who 

were born or raised in it.  As well, the current and former 

ministers of Health are from Meadow Lake.  Others might call 

that a coincidence, Mr. Speaker.  To me, it very simply 

illustrates the principle of natural selection. 

 

Mainly, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to lead this debate 

because I am proud to be a part of this government -- 

privileged to be associated with this Premier and this cabinet of 

hard-working women and men, and thrilled at the prospect held 

out in this throne speech. 

 

This speech says to the people of Saskatchewan that our 

10-year epidemic of financial insanity is finally over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- It tells us that irresponsibility is no longer our 

guiding light.  It tells us that the first steps have been taken 

toward restoring Saskatchewan to its rightful and historic place 

as an innovator among governments in Canada.  It tells us, as 

Prime Minister William Gladstone said more than a hundred 

years ago, the resources of civilization are not yet exhausted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, December's session was a transitional one.  That 

throne speech and the short session which followed took this 

province out of reverse and put it into first gear.  We put an end 

to the loathsome PST (provincial sales tax) 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

and immediately introduced a note of optimism into the 

provincial economy that has been silent for years. 

 

We reintroduced the word economize into the provincial 

vocabulary through a series of measures, both large and small.  

We combined the SaskPower and SaskEnergy bills in the same 

envelope, saving $725,000 a year.  We began our government 

with the smallest and most effective cabinet in years with . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- With equally small staff, Mr. Speaker, saving 

approximately $100,000 a month.  We took away the 

extravagant life-styles of Graham Taylor and Bob Andrew at a 

saving of nearly $2 million a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- We didn't find enough in December to cover 

the Tory debt of nearly $14 billion, but we made a start. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, as we said we would do, we 

opened the books.  We established the Financial Management 

Review Commission and solemnly swore that that kind of 

incomprehensible and incompetent secrecy that was the Tory 

government watchword would never happen again. 

 

Notice, Mr. Speaker, that I pass quickly over the nearly $14 

billion figure.  I am sure my colleagues will have something 

more to say about it as will I.  But frankly my mind stutters at 

the brutal enormity of this figure.  I simply do not understand 

how rational men and women fulfilling their sworn duty to the 

public good could allow this to happen. 

 

One of the previous deputy premiers, Eric Berntson, a current 

senator of excess, is on record as saying that they intended to 

fix this province so it could never be returned to the way it was 

under the Douglas, Lloyd, and Blakeney governments.  That is, 

I suggest, close to the only aim that they've achieved -- maybe. 

 

This throne speech continues the process begun in our first 

session.  The blueprint it provides, along with the budget 

speech to follow shortly, will put us in high gear once again.  

Folks, we're on the way. 

 

There are a number of things I like about this speech, but what 

I like most is its attitude -- its open, up-front, bald assertion of 

this government's basic commitment.  The speech says this is 

what we're going to do. It then says, if we fail to do it, the 

judgement be on our heads. 

 

The throne speech says that this government will put the 

provincial finances in order.  It will restore open, honest, and 

accountable government.  It will be fair and it will be 

compassionate.  It will reintroduce a spirit of community and of 

co-operation, and it will lead the province into economic 

recovery.  The people will judge us on how successfully we 

achieve these goals, and that's fair game. 

 

I want to say something about these goals, about our plans.  

Keeping track of the public purse may not be an 

original plan, but operating the government with the doors 

open and the books legible is one thing Tommy Douglas and 

this government believe in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Nothing new here, Mr. Speaker, just plain 

common-sense objectives that are supposedly those of any 

government with some direction and integrity. 

 

And there you have it, Mr. Speaker.  What's new here is the 

word restore.  The Premier and his government will restore 

sanity, integrity, and a compassion to the operation of this 

government; and in the process, restore the faith of the 

Saskatchewan people in what has heretofore been their 

instrument and their servant, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

What a sad comment.  What a damning indictment of the 

previous government.  The first task, the monumental task of 

this new administration, is to restore in the minds of the people 

what should be taken for granted. 

 

Government after government from 1905 on has acted with 

honesty and with integrity.  The people might not always have 

agreed with what was done; that's why some governments are 

turned out and new ones are brought in.  But by and large, the 

people knew their governments were attempting to act in the 

people's best interest. 

 

I don't want to sound self-serving, Mr. Speaker, but politics 

was once considered a noble profession; I would like to believe 

that it still is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- But it's fair to say, I think, that that image has 

indeed been tarnished.  With every dollar they went in the hole, 

with every horror story, with every deal gone sour, all this took 

a bit more of the glow off the image of government and those 

who served it. 

 

We have inherited a sorry mess, Mr. Speaker, and it is to the 

eternal shame of the previous government that it made the mess 

we all have to clean up today.  Its only real accomplishment, I 

suppose, is that it made the only previous Saskatchewan Tory 

government, the Anderson government, look good by 

comparison. 

 

And the Leader of the Opposition dares say, where's your plan?  

I tell you where our plan is; our plan is to start rebuilding and 

restoring.  Our mandate for change is a sense to return to go, 

but before we collect our $200.  We have to retrace our steps to 

find where we've lost the way and then continue on the road we 

began so long ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1931 Mr. George H. Williams, once a member 

of this Assembly for the constituency of Wadena and one of the 

pioneers of the farm movements in this province said of our 

party, we must decide whether we really are going to accept as 

our road, the road to a social commonwealth or continue to 

support a system of individualism and worship at the shrine of 

personal gain. 

 

Self or society, individual wealth or commonwealth -- 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

which road?  My friends, you have a right to a living from the 

fruits of your labour.  You have a right to give your children 

the kind of future you planned for them when you brought 

them into this world. 

 

In the 60-odd years since that statement was made, we in 

Saskatchewan have taken the correct road, for the most part.  

This throne speech indicates that we have once again found our 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a few short days the Minister of Finance will 

present his budget.  He will I suppose take his cue from Lord 

Rutherford who said, we haven't got the money so we've got to 

think.  His will be a thinking-person's budget.  He will 

announce how our finances are to be put back in order. 

 

There are many aspects of this mandate for change to talk 

about.  I would like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to 

explore the idea of community and of co-operation first, as a 

Canadian and Saskatchewan bench-mark, then more 

practically, on how we plan to integrate it into our economic 

recovery. 

 

The long-standing argument between our party and theirs, Mr. 

Speaker, covers many topics, but the fundamental difference, I 

believe, can be summed up and summed up fairly in two words 

-- community and individualism. 

 

The cut and thrust of political repartee to struggle for the hearts 

and the minds of the voters ultimately comes back to this 

distinction John Kenneth Galbraith so aptly puts it when he 

says, the modern Conservative is engaged in one of man's 

oldest exercises in moral philosophy, that is the search of a 

superior moral justification for selfishness. 

 

New Democrats restore the rights of the individual and believe 

fervently in allowing the expression of that individuality.  

However, we recognize at the same time that untrammelled 

individualism is simply a code word for trampling the weak 

and the underprivileged.  The community's job and that of its 

servants, the government, is to do as much as possible to 

remove the large disparities and the gross discriminations 

which can and do exist in society. 

 

It is our job, we believe, to do the best we can to achieve the 

best possible balance between the rights of the individual and 

the needs of the caring, sharing society.  Because of this basic 

commitment, New Democratic governments have introduced in 

the past, broad universal programs which have made it easier 

for the individual to cope with society and allow some sense of 

security.  Hence the list of programs of which Saskatchewan 

people are so justifiably proud -- medicare, hospitalization, 

government insurance, and many, many more.  An economic 

plan that makes sense and works in combination with the 

private and public sectors to finance the creation of these 

programs for people. 

 

What does the opposition believe, and how do they translate 

their beliefs into programs?  That's hard to say.  They use 

abstract words like freedom and individualism, free enterprise 

and government interference.  Translated, that means the strong 

have no concern for the weak; the 

advantaged have no need to look after the disadvantaged; the 

rich have no need to pay any attention to the poor. 

 

Their philosophy and plans could be summed up by Kenneth 

Tynan who says: a critic is a man who knows the way but can't 

drive the car.  I wonder at times though, Mr. Speaker, about 

knowing the way. 

 

Ours on the other hand is a simple set of beliefs based on 

biblical principles dedicated to the fair distribution of benefits 

to all, the rights of the individual balanced by his and her 

responsibility to the community.  Simple, but it seems to work.  

We know it works because the Tories spent so much energy 

trying to destroy what the people had built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I have described I believe is our basic 

system of beliefs, our ideology, a word I'm not ashamed to use.  

But I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that ours is a system more in 

tune with the realities of the Saskatchewan history and the 

Saskatchewan character, more in line with the development of 

our people and their institutions than the call to tough, rugged 

individualism.  I could be wrong but I don't think so.  The fact 

that three times in the history of our province our party was 

called on to rescue the province after experiments with the 

other system is one proof.  An honest look at our past is 

another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of Canada and the history of 

Saskatchewan is a noble one, one our children do not study 

nearly enough.  If we step back and observe what our ancestors 

did to establish a foothold for themselves and then for us, we 

will realize their accomplishments were truly remarkable.  

There is no need to go into detail here, but we know that these 

pioneers, small in number but huge in heart, forged the basis of 

our modern society.  They survived as individuals, but they 

prospered together. 

 

A few miles north of my home in Goodsoil is the bush country 

stretching from sea to sea to the tundra.  An individual does not 

stand much of a chance against that enormity, but a community 

does, and did.  Further south with fewer trees and more 

grasshoppers, the situation was the same.  Individual 

homesteaders did not fare well by themselves against eastern 

interests, but when he and she banded together into the pools, 

the co-ops, the churches, and the credit unions, then voices 

were heard.  It happened out of necessity.  It became a way of 

life. 

 

As a teacher yourself, Mr. Speaker, you will know that we do 

not have the numbers of heroes our neighbours to the south 

have -- the George Washingtons, the Buffalo Bills, the Davy 

Crocketts, and on and on.  Not nearly as many. 

 

But what we do have is our kind of heroes, Canadian and 

Saskatchewan heroes, people who acted together rather than 

individually -- the Mountie, the soldier, the homesteader, the 

many great Indian chiefs.  We remember them for what they 

accomplished collectively not for what they did as individuals. 

 

This country is big.  It's imposing.  It's cold. And it takes a 

combined effort to scratch an existence out of it.  We learned 

that early, and we turned that knowledge into the institutions 

that are the backbone of this province.  And, 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, we turned that knowledge into the CCF/NDP 

political movement. 

 

So I won't be the first to admit, Mr. Speaker, that when the 

throne speech talks of reinstilling a spirit of community and of 

co-operation, it is being narrowly partisan, trumpeting our 

party line that in the immortal words of J.S. Woodsworth: what 

we desire for ourselves, we wish for all. 

 

There are a number of items in the throne speech which 

indicate its partisanship.  It announces, for instance, the 

establishment of the Premier's Economic Action Committee to 

advise and assist in economic rejuvenation.  Perhaps we should 

do it the Tory way -- establish an economic diversification 

corporation and tell absolutely no one, not even the legislature, 

that it exists. 

 

The throne speech announced that The Community Bonds Act 

will be amended.  Like few other Tory plans, here is an idea 

that has some merit until you put Tory ministers in charge of 

the plan.  Ask the people of Melville who invested in Trinitel.  

We are going to invite some third party involvement to get an 

unbiased review of investments before another community is 

duped. 

 

This government believes that community and co-operation are 

not just words.  They represent valid and valuable solutions to 

the very serious economic situation that we face today. 

 

Representing a constituency on the border between the sparsely 

populated North and the southern part of the province, I am 

particularly excited about the announcement . . . and it is about 

an announcement; and in the co-operation between the private 

and public sectors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Tories had a plan to meet Saskatchewan's 

future power needs.  They called it the Rafferty-Alameda 

project.  I believe other members will have something to say 

about this monument to greed and incompetence.  Suffice it to 

say here that it is a mammoth project.  It is way over budget 

and the economical and environmental cost of the power it will 

produce remains to be seen.  This, the pet project of the former 

premier and former deputy premier. 

 

Rather than another super project, Saskatchewan Power plans 

to encourage the development of several small co-generation 

projects.  I am a credit union manager, not an engineer, Mr. 

Speaker, but I understand that co-generation is the power surge 

of the future -- smaller, cleaner, more efficient, and best of all, 

more employment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these co-generation developments will not 

cost us $25 million down, with some possibility of energy 

production in several years, as would another project favoured 

by the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, we're not buying a genie in a bottle or a 

$200 million bowl to hold a drop of water.  We're investing in a 

viable job-producing co-operative energy project. 

 

If we are to dig ourselves out of this $14 billion hole Mr. 

Open-for-Business dug for us, it's going to take every scrap of 

ingenuity available in this province, whether it be found in the 

private, public, or co-operative sector.  It's going to take the 

return on every pop can we can find, because the bankers of 

New York seem not surprisingly reluctant to want to loan us 

much more money until we can prove we don't need it any 

more. 

 

It's going to take co-operation.  Like every other person in 

Saskatchewan, I look forward to the details of these 

co-operative efforts and others by the Minister of Finance and 

the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk very briefly about another area 

where co-operation is beginning to occur, where it has been 

shamefully absent for too long.  I'm talking about our first 

nations.  The throne speech reminds us we still have a long way 

to go before we redress some old wounds, and frankly we have 

been saying for too long we have a long way to go. 

 

The throne speech says we will make rapid progress on 

aboriginal self-determination and reliance, and I believe that.  I 

believe that because in my constituency I can see progress 

being made. 

 

Let me say a few words about the Meadow Lake first nations.  

Located on the lands of the Flying Dust Indian nation, are the 

head offices of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, a vibrant and 

progressive organization composed of Cree and Dene chiefs.  

Together they are charting their people's collective destiny by 

linking Indian tradition and culture harmoniously with the 

latest technology and skills available to them.  Their successes 

are many. 

 

By using a co-operative approach always based on mutual 

respect in their dealing with the Crown and the private sector, 

they have designed and developed the following: the national 

Indian forestry institute, a school of excellence in Indian child 

care, an Indian health care system based on other wellness 

models and holistic medicine; employment, education, and 

training opportunities that assure a bright future for their 

children and stimulate the overall Saskatchewan economy.  

They are involved in many other ventures. 

 

We as a government have every intention of working closely 

with these first nations in partnership, learning from each other 

as we rebuild Saskatchewan together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there is one thing that we could learn from 

Indian people, it is how to live in this world harmoniously -- 

how to care for mother earth instead of fouling the nest we live 

in.  We need to realize once and for all that Earth's resources 

are finite -- that its life-giving bounty, its air, its water, land, 

and life are not eternally replaceable. 

 

In the words of the song: we are the children of the universe, 

no more than the trees and the stars; we have a right to be here.  

But we are not its masters.  Indian people 



April 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

have known this for generations.  It is occurring to us, I hope, 

before the crisis point.  Meeting the environmental crisis we 

have all placed ourselves in will take the same kind of 

co-operative effort I have been talking about. 

 

And I am pleased to see three vital pieces of environmental 

legislation in this throne speech -- the charter of rights and 

responsibilities, the Environmental Assessment Commission, 

and the environmental management and protection Act.  These 

two accompany the environmental round table already in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the environmental charter of rights will establish 

principles of environmental stewardship.  It will set a 

framework of province-wide standards for the environmental 

protection.  It will give the public access to information 

affecting their local or provincial environment.  It will 

guarantee the public's right to participate in economic decisions 

affecting their environment.  And most significantly, it will 

protect workers and citizens who report environmental 

accidents or hazards -- whistle-blower protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall the Premier made a commitment to an 

environmental charter of rights.  We see the fulfilment of that 

commitment now with this announcement. 

 

We see as well the recognition that protecting our environment 

is a co-operative responsibility, just as is restoring our 

economy in a sane and sustainable manner, more of that narrow 

partisanship I mentioned earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues on the agriculture caucus 

committee will have much to say about agriculture when they 

rise in this debate.  They will comment in detail about how this 

government is consulting and working with farm groups, as we 

all wrestle with the problems besetting this most central 

segment of our economy and of our social structure. 

 

We are taking action to provide security of tenure in these 

difficult times.  We recognize that security will come with 

regularity of income.  We are doing what we can through the 

modified GRIP program to deal with the income problem.  

Most importantly, we will continue to press the federal 

government to take its responsibility for income security.  The 

American government and the Common Market governments 

know their responsibility to their farm community.  Our federal 

government, alas, does not. 

 

The spirit of community and of co-operation, Mr. Speaker, that 

spirit cuts across every aspect of this throne speech.  It forms 

every action of this government.  The rekindling of that spirit is 

our crusade and it is our pragmatic duty.  We know that 

governments cannot take charge of the individual destiny, but it 

can work in partnership with the individual to make that 

destiny attainable. 

 

Whether it be the economy, agriculture, the environment, 

health care, northern development, employment programs, or 

services for seniors, all of the programs mentioned in this 

throne speech will be brought by the government.  We will 

provide leadership, but we will not be successful unless we 

have the help of Saskatchewan people.  Co-operation -- that's 

what it's all 

about.  That's the plan.  It's good ideology.  It's good sense.  It's 

the reason I'm proud to be a New Democrat sitting in this 

House on this side at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, 2,000 years ago Emperor 

Augustus said of the city of Rome: I inherited it bricks and left 

it marble.  When the former premier inherited the Government 

of Saskatchewan in 1982, they inherited a house in order with 

their chance to turn it into their own province of marble.  In 

1992 we're here with a broom and a dustpan.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we also have a hammer and some nails and a plan. 

 

There's a lot of cleaning up to do before we begin rebuilding 

and rebuilding in earnest, but we're on the way.  Rome wasn't 

built in a day.  Saskatchewan wasn't bankrupted in a week and 

it won't be restored in a month.  But it will happen.  It will 

happen, Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan people, with the 

able assistance of the Premier and the government, will make it 

happen. 

 

This throne speech provides the battle plan for the first stages 

of restoration and I am proud to support it.  I move, therefore, 

seconded by the member for Regina Wascana Plains: 

 

 That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

 To Her Honour the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 May it please Your Honour: 

 

 We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present session. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was talking to many 

people and had an opportunity to hear from constituents who 

are very impressed with the Speech from the Throne and the 

plan of our Premier and our government.  They're excited and 

they're willing to listen to the return debate of my colleagues 

also and hear more particulars of that plan and, unfortunately, 

to hear the sad mess of the Tory regime.  But today it is late of 

hour and I would beg leave to move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:15 p.m. 

 


