




















































Hansard: April 30, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 85 

 April 30, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, let me welcome you back to this 

Chamber after such a long and unnecessary absence -- and I 

don't mean just supper. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to take just a moment of your time, and 

that of this Assembly, before I get into the main part of my 

speech with regards to the Speech from the Throne.  Today will 

be recorded, I fear, as being black Thursday in Saskatchewan.  

Many of you may not realize it, but I'm not going to be political 

in this statement.  The black Thursday is of course due to our 

uncommon weather conditions that we have blowing through 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

I talked to one of my constituents today who is not exactly a 

teenager and has been around for some years, who told me that 

it is probably the worst day that she has ever seen in her entire 

life with regards to weather.  And I know this hasn't got 

anything to do with the throne speech itself, but certainly I 

know that all of you in this Assembly would want to share a 

moment with me to reflect on the importance of the losses to 

the farmers of Saskatchewan when we hit such a day as this, in 

simply the loss of topsoil alone.  That will probably hurt farms 

in my constituency for the next 30 or 40 years down the road.  

And it's extremely important to us when we lose that much of 

our productivity potential.  And so I want to extend to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan the sympathies of myself and any one 

of you that would like to join in that chorus, for we know that 

they have taken a tremendous loss and we do recognize that 

and record it for posterity on their behalf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I know, Mr. Speaker, that you must have been 

anxious in the months that the government kept this Hon. 

Assembly sealed away from the people of the province.  It 

must have been anxious, sir, to see this important and hon. 

institution convene to speak for the people.  For certainly it is 

an hon. institution and it certainly does provide an opportunity 

for the people to hear both sides of the story.  And usually there 

are at least two sides to a story, and sometimes there is even the 

truth.  So there may even be a third side. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps more than ever before, the 

people are in need of a strong voice to confront a government 

bent on destruction.  Bent, I say, on self-aggrandizement; bent, 

Mr. Speaker, on perpetuation of the greatest hoax of the 

century; socialists claiming to have, as I heard earlier today, a 

dream, or was it an idea, or some mythical plan for the future? 

-- when in fact what they have is a philosophy of socialism that 

just will not 

work. 

 

The proof, as they say, is in the pudding, and I guess the proof 

of this has to go to our world situation.  And I don't think I'm 

telling anybody anything new when I remind you of what has 

happened to the socialist states around our world, the Soviet 

Union, the biggest and most classic example of the total and 

complete failure of the philosophy of socialism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes I have actually heard a lot of people from 

the Soviet Union claim that they are not truly communists, just 

socialists.  Well I don't see much difference. 

 

Now how has the province fared since November 1 of last year 

when the members opposite finally achieved their goal of 

power, Mr. Speaker?  How have those who trusted the member 

for Riversdale fared?  How goes it with the waitress in 

downtown Saskatoon?  With the farmer outside of Kamsack?  

The miner in Esterhazy?  Or the steelworker in Regina, here in 

the city?  How have these people fared? 

 

The steelworker is laid off.  The farmer has notice to vacate his 

land and now his hope has been crashed and dashed by the 

destruction of the only sure thing he had, which was the 1991 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program.  The miner 

is being made ready for the upcoming assault on the potash 

industry, which I'm sure will happen.  And as they say in the 

song, the waitress is practising politics while the government 

slowly gets stoned.  It comes from "The Piano Man" -- quite a 

fine tune. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are dramatically 

worse off today than they were merely a six-month period of 

time ago.  It is astonishing the damage that this government has 

done so quickly.  Or to paraphrase another statesman: never 

have so few harmed so many so much in so short a time. 

 

Look at the list, Mr. Speaker.  First the government savaged the 

people's representative institution -- this very Legislative 

Assembly.  They started by suspending the constitution of the 

province, then continued by ignoring it.  They started by 

passing laws to ravage individual rights in the smoke of public 

anxiety, and they have continued this by disregarding their very 

own law.  They have hid from the Assembly and implemented 

extraordinary changes to our province without the benefit of 

questions or criticisms.  Those are the most sacred things in our 

parliamentary process, Mr. Speaker -- the right to be criticized 

and the right for questions to be asked.  It is the only 

fundamental thing, Mr. Speaker, that can allow people in a free 

society the opportunity to make sure that a dictatorship does 

not evolve. 

 

They have, in the past six months, recrafted the entire 

organization of the health care system in Regina.  They have 

threatened to close every school division that has fewer than 

7,000 students, or virtually every rural school in the province, 

if that plan had been followed through. 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

Can you believe it?  It takes meetings of over 600 people in 

Swift Current in the Comprehensive School to challenge the 

system, to get people to see the light -- that rural people are 

important and that rural students have as many rights as anyone 

else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- They have increased every fee and charge to 

the taxpayer they could possibly do without legislation, and 

they have more in store -- by their very own words, much more 

in store.  They have cancelled the gasification of 

Saskatchewan, a project that brought natural gas to my farm 

and many hundreds of others; a cheap source of energy that we 

have in our province in abundance.  And now we have a 

situation, Mr. Speaker, where many of the farmers who were 

left at the tail-end of the program will not have the opportunity 

to share in that great and wonderful way of heating and running 

their farms. 

 

They will have to pay the piper now because they happen to be 

on the wrong end of the list and got left to last.  And now 

they're cancelled.  And I refer, sir, not just to the people in the 

sand hills out home in my constituency, but some in a lot of 

other constituencies as well.  Totally unfair, Mr. Speaker, to 

kill a program before all of the people who are taxpayers have 

had an opportunity to share in the advantages, because they all 

pay taxes equally and they should have the right to those 

programs to be completed. 

 

They have taken the money from the leasehold farmers and 

ranchers.  All across the South there are farmers and ranchers 

who now find themselves without cash flow that they depended 

upon, that they had budgeted for.  And that was taken away by 

a sweep of somebody's pen in some dark corner, perhaps of this 

building or some other; we're not sure where -- no discussion in 

the legislature, no attempt to make a fair and reasonable 

settlement, no attempt to negotiate with these farmers and these 

ranchers. 

 

They meet in Maple Creek; they meet at the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention here in Regina with the ministers in charge, and all 

on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker.  All on deaf ears, because even these 

ranchers and farmers knew that perhaps they would have to 

negotiate a situation where they would take less.  And even 

though they knew that they had the right to have the whole 

amount of money, they offered to take less in order to offer a 

conciliatory approach.  They had to give this government an 

opportunity to save face and not have to say that they were 

giving up their total position. 

 

But this government does not listen to reason.  This 

government does not negotiate.  It lets the farmers and ranchers 

sit out there without any money and without any cash flow and 

without anything to tell to their bankers, in not only this regard 

but many others in the farming sector. 

 

They have engaged in this government in patronage so 

sweeping and so secretive that no reporter has been able to 

keep up with it.  They have hired hundreds without cause, up to 

and including expelling secretaries from 

their offices under armed guard.  They have hired legions to do 

their dirty work, rather than have the courage to face a janitor 

and tell him my husband, or the husband of my campaign 

worker, is a janitor and he needs your job. 

 

They sent Olive Waller, a firm that for ever more will be 

known as the firm of hit men hired in Saskatchewan.  No sir, 

Mr. Speaker, the mafia contract companies had nothing over on 

Olive Walker. 

 

And this government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Waller, 

you're right.  And this government, Mr. Speaker, this Premier 

and his group of grim reapers continue their dismal record by 

throwing away one of the most important opportunities this 

province has had in its hundred years of existence. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You're getting onto it now.  They said no to 

the nuclear research deal with AECL.  The members already 

know because their consciences are bothering them.  I didn't 

think they had one.  You just never know. 

 

And they did it without consulting the people, without even 

discussing the matter with their partners, the federal minister.  

And I can say this with conviction, Mr. Speaker, because we 

have had statements from SARM, where votes were taken at 

assemblies of 2,000 farmers gathered together in this very city 

on this very question -- almost unanimous support for the 

AECL deal. 

 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) same 

story.  Chambers of commerces, mayors all across this 

province, pleaded with this government to see the rational 

sense of taking federal millions and putting them to work in 

this province for the betterment of our youth.  And what better 

place to put youth to work than in areas of technology, the kind 

of which AECL was offering to this province? 

 

Where will it be next?  As many of you know, there's an old 

saying that goes that if you want things better, go to Alberta.  

And I wouldn't be surprised that you will end up following this 

deal there as well.  Why do we have to watch our children and 

our families end up in Alberta or some place else?  Because we 

have the blindness of a government thinking that a deal means 

something that isn't in it. 

 

But they did do some consulting, Mr. Speaker.  They consulted 

with the wing-nuts and the radicals and the fearmongers that 

hold so much sway over those benches opposite.  They 

consulted with Barb Byers and George Rosenau, but they didn't 

take the time to listen to the business community in the home 

towns of the Premier himself.  They surely didn't listen to 

SARM and they certainly didn't listen to SUMA. 

 

This government has proven it is so capable of destruction and 

the creation of pain for our people that this Assembly would do 

well to sit in continuous session as long as the member for 

Riversdale occupies the chair he has turned into a despot's 

throne. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

And how has this government consoled itself in the morsel of 

conscience that it has remaining?  It has to keep its back . . . 

How does it keep its back-benchers in check?  It has played a 

terrible and futile game with the people and with its own 

members.  It has a two-pronged strategy to keep criticism in 

check and preserve the powers of the new throne -- the gilded 

altar of the boy-king from Riversdale. 

 

First the NDP (New Democratic Party) has decided that rather 

than govern it will close the political and moral and financial 

energies of the government on a sustained and unrelenting 

effort to blame all its ills on everyone else.  Blame the previous 

administration.  If that doesn't work any more, then you start to 

blame Ottawa.  And when that doesn't work any more, then you 

blame the farmers who suffer what the NDP call moral hazards.  

I am offended because I am a farmer.  And to say that I am a 

moral hazard I am sure does not only offend me as a farmer, it 

must offend every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And then blame rural people who are too 

greedy to give up their schools for the sake of the government.  

Blame the nurses who are too cruel to be quiet in the face of 

the deregulated health care, or degraded health care system, 

that we're about to see.  Blame anyone and everyone, except 

themselves. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And let me, Mr. Speaker, briefly deal with the 

trust of the NDP in their chorus of blame the previous 

administration for the NDP's own bad choices. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, let us deal with the claim that the books 

were closed and that the member from Riversdale did not know 

what the financial condition of the province was.  Let us quote 

the CK-TV interview with Mr. Donald Gass, the Premier's 

hand-picked analyst.  The interview was broadcast on February 

18, 1992, and here were the findings of Donald Gass, and I 

quote:  the commission said the Tories made no attempt to hide 

the province's financial standing.  In fact the books were open 

all along to credit agents, agencies or anyone else interested. 

 

That's a direct quote, Mr. Speaker, worth repeating, "the books 

were open all along". 

 

Mr. Gass, the Premier's hand-picked financial judge and jury, 

went further in an unexpected condemnation of the member for 

Riversdale and his party.  Again, Mr. Gass' exact words in that 

interview were, "It shouldn't come as any surprise to them." 

 

The financial situation of the province was no surprise.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember that every time the previous 

government tried to get the message out that restraint was 

needed, the member for Riversdale put a thousand union 

protesters on the steps of the legislature to demand more, more, 

more government spending. 

 

And just to reinforce the ideas that have come to mind, and the 

quotes that have come to my attention that I have used in my 

own notes which I prepared a few days back 

on this particular subject, I want to point out a pamphlet.  It's 

called the Humanity First, A Brief to the Saskatchewan 

Cabinet From the Public Sector Bargaining Coalition, April 29, 

1992. 

 

And not only I was seeing what had happened with the Gass 

Commission but these folks write in their brief: 

 

 The Gass Commission has misrepresented government 

spending, understated revenue potential and provided no 

evidence to substantiate their assertions that we are in "an 

extremely serious financial situation". 

 

 The Gass Commission has distorted the picture, making the 

numbers look worse than the reality of the situation . . . 

 

Well how about that? 

 

 Moreover, the Gass Report ignores the impact of the 

recession.  Tax revenues are down owing to the recession, but 

an improving economy will alter that fact.  There are also the 

added expenses of the recession.  Increased assistance 

payments are made to the victims of the downturn, while the 

Bank of Canada's high interest rate policy adds charges to 

debt financing. These cyclical factors affect the deficit 

picture.  In reality, we believe that the size of the deficit is 

more modest than the Gass Report suggests and our future 

prospects are brighter than we are led to believe. 

 

 Since 1982-83 the accumulated government deficit has gone 

from zero to 25% of the provincial GDP, but in comparative 

terms, Saskatchewan is not out of line with the other 

provinces.  Indeed, the trends are not all bad news.  While the 

run-up of the deficit has been swift and significant, the result 

merely places us in the same league as the rest of Canada. 

 

Now how about that.  And guess who wrote that -- the Public 

Sector Bargaining Coalition.  That, I believe, would have a few 

months ago been identified as a group that might have 

supported the government more readily than anyone else in 

political circles.  But even they have seen the light of what the 

reality is. 

 

The former minister of Finance travelled around this province 

asking people to take the financial crisis seriously.  And the 

member from Riversdale called it a smoke-screen for an attack 

on health and education.  It was the political choice of the 

members opposite to tell the people that there was no financial 

crisis that could not be solved by cutting advertising and 

eliminating patronage. 

 

In fact the Premier made a doozy of a commitment in Yorkton 

where he told people he would save $100 million by 

eliminating legislative secretaries. Well he's eliminated the 

secretaries.  So now where's the hundred million?  Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier had his political choice and he sold a bill of goods 

to the people of this province.  He cannot now get . . . 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  It is very difficult to 

hear the member speak with all the conversations that are going 

on, particularly across the floor.  I would ask those members if 

they could write notes to each other and meet outside the 

legislature.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The previous 

government, Mr. Speaker, must take its share of responsibility 

indeed.  After all, they were the government.  It was unable to 

communicate through the protests and the rancours of the NDP 

just how serious things were.  And that certainly has to have 

been a failing, because the situation was rather bad and we 

should somehow have found a way to be able to educate the 

people and let them know what a lot of other folks naturally did 

know. 

 

The media, rather than helping to communicate that message as 

it has now, at the time chose instead to focus on things like 

crowded class-rooms, magnifying the belief of the people that 

more money could somehow be had to solve the real problems. 

 

And as the former government tried to get the message out that 

revenue was needed, and the fairest, most efficient and 

economically productive way to raise that revenue was through 

tax harmonization, every special interest group in the province 

jumped on the NDP bandwagon to frighten the people and to 

destroy rational debate.  The people had no idea that the NDP 

was talking about taking off harmonization only to replace it 

with the new provincial family tax on health care.  Instead of 

the PST (provincial sales tax) we are going to get the PFT 

(provincial family tax). 

 

People had no idea the NDP would be increasing taxes because 

the leader of the NDP solemnly gave his word this would not 

happen.  He swore an oath to the people of this province that he 

would force government to live within a $4.5 billion budget.  

He made the direct, clear, and unequivocal promise, and now 

he wants to pretend he didn't know what he was talking about.  

He says he didn't know how bad things were. 

 

Well Donald Gass says the Premier is not being fully honest.  

Donald Gass says anyone who was interested knew the 

financial situation.  Is the Premier now going to say that 

Donald Gass was paid to make a false report?  The fact is that 

the member for Riversdale did know.  He knew but he didn't 

care.  Just so long as he could become Premier, that is all that 

mattered to him.  And as his back-benchers are learning now 

how dangerous it is to put someone like that in the Premier's 

chair, they too are realizing the seriousness of the hoax that is 

being heaped on our population. 

 

We know for a fact that a number of those MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) are under great pressure from their 

own constituents to get out of the party of broken promises, 

betrayals, and disarray -- to get out of the hypocritical capital 

and form their own party in opposition to this outlandish 

cabinet.  Whether that pressure bears fruit only time will tell, 

but the fact that it is there tells the people a great deal about the 

chaos the Government of Saskatchewan is in. 

Let us now look at the blame the member for Riversdale wants 

to heap on the former government over the matter of the larger 

deficit due to unfunded liabilities and Crown corporation 

finances. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, on the matter of unfunded liabilities.  It is 

simply a fact -- again publicly attested to by Donald Gass -- 

that these debts were incurred under the NDP government of 

the same member for Riversdale.  It was his government that 

brought those debts into existence by stealing from the teachers 

and employees of this province to pay for their adventures into 

nationalization.  And of course we could mention the pension 

fund of teachers, as well as that of the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union). 

 

That is a fact, and Donald Gass has said so.  Is the Premier 

again going to refute Mr. Gass?  If the Premier has no 

confidence in Mr. Gass, why did he pay him to undertake this 

massive study? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Three hundred thousand. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Three hundred thousand somebody says it 

cost us.  The fact is that the billions of unfunded liabilities are 

an NDP albatross.  And the previous government tried, and 

tried, to get that message out.  But it was ignored with all of the 

radical opposition that was master-minded very well indeed by 

the NDP. 

 

What about the position of the Crown Investments Corporation, 

Mr. Speaker?  What about that?  Well let us first look at the 

end result according to the Minister of Finance himself, when 

he had what the Premier used to call in this House a toy 

minister.  The Associate Minister of Finance, acting for the real 

minister, issued a report called "accounting initiatives", on 

April 14, 1992. 

 

In the news release, the minister did not mention what effect all 

the smoke and mirrors would have on the taxpayers.  But in the 

actual report itself it is revealed that the total impact of all the 

hysteria, about $900 million here, and $600 million there, and 

maybe $500 million over there, that the end result in terms of 

actual dollar cost, the government would be really, Mr. 

Speaker, 4.5 million -- not billions, million -- 4.5 million would 

be the total impact, Mr. Speaker.  After all the public terrorism, 

after using these huge numbers as a rationale for a new flat tax, 

after using the hysteria to frighten old people, we find the total 

impact will be less than the cost of the political staff in the 

Executive Council positions -- all that fear and all that terror 

for 4.5 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is shameful beyond words that this government 

continues in government in its mean spirit that is crafted so 

thoroughly and was crafted there while they were in 

opposition.  So whatever the bouncing ball of CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) numbers really 

means, we know now the bottom line is 4.5 million.  A 

significant number to be sure -- that is a lot of money, 

especially if it was in my pocket -- but not terrifying in 

government terms; not worth an entire speech to a fund-raising 

dinner.  Because it is not even 1 per cent of 1 per cent of the 

total budget of this province.  You all have a calculator.  I am 

pretty sure you got it out now. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what about the Crown debts themselves?  

Are they a surprise?  When the previous administration 

proposed to sell shares in SaskEnergy and SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), it was made clear that the province 

desperately needed to substitute equity for debt.  There was no 

doubt about that.  We need serious capital injections into the 

Crown corporations.  We needed it then, and we probably need 

it now.  This was exactly the message the former government 

delivered. 

 

Did the member for Riversdale take the message seriously?  

Did he examine the severity of the need?  No, Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Riversdale again resorted to the hysteria, and he 

took his caucus out on strike for 17 days to do as they 

promised, and that was to make the province ungovernable.  

And that was his response. 

 

(1930) 

 

And now he has the bald audacity to say he was surprised.  

Seventeen days on strike and now he's surprised at why he did 

it, maybe.  He made his choices, and they were made purely 

political.  The people, Mr. Speaker, should not have to pay for 

the NDP's bad choices. 

 

What about the health care spending, Mr. Speaker?  What 

about this wellness model?  Mr. Speaker, the former minister 

of Health was talking regularly about a wellness model; we 

remember it quite well.  The former government developed a 

first-rate system of breast cancer screening.  It developed 

community physiotherapy clinics and local chiropody clinics to 

remove the needs for excessive visits to major hospitals.  Foot 

care, Mr. Speaker, is important to old people.  It might be a 

joke or a laughing matter to the members opposite, but when 

you get to be an old person and your feet hurt and you can't 

walk around, then it's serious stuff.  So humour doesn't enter 

into the health care in this matter. 

 

The previous government developed the Everyone Wins 

campaign which initially I see being advertised again.  How 

about that -- the same old program and they call it new.  So the 

wellness program, Mr. Speaker, is not new, as most things in 

life are really not new.  The current Health minister is 

light-years behind on the wellness model, and if she thinks all 

it means is closing hospitals and taxing the sick, she is with the 

dinosaurs of health care. 

 

What are people who are sick supposed to do, Mr. Speaker?  

Read one of the minister's pamphlets and heal themselves?  

The fact is that history records it was a PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government, the previous government, that 

outlawed extra billing by doctors.  The NDP had decades of 

power to act and refused.  It was the former PC government 

that had to rebuild a dilapidated and dangerous health care 

infrastructure.  The NDP had been in government a great long 

time, and in that time our hospitals got to the point that there 

were literally stories about bats in the belfry in the hospital 

right here in Regina. 

 

Those are the facts.  And yes, it cost a lot of money to rebuild 

the health care system, and yes, it contributed to the deficit.  

But the fact is the cost was the cost stored up 

from years of NDP neglect. 

 

It was Tories who rebuilt the health care, who funded it fully, 

who outlawed extra billing, and who began the process of 

reform.  And the NDP, who have sold the people on the 

mythology that they are the defenders of medicare, this party, 

this government, is going to be the government that undoes all 

that has gone into building our medicare system, all that has 

gone into building this system since John Diefenbaker first 

proposed it in 1938 and Tommy Douglas who instituted it in 

1962. 

 

A betrayal of everything that has ever come out of the mouths 

of this Minister of Health . . . this minister who vowed she 

would never allow user fees or premiums now tells the people 

of Saskatchewan that she was just playing politics.  She will go 

down in history as the Minister of Health who presided over 

the first major assault on her own sacred trust, an assault, Mr. 

Speaker, on our most dearly held, shared value in this province.  

Shame on her and shame on the MLAs over there who are 

allowing her to get away with it. 

 

It is not possible for this Premier, this Minister of Health, or 

that caucus of the NDP chorus singers, to blame this on anyone 

but themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one last point of blame to dispense with -- that is 

the political nonsense about the waste and mismanagement 

mentioned earlier.  It was really very, very heart rendering to 

hear about the Government House Leader, the minister of 

everything, crying a blue streak about how the previous 

government spent away the future of his children and the 

children of the gathered reporters. 

 

Quite a performance indeed, and based in large part on the old, 

mean-spirited tactic of that man and his party that somehow 

would have people believe that my children are not children, 

that the Tories do not have children.  And if they do, then that 

Tories do not care about the future of their children. 

 

That member from Elphinstone ought to know better, Mr. 

Speaker.  And let us look at that substance of his charge.  The 

big ticket item for the member opposite in regard to waste and 

mismanagement has been patronage and advertising.  I will go 

into the patronage in some detail in a few moments. 

 

But what about advertising?  Does this government really 

believe that our people are so mathematically retarded that they 

will not realize that hundreds of millions of dollars cannot 

come from savings in advertising or even employment?  Fire 

the entire civil service if you like, just to be sure you have 

rooted out every Tory there is, and you still won't come up with 

the kind of money you need to address the problems. 

 

And what about advertising and polling, Mr. Speaker?  This 

government has been using taxpayers to have their buddies at 

Thomas Brook's poll the people about how best to sell an 

irresponsible budget and this irresponsible throne speech.  The 

questions are blatantly political, and the poll should be paid for 

by the NDP party itself.  But the minister of everything under 

the sun is quite content that 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

the taxpayer is paying for the NDP's polls.  And what about the 

Phoenix Group, Mr. Speaker, NDPers from away back?  Those 

friends of the Premier are getting their millions from the 

taxpayer.  Is this how you solve waste and mismanagement? 

 

Then there is SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation), Mr. Speaker.  The member from Riversdale 

constantly harped on SEDCO as an example of wasteful 

spending.  And what do we get from this new government?  

News release after news release, extolling the wonders of 

SEDCO loans to everything from hotels to flower shops.  They 

clearly don't think it's wasteful any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, the fact of the matter is that the spending of the 

previous government went into assuring a future for all of the 

children of this province.  I dare say the incomes generated by 

workers at the Shand went to support the children of people 

who voted NDP under union orders.  We care about all the 

children, Mr. Speaker, all of them regardless of political 

politics, unlike the weeping willow from Elphinstone.  And the 

new Minister of Finance in his first economic review confirms 

that the previous government did act to protect that future.  Let 

me quote from page 6 of that report, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Minister of Finance . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would remind members not to 

converse with people in the galleries, please. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was so engrossed 

in the seriousness of my speech I never even noted that 

indiscretion.  And I do appreciate your straightening the 

member out. 

 

 . . . the construction of a second . . . oil upgrader, a fertilizer 

plant and a pulp mill will help support economic growth in 

1991 as well as offer opportunities for more growth in future 

when these new facilities come on stream or reach full 

capacity production. 

 

Provide more opportunities for growth in the future is what the 

Minister of Finance says the previous government did.  Isn't 

that interesting?  We did build bacon plants and fertilizer plants 

and turbine factories and uranium mines and computer 

companies and huge natural gas industry and on and on and on 

it goes. 

 

The previous government built for the future during very 

difficult times.  The previous government did spend money on 

health and education.  We might be condemned for it, but we 

don't apologize for it.  And we built facilities for community 

care and distance education and regional college systems.  And 

yes, it did cost money.  Why would you want to be in 

government if you didn't spend money? 

 

But if we had not done so, if we had not built in the tough 

times, there would be precious little left in this province today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We built for the future of our children 

and yes, for yours as well.  And, Mr. Speaker, this government 

has choices -- many of them.  But they insist they do not.  They 

abdicate all responsibility and engage instead only in blame. 

 

I say again, Mr. Speaker, it is a government based on blame 

and not motivated by responsibility -- a government of 

blamers, by blamers, and for blamers; a government composed 

in equal parts of what social scientists have classed as 

busybodies and victims, Mr. Speaker.  The busybody is the one 

who has to tell you every detail of your life and how you are 

doing it wrong, how it has been wrong never before, and how 

you must do it a new, their perfect way. 

 

The victim is the one who is never responsible for anything but 

always the victim of someone else's bad deeds.  Busybodies 

and victims occupy the larger part of this Assembly, and it has 

already begun its degrading effects on the social, political, and 

economic fabric of our province. 

 

Let me read for you, Mr. Speaker, the words of The Melfort 

Journal, and perhaps the member for Melfort might sit up and 

listen to this from the February 4 edition: 

 

 Since their election however, the government seems to be 

preoccupied with digging up as much dirt as possible on the 

former government's financial mismanagement. 

 

 . . . At the same time, it would seem the electorate is aware of 

circumstances, beyond the control of the past government, 

which also contributed to the present situation. 

 

 Circumstances such as the drop in export grain prices, 

drought, falling world markets for potash and oil, and 

increasing social demands on the government -- all 

contributed to the province's financial situation. 

 

 At the same time, the electorate may also remember from the 

then opposition New Democrats, calls for more money for 

health care, more money for education, financial aid to the 

agricultural sector, and so on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say once clearly that whatever the 

ills of the former government, and there can be no question that 

significant mistakes were made, the fact remains that people 

exercised their judgement, and I stand on this side of the 

House.  The Premier must learn to understand that with the 

throne he has crafted must go the responsibility he asked for 

when he sought election.  The members opposite must 

understand that it is now their job to government actively, 

honestly and enthusiastically.  The fact that they are unable to 

do so is a powerful condemnation in itself. 

 

On the patronage question, what happened to the moral outrage 

of the members opposite?  What is the member for Regina 

Victoria doing trying to exercise influence in Crown 

corporation hiring?  What is the NDP caucus committee on 

hiring?  Why has its existence not been made public, and what 

are the criteria that are applied to 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

the people of this province in secret, behind closed doors and 

closed to the scrutiny of either the Provincial Auditor or this 

Assembly. 

 

What kind of conviction is represented by the member for P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Northcote when he says in the Daily Herald 

quote: it's the Minister's prerogative to organize her 

department; if Mr. Hiltz doesn't fit into her plan I guess that's 

just the way it is. 

 

(1945) 

 

Doesn't he know, Mr. Speaker, that we have done away with 

royal prerogatives of that sort over a hundred years ago?  Does 

the member honestly believe that the boy-king has brought 

with him a new set of royal privileges that go beyond the rights 

and dignities of individual employees?  Why did the member 

not think it was the royal prerogative of previous ministers to 

fire people at will who, quote:  didn't fit into their plans. 

 

What moral standard can be used to measure the judgement of 

the Tisdale Recorder on this government when it wrote, and I 

quote: step out of line and your job could be gone.  That is the 

message that the SGEU has delivered to its members.  The 

message came in the form of the Christmas Eve dismissal of 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board employee, Helga Bittner, by the 

new provincial government. The SGEU supported -- I'm 

quoting -- supported the Romanow campaign and now the 

Romanow government is returning the favour, end of quote. 

 

Helga Bittner knows that this government . . . what it means 

when it says it wants honourable government.  It means it 

wants to honour its debts to the union bosses who made war on 

her family with the member from Canora wielding the weapons 

that brought great harm to this single parent family. 

 

What did the Humboldt Journal have to say after this 

government, this Premier, coldly broke his promise to examine 

each Fair Share move on its merit and instead simply cancelled 

it outright.  The Journal wrote, and I quote: last year the NDP 

were caught up in an election campaign and were supported by 

labour unions who were resolute in the defeat of the 

Conservative government.  The labour unions demonstrated 

that commitment by contributing an impressive $250,000 to the 

NDP's election war chest, end of quote. 

 

That's unbelievable.  What a figure.  The SGEU bought the 

election for the NDP, and in return the NDP has given them the 

right not only to say who will be fired but also to undo other 

promises of the Premier himself. 

 

During the election the Premier made great fanfare about the 

cost-of-production guarantees for farmers.  What did the 

Davidson Leader say about the results after the election?  The 

headline on January 12 read, and I quote: "NDP betrayed 

farmers."  And this over a story written by a reverend.  The 

hypocrisy was so blatant that even a man of the cloth was 

pressed to calling the Premier on his broken promise.  NDP 

betrayed farmers.  The headline showed it.  Betrayed indeed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

And what has been the response of this Premier to this 

legitimate outpouring from the people?  It has been to blame it 

all on the Tories, to avoid the legislature, and now to present to 

this Assembly a throne speech so devoid of hope, devoid of 

responsibility, devoid of meaning, so empty and pitiful this 

throne speech, Mr. Speaker, that one has to wonder how even 

this Premier can keep a straight face in presenting it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is no Speech from the Throne, but a set of 

mumbles from the Premier's office.  What is missing from this 

speech, Mr. Speaker?  What is missing from this speech? -- 

Garry Aldridge who wrote the better part of it.  He is missing, 

Mr. Aldridge who was perfectly able to be the chief of staff of 

the Leader of the NDP for something over $40,000 per year.  

Now after one day is chief of staff of the same leader, but now 

with the power of the people's purse, now he needs $85,000 per 

year to be the NDP leader's chief of staff.  The math works out 

to more than an 80 per cent increase in salary, Mr. Speaker, just 

for walking from one office in this building down to a different 

office down the hall.  Quite the nice terms -- an 80 per cent 

increase for Garry Aldridge. 

 

At a 20 per cent cut for our towns, our villages, and our cities, 

we can see why the Premier needs to find money.  And we can 

see why Mr. Aldridge is not a part of this speech.  Indeed I 

suppose we can call this the $85,000 speech since that is what 

the taxpayers are forking over to the man who wrote it. 

 

Jack Messer is not a part of this speech, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Premier's campaign manager, a political creature who in 1975 

told farmers that there was no such thing as private ownership, 

this man now runs SaskPower on the strength of a verbal 

contract -- nothing in writing.  A verbal contract, Mr. Speaker, 

so that we will never know the secret deals, and the ones we 

can discover include such important things as building him his 

own bathroom, buying him a top-of-the-line Lexus automobile, 

installing the finest electrical telephone in his car, and what 

other perks we will probably never know. 

 

Carole Bryant, another NDP campaign worker, she's not in this 

speech, Mr. Speaker.  She has found a job at SaskPower too.  

She told reporters she's needed to implement government 

policy at the Crown corporation.  Remember, Mr. Speaker, 

busybodies and victims -- and here we have a busybody job for 

the NDP campaign director at tens of thousands of dollars per 

year and unknown, unrevealed, secret perks for her as well. 

 

No wonder the Premier has to take away rural schools to cover 

the expenses.  After all, Carol Bryant's salary and benefits 

would keep open the school at Conquest for a year and her 

salary has to come from somewhere. 

 

What about the former NDP MLA for Estevan -- John 

Chapman?  He's not in this speech, Mr. Speaker.  No, his 

patronage appointment to the Souris Basin Development 

Authority is to remain a quiet affair between him and the 

Premier. 

 

Let there be no discussion of John Chapman, but what about 

Deborah J. Hartung.  No sir, she's not in this speech either and 

she has already gone through two -- not one, 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

but two -- jumps in salary.  Now, Mr. Speaker, she occupies a 

brand new job title in the office of the Premier, the job title of 

senior researcher for Executive Council, a position that has 

never before existed that I can determine, but perhaps under the 

old NDP government sometime.  And as you know, Mr. 

Speaker, her $53,000 has to come from someone and it may as 

well come from the nurses whose jobs are about to disappear. 

 

And what about Bill Hyde, a campaign manager, I understand, 

for the member for Regina Victoria.  What about Hyde?   

Hyde's job is worth a pound of flesh to the taxpayers over at his 

nice offices.  Has he his own bathroom?  I don't know.  He's 

got some pretty nice offices over at SaskTel; hard to tell what's 

in them. 

 

Then of course, Mr. Speaker, I could go on down the list of the 

feeding frenzy of the Minister of Community Services who the 

member from Northcote tells us has prerogatives.  A veritable 

feeding frenzy of hiring and firing and reclassifications to get 

sneaky salary increases while the people of this province watch 

their power bills and their phone bills and their heating bills 

and their car insurance all go up to support the prerogatives of 

the minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation).  None of them are in the throne speech, Mr. 

Speaker, none of them at all. 

 

And what about, Mr. Speaker, the entire law firm of the 

Premier?  A firm that was once named Romanow Mitchell 

Ching.  Now it doesn't exist because every one of his partners 

has got on the taxpayers' dole.  Every one of them is on the 

dole.  Never before has a politician managed to wipe out an 

entire law firm by hiring all of them at taxpayers' expense, 

never before.  It's all rather incredible, Mr. Speaker, when you 

match the public morality of this Premier against the private 

greed that we have seen practised in six short months. 

 

Now I want to relate to you some recent history, Mr. Speaker, 

that has profound implications for the leadership of this 

government.  Mr. Speaker, I note that Beauchesne states in the 

5th Edition that no one -- that one may not, rather, and I quote, 

"impute to any Member or Members unworthy motives for 

their actions in a particular case."  The gravity of the case that 

needs to be presented is such that it would easily cross that line.  

However, the saving grace of this matter, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the unworthy motives are not related to a particular case.  

They're related to the general practice of the government by 

members opposite; to the general attitude and approach of the 

NDP government. And therefore the case does not need to be 

made in the particular but in the general. 

 

I also checked carefully Beauchesne's for the list of 

unparliamentary words and phrases, because the case needs to 

be made strongly without offending the decorum of the 

Assembly.  And while that list is a long one, Mr. Speaker, I 

found a word that characterizes this government overall 

approach to the people of Saskatchewan that is not 

unparliamentary and that in fact has been used many times in 

this House.  And the word that characterizes this government 

so well is deception.  I say to you that the evidence is in.  What 

the people of this province are facing is an election based on 

deception; a 

government born of deception; a Premier entrenched in 

deception; a political party practising deception.  Mr. Speaker, 

these are hard words but the evidence is in fact already before 

the people. 

 

Let us take the biggest deception of the Premier in his course to 

date -- what the business community is calling the dancing 

deficit.  We have two kinds of manipulation of truth right out 

of the starting gate. 

 

First the government is using every clever means at its disposal 

to enlarge the size of the 1991-92 deficit, including some rather 

blatant exercises in back-charging.  It is also interesting to note 

that today in this very Assembly, two separate members of this 

Assembly from the opposite side have used two separate 

figures in explaining their idea of the terror of the deficit.  

Early this morning when we started . . . or afternoon . . . This 

early afternoon the member from Riversdale quoted a figure of 

$14 billion.  A little while later the member from Moose Jaw 

quoted $9 billion, or was it vice versa? 

 

Well it doesn't matter because it flip flops this way and that 

way and this way and that way.  And you never know what 

they are going to say next that the deficit figure was because 

they never ever really figured out what kind of a story they are 

going to tell us.  Because they really did know.  And let me 

explain this, Mr. Speaker, for the members of the public. 

 

What the Premier is doing is charging . . . taking charges that 

would normally accrue in the 1992-93 year, and at least in one 

case over the next four years, and he is, by executive order, 

paying for these charges out of the 1991-92 year.  You take 

something that was planned to be paid over the next years in 

the future, and you suddenly declare that they all have to be 

paid immediately out of last year's budget before you bring in 

your own budget. 

 

And then you build this thing up.  What this does is takes tens 

of millions of dollars of spending out of the next account and 

puts it into the old account, swelling the old deficit.  This is not 

only deceptive, it is also serious financial management.  It 

artificially inflates the 1991 deficit.  The Premier is incurring 

additional interest charges for the future.  He is grossly 

misusing taxpayers' money for purely political reasons. 

 

The second thing the Premier is doing in the dance of the 

deficit . . . and this one is much more difficult to understand 

because it's rather complex.  We all know that Donald Gass 

reported the size of the deficit, if the government used a new 

accounting method, would be in the order of 1.2 billion.  Mr. 

Gass said that this is not a change in the financial position of 

the province but simply a new way of reporting that position. 

 

Now the Premier runs around the province telling everyone two 

things.  First, he thinks he will stick with the old method, and 

second, that the deficit is 1.2 -- think about that.  First you use a 

different method.  Then you go back to the old method.  I hope 

you can see what he's doing here, Mr. Speaker.  It's called 

deception.  He is rejecting the new method that would report 

the deficit at 1.2 billion but he is still claiming a deficit of 1.2.  

Reject it but claim it. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

(2000) 

 

Now why is he doing that?  He is doing that because when his 

Minister of Finance brings in a deficit of around 500 million, 

he does not want to have to take the responsibility for his 

decision not to harmonize the sales tax.  Instead he intends to 

continue the deception by claiming he reduced the deficit from 

1.2 billion to 500 million, just like his Minister of Finance got 

into the Premier's game of deception by telling everyone he 

made a cut of a 115 million.  He actually overestimated the 

value of the cuts by 400 per cent -- a 400 per cent error man, 

off in his first statement by 400 per cent. 

 

Now think that through, Mr. Speaker.  We are not talking about 

a projection, a prediction, or an estimate or something down 

the road.  We are talking about a statement of fact that is easily 

checked by the minister himself.  Yet he mistook a $30 million 

reduction for a $115 million reduction.  Well, Mr. Speaker, let's 

do a little math to see what the deficit should be, not 

accounting for any of the extraordinary spending of the 

government has done on its own agenda. 

 

Take the 265 million projected in the last budget.  That was the 

projected deficit.  Now add the 180 million the NDP gave up 

when they cancelled harmonization, because after all in the 

proposal that was made, that was a real figure that would have 

been collected: 265 plus 180 equals 445. 

 

If you can't follow this, you can get your calculators.  So 

without accounting for anything else, the deficit would come in 

at 445 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, during the election, the Premier claimed 

that the deficit was dramatically higher than forecast.  In the 

middle of that election, and I want to emphasize that it was 

actually during that election, the former minister of Finance 

wrote to the NDP leader and explained the financial situation.  

Included in that explanation was the provision that there had 

been a $58 million overexpenditure on farm support due to a 

larger than expected uptake in the GRIP program. 

 

Now let's add 265 plus 180 plus 58.  Just with those three 

items, we get a deficit of $503 million. 

 

Well surprise, Mr. Speaker, surprise.  Without taking anything 

else into account, the NDP leader was fully aware that his own 

agenda would result in a minimum deficit of over $500 million.  

And it is truly sad that the media has not been able . . . has been 

unable to fully explain this simple math to the people.  I 

understand some of the unwillingness to explain the dance of 

the deficit.  There is a personal commitment to a deficit 

reduction that has gone so far as to excuse whatever deception, 

if the deception is seen as serving the interest of deficit 

reduction. 

 

But that is not fair to the people of Saskatchewan.  The 

hyperbole and exaggeration of the government has removed the 

middle ground in the debate for the deficit.  It has created a 

climate of almost despair.  That very well serves the political 

interests of members opposite but 

which does not serve the people of this province at all. 

 

And as I said to the Premier and to his caucus, this throne 

speech had better be the last deception you practise on the 

people of Saskatchewan.  If the long-overdue budget that is 

coming does not correct the deception, there will be a price to 

be paid.  And we will cause the Minister of Finance to step by 

step account for each of his manipulations in the Committee of 

Finance, and we will cause each member to explain in detail 

where the spending they did and are about to do came from, 

and how they arrived at paying this year's bills with last year's 

debt. 

 

There will be a price to be paid, Mr. Speaker, because in the 

end, deception will not stand, and in the end this government 

will not stand either. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's a great pleasure to be able to participate in this debate on 

the Speech from the Throne.  I'm very honoured to be here 

representing the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount and the 

Ministries of Social Services and Seniors. 

 

Saskatoon Westmount is a constituency with a high percentage 

of seniors, many of whom are my neighbours.  It's also an 

inner-city riding in which there are people on social assistance.  

We who live in the riding experience in our daily lives some of 

the social problems which this new government is committed 

to addressing. 

 

The Speech from the Throne set out a blueprint for the next 

four years.  It outlined the government's commitment to get in 

control of the deficit, creating jobs, protecting our environment, 

improving the quality of life, and restoring ethical and open 

government to Saskatchewan.  It also spoke about compassion 

and fairness, and it's these two themes that I want to focus on. 

 

We have major social problems in this province which the 

former government ignored and even worsened.  Since 

becoming Minister of Social Services, I spent a good deal of 

my time travelling around the province, visiting employees and 

clients whom my department serves.  It's been interesting, and 

it's been sobering. 

 

I have seen the devastating affects of poverty.  During the last 

decade, poverty has increased dramatically in this province.  

Ten years ago, Saskatchewan had one of the lowest child 

poverty rates in Canada.  Today we have one of the highest.  

One child in five in Saskatchewan grows up in poverty.  

Children are poor because their parents are poor.  Because their 

parents are working but don't make enough money to make 

ends meet.  Because their parents are only working part time 

even though they want to work full time.  Because their parents 

can't find jobs.  Or because their parents require training to 

prepare them for the job market. 

 

We simply cannot allow one child in five in Saskatchewan to 

grow up poor.  There's the cost to the 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

taxpayer.  Poor children have many more health care problems 

than others. They have more problems at school.  Dealing with 

the poverty crisis today will actually save us money tomorrow. 

 

But poverty is not just about numbers. It's about people.  

Poverty means children who can't concentrate at school 

because they're hungry. Poverty means tension, conflict, and 

even violence in homes plagued by financial insecurity.  It 

means frightened children who have to be left alone because 

parents can't afford child care.  It means the exhaustion of the 

single parent trying to juggle the competing demands of her job 

and her family.  It means the despair that leads young people to 

early experimentation with alcohol, drugs, teen-age 

pregnancies, and crime. 

 

So in the last decade there has been a dramatic increase in 

poverty and the accompanying social problems.  And how did 

the last government deal with this emerging social crisis?  We 

must never forget their response.  We also have to remember 

Grant Schmidt and how he treated poor people.  Mr. Schmidt 

and the others ignored the poverty crisis and even denied that 

there was a problem.  Grant Schmidt said, where are the hungry 

children? -- show me.  He wouldn't even admit there were 

hungry children in the province until the city of Regina did a 

lengthy report describing in heart-rending terms the lives of the 

hungry children. 

 

The previous government put down the poor.  What did they 

offer poor, single parents, struggling to make ends meet on 

incomes well below the poverty line?  Grant Schmidt gave 

these mothers lectures and told them that they had to learn how 

to manage their money properly or grow gardens.  The 

previous government's attitude toward the poor was punitive.  

People on social assistance were forced to pick up their 

cheques -- after their transportation allowances had been taken 

away from them.  Grant Schmidt took every opportunity to 

belittle poor people and to imply that welfare fraud, not 

poverty, was Saskatchewan's main social problem. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And look at what they did with the 

money, Janice. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And look what they did with the 

money.  Right on. 

 

The regulations which describe what people on social 

assistance are entitled to were kept from recipients.  Not that 

the regulations would have helped the recipients much.  The 

regulations are so complicated, bureaucratic, and full of red 

tape that practical people can't make head or tail out of them 

anyway. 

 

Not only did the previous government attack the poor, they also 

attacked the people who tried to help the poor.  The 

Department of Social Services that I inherited was a 

demoralized department, rife with political interference at all 

levels.  Social workers were not encouraged to be 

compassionate and their professional judgement was not 

respected.  The NGOs (non-governmental organizations), 

which often operate on shoe-string budgets to provide 

invaluable services to the needy, were gagged.  That is, they 

knew that if they criticized the government they 

risked losing their funding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the social problems in this province 

were worsening in the 1980s, the members opposite were 

blaming the victims.  They were lashing out at the poor instead 

of trying to deal with the problem of poverty.  And they were 

pitting people against each other, encouraging others to 

disparage and look down on some of the most vulnerable 

people in our society. 

 

The verdict delivered by the electorate in October 1991 was 

richly deserved.  The previous government and its soft-headed 

and hard-hearted approach was rejected in favour of a new 

government committed to compassion and fairness.  This is a 

government committed to tackling poverty.  We're simply not 

going to do what the member from Rosthern did when he was 

minister of Social Services.  Three hundred and seventy-two 

days ago, in this very House, the member opposite said that 

NDP plans to tackle poverty would cost a billion dollars.  And 

he used that as an excuse to throw up his hands and do nothing. 

 

We can't perform miracles, and we don't have a billion dollars.  

But we won't stand idly by while children go hungry in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We will unleash the creative 

energies of Saskatchewan people and appeal to the more nobler 

instincts of compassion.  We will ask them to work in 

partnership with us to solve our social problems. 

 

Our dollars are short but we will use them well.  We will 

review all income security programs in consultation with 

interested groups to ensure that our scarce tax dollars are most 

effectively targeted at those in need.  We will conduct an 

interdepartmental review of all seniors programs to work 

toward a guaranteed level of support for seniors.  We will work 

in partnership with the NGOs to better integrate services and 

avoid duplication. 

 

(2015) 

 

People who are in my constituency who are on social 

assistance want to work.  They want jobs and training.  This 

government, through its community employment program, will 

offer them both.  People on social assistance will be given jobs 

working on worthwhile community projects or working with 

volunteer groups or NGOs. 

 

Both the recipients and the communities will benefit.  

Understaffed and underfunded agencies like food banks or 

child care centres will get some much needed help that they 

would not otherwise be able to afford.  Job creation programs 

will get the economy moving again.  Money will be put into the 

hands of people on social assistance who will in turn spend that 

money at our local co-ops or small businesses. 

 

And the program will lever federal funds into the province.  

For every dollar that the province spends on training and 

employment, the federal government is committed to an 

equivalent investment. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

The recipients will also benefit.  They will receive sensitive 

training from agencies accustomed to dealing with the needy.  I 

would like, for instance, to see food banks offering programs to 

clients teaching them how to cook.  But I would be especially 

pleased to see someone on social assistance who has to use the 

food bank being trained to offer the cooking lessons 

themselves.  If poor people in this province are going to work 

on projects, I want them to work on projects that benefit poor 

people. 

 

Economic success in the 1990s requires a trained and educated 

work-force.  By consolidating all training and employment 

programs under one umbrella, New Careers, the government 

will provide a more co-ordinated and cost-effective service.  

Recipients will develop a long-term career plan which will 

involve skills development, educational upgrading, and 

on-the-job training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government also has to change the way it 

deals with aboriginal people.  We want to form a partnership 

with them.  For over 100 years white people have told Indian 

and Metis people how to run their lives.  And the record clearly 

shows that that approach was a dismal failure.  When some 70 

per cent of the institutionalized young offenders in this 

province are of aboriginal ancestry, this tells me that we as a 

society have failed miserably. 

 

This government is moving to a new and better system where 

aboriginal people will have a greater and greater role in 

designing and delivering their own social programs.  We're 

going through a troubled time in this province.  We all know 

this.  The previous government not only bankrupted the 

treasury, it also took the heart out of Saskatchewan and pitted 

people against each other.  We have to join together so we can 

begin to heal the hurt of this province and create a renewed 

value system for Saskatchewan -- create a value system that 

recalls the co-operative history of this province; our tradition of 

facing adversity together, of neighbours helping neighbours, 

communities helping communities. 

 

In Social Services, we've already begun.  People on social 

assistance are no longer being forced to pick up their cheques.  

They are being told why decisions which affect them are being 

made and they are being given access to the regulations.  The 

commitment of this government is to treat all people with 

dignity and respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Our vision is of a province where 

people and communities are involved in the decisions which 

affect their lives.  Only through co-operation can we make our 

communities strong again.  This government will turn around 

the financial mess of the province.  We will get control of the 

deficit.  And we must reach out to others in the community and 

ask them to join with us in rebuilding a Saskatchewan based on 

co-operation, compassion, and partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is definitely an 

honour to rise in support of the Speech from the Throne 

 And it is good to see you back in the Speaker's chair.  You are 

a man of very high standards, and I am sure you are going to 

restore the proper decorum in this legislature.  It is just part of 

the process to reassure the people's confidence in elected 

officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly a very special 

person that is important in my life.  She is seated in the east 

gallery.  My wife Carol is here tonight.  And she is 

accompanied by her sister Gloria Stefanson and two of their 

children, Sarah and Matthew, are here to watch the proceedings 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ask yourself this very important question: why are 

we here?  Why are we all working so hard, and why are we 

doing this? 

 

This is a very young province, started to be settled a little over 

a hundred years ago.  My grandfather was one of those first 

immigrants or those settlers.  He came from Poland when he 

was 17 years old.  He first worked in coal mines in Bienfait.  

He worked on the railroad in Melville.  He started farming in 

the Brewer district in 1925.  Being a young farmer, he went to 

his neighbours to borrow some seed.  He was going to replace 

it that fall, but he was hailed out.  So he went back to those 

same farmers, asked them for more seed.  He was hailed out for 

a second time.  Those first years were very, very tough, and he 

seldom talked about it. 

 

Those are some of the hard times our early pioneers went 

through to build this very province.  He moved to Bankend 

district in 1930, and in 1935 he built his first house.  In his 

early years, moving to Bankend, one year he broke 80 acres 

with horses.  He overworked those horses so hard that he lost 

18 -- 18 of them that next winter.  Definitely hard work our 

pioneers went through, like I stated before, and a lot of tough 

times. 

 

You ask yourself, why, why are we doing this, Mr. Speaker?  

Well it is definitely for our children.  And certainly we are also 

here to better oneself, but the main reason is for our children.  

When you see some of the past happenings of the last nine and 

a half years, it seems to me the past administration was in it 

just for themselves.  Mr. Speaker, my grandfather passed away 

in 1978.  And at least he didn't have to see the deterioration of 

this province that he helped build. 

 

When I was campaigning to be a member of this Assembly, the 

issue that came up time and time again was from seniors, very 

concerned about the deterioration of the very province that they 

worked so very hard to build.  You can think back how tough it 

was after the '30s and the Anderson and Bennett governments.  

We did straighten that mess out.  Now we are confronted with 

another mess the former administration left us with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to recite a little poem just 

for some comparison purposes.  It goes like this: 

 

In days of old 

when knights were bold 

and journeyed from their castles 

Trusty men were left behind 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

knights needed not the hastle 

They helped themselves to food and wine 

And drank from the king's own chalice. 

Oh, it was a stirring sight, 

Those gypsies in the palace. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 the 

knights did leave this palace but they left because of a decision 

of the electorate. 

 

Compare the food in the poem that was taken to the people's 

money.  You compare the wine . . . Well I guess we can just 

compare that to the wine or the liquor that was transferred from 

the Sask Liquor Board warehouse to the ministers' offices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Yes indeed, Mr. Speaker, no doubt in my mind.  

Gypsies in the palace. 

 

Where do political parties get their names?  Their names 

should say what they stand for.  In 1934 a farmer labour party 

was started.  George Williams, the member from Wadena, was 

one of the first five elected to that party. 

 

It later turned into the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation.  Then later, the New Democrats.  Think of it this 

way: farmer-labour, co-operation; commonwealth, not 

individual wealth, common wealth; new ideas; democratic. 

 

Take the members opposite -- Progressive Conservatives.  

Where did that name come from?  Maybe it came from 1929 

when the Liberals had elected 28 members; the Conservative 

Party, 24; and the Progressives, 5.  There was a Conservative 

and a Progressive coalition to form government, although they 

did not use that name until the 1944 election where they elected 

zero members. 

 

You think about that name -- it is neither progressive, or it is 

conservative.  And progressive, when you look in the 

dictionary, it means they want change.  Conservative is 

resistant to change. 

 

So which way are you going?  One way you want it and the 

next way you don't.  No doubt it seems you're quite mixed up.  

Sounds like mass confusion to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe they should change their name from the 

PC to the WM or waste and mismanagement party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Yes, it is quite obvious after we've opened the 

books -- all the waste and mismanagement.  Almost $14 

thousand of debt for every man, woman, child, and infant in 

this province. 

 

Yes, I wish things were different, but wishful thinking doesn't 

make it so.  But October 21, '91, the people voted through the 

democratic process, and they voted wisely I must say, but they 

voted for a difference.  They also voted for a clear mandate for 

change to open, honest, accountable government.  By working 

together, we're 

going to pay off this debt.  It will give us the financial freedom 

-- the freedom to make good decisions and to control our own 

destiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, it 

stretches from the southern fringes of the Porcupine forest to 

south of Kelliher, and from the Quill Lakes east to Invermay.  

It is full of good, hard-working people. 

 

When I was in one of the grocery stores here in Regina this 

week, I noticed on the shelves some peaola chips from 

Kelvington . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You bet, it's good 

stuff.  It's made from pea flour, and they form it into chips and 

fry it in canola oil.  It's high in protein, low in cholesterol.  It is 

quite healthy, and I hope all members of the Assembly go out 

and try some tonight. 

 

It is people working with the people's ideas.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

this new administration, our government, will work with 

businesses and individuals who will create jobs and value 

added products.  That is going to be helped by the changed 

mandate and the community bonds to allow co-operatives in 

that system. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Speaker, people long fought for job rights and job equality.  

Now that they have them, there are no jobs.  Mr. Speaker, a 

legacy of the last 10 years -- and you can look at the latest 

census figures to reassure this belief -- Saskatchewan was the 

only province in this nation to lose population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the feds have been off-loading, 

especially in agriculture.  Coming from a rural constituency it's 

very noticeable, but it affects all of Saskatchewan.  We all 

know that the feds propped up GRIP last year to the tune of 

$78 million.  They say it was to get farmers to sign in; they 

were just trying to buy election.  We all know that.  We know 

it's a national program, it's got to be.  It's a national 

responsibility.  We're going to work to enhance the 

cost-of-production formula.  We will press Ottawa for the 500 

million it owes farmers for the '90-91 crop year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Mr. Speaker, we have already extended the 

deadline for the sign-up of the safety nets.  And members 

opposite voted against this in a recorded vote; in a recorded 

vote they voted against this. 

 

They had a chance.  They had a chance to stand up for farmers, 

Mr. Speaker.  They had a chance to send Ottawa a strong, 

clear, unanimous message, but they chose not to.  They let the 

farmers down again.  This reassures my belief that they are in it 

only for themselves.  Instead of the members opposite whining 

and complaining and hollering and screaming, why don't you 

join us in rebuilding Saskatchewan? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's called co-operation. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- That's right.  It's called co-operation. 

 

Some of the past waste and mismanagement of GigaText, 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

Supercart, Joytec, High R Door, Austrak, Pro-Star Mills, 

Nardei Fabricators, Canapharm, Rafferty, STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company), and it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker 

-- this is only a few. 

 

And you couple this with the patronage of the former PC 

members and candidates.  And the Provincial Auditor report 

reveals even more waste and mismanagement.  Mr. Speaker, 

they have left this provincial treasury like old Mother 

Hubbard's cupboard.  It's bare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After October 21, '91, there is new faith and optimism 

spreading over Saskatchewan.  We're going to rebuild 

Saskatchewan again, as we did in 1944 and in 1971.  We're 

going to do it again in 1991.  Mr. Speaker, this is the third time 

the people of Saskatchewan have called on the New Democrats 

to fix up the mess left by the previous administrations. 

 

By working together we're going to obtain the freedom to 

control our own destiny, Mr. Speaker.  And it is up to the 

people of this fine province to help us keep those gypsies out of 

the palace. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

support the motion from my colleague from Meadow Lake.  

We both live in the beautiful north-west, and we both are 

dedicated to improving the conditions of our constituents.  

Even though it is less than five months since we assembled in 

this House and debated the throne speech from the last session, 

it is this sitting that feels like a true beginning for this 

government. 

 

The member from Regina Wascana was completely correct in 

her description of how we must clean up this mess before we 

can move forward.  And what a mess was left behind in terms 

of the provincial finances.  As a member of our caucus fiscal 

policy committee, I have been shocked and appalled at the 

magnitude of waste and mismanagement of the previous 

government. 

 

The members who created this mess and are now in opposition 

whined loudly about how the Gass Commission has vindicated 

them.  How?  Because it showed at the very least they were not 

criminals.  Good heavens, what kind of standards of behaviour 

does your party have?  Does your model for integrity and 

ethical behaviour state that anything is fine so long as it's not 

criminal behaviour?  Or is it that you just don't want your 

people to get caught in criminal behaviour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Well legally criminal or not, what you have 

done to this province is certainly a crime morally.  There are 

many people in Cut Knife-Lloydminster that wish they could 

have their pound of flesh out of your hides. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The people that I represent are honest and 

hard-working.  They understand that it is wrong to take and 

destroy what does not belong to them.  Do you know 

why my constituents are so angry?  They know that ordinary 

folks running their farms, businesses, and personal finances 

could have never gotten away with what you did.  But what 

they are finding truly amazing is that our laws were not able to 

protect the people from decisions made by the previous 

government. 

 

The honest and hard-working people I represent, they would 

like to see you and other members of the former PC 

government held personally responsible.  They would like to 

see you pay back every penny of the $13.8 billion debt that was 

accumulated when you were on that side of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that I understand the anger 

and frustration that my people are feeling -- 361 million lost 

when you insisted upon selling off the Potash Corporation.  

You were so determined to get rid of this Crown corporation 

that you didn't care if you lost money provincially. 

 

You sold the potash company even though your own officials 

advised against it.  You knew that selling PC would lose 

hundreds of millions but you forced the sale through anyway.  

Our leader and Premier promised to leave no stone unturned 

and to expose the waste and corruption -- little did I know they 

weren't stones but boulders -- but I don't think he realized how 

many stones there were and just how big some of them were.  

This government has been turning over stones since November 

1.  Just when we think surely this must be all, something else is 

exposed; then smack, we run into another boulder.  We have 

been trying to move forward and put the past behind us but 

then another financial disaster is discovered. 

 

Such was the case a few weeks ago when the Crown 

Management Board status report was released.  There we found 

an organization that was completely bankrupt.  While the PCs 

signed deals that lost money for CMB (Crown Management 

Board of Saskatchewan), they were also forcing the corporation 

to pay huge dividends to the province.  This is about as smart 

as using your VISA card to pay off your Mastercard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The result of this disaster, now that it has been 

exposed, is that the government is forced to pay interest 

charges on CMB's debt.  This is a terrible blow to our own 

expenses for this year. 

 

Like I said, we are amazed at how many stones or boulders of 

financial disaster that we have cleared out of the way.  But now 

we are finally reaching the end.  We know the full extent of the 

damage and we and the people of Saskatchewan will always 

remember who caused it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to endorse the throne speech.  In 

spite of the crushing financial situation, it is clear that this 

government is already starting to rebuild and to make some 

positive changes in people's lives. 

 

I'm particularly pleased and encourage the emphasis this 

government has placed upon education.  It shows, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government truly understands that a 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

properly trained and educated work-force is absolutely key to 

improving the economy and to solve the issue of poverty in the 

long run.  As a teacher myself, I've been aware for many years 

how our schools were often not addressing today's needs.  I 

commend the government for taking the initiative to establish 

the Saskatchewan Education Council.  I am excited about the 

possibilities that this represents to the people of Saskatchewan.  

This government is prepared to play a key facilitating role, but 

clearly they are providing an environment which brings people 

together and allows the community to develop solutions on 

their own. 

 

There is certainly no shortage of good ideas.  I know that by 

working together co-operatively that we will create the 

education system that is required to meet individual, social, and 

economic needs. 

 

I also want to mention the special training initiative for 

aboriginals and for women.  Once again, this government not 

only talks about equality, but they understand the underlying 

causes of injustice.  Only by having adequate and appropriate 

training can people have access to job opportunities. 

 

Another area that I am personally very excited about is health 

care.  We have the potential to revolutionize health care 

services.  Equal access to health care is a fundamental right for 

all people. 

 

Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd preserved and 

implemented universal health care programs during a time 

when many people had not even thought of the concept.  They 

were accused of being dreamers, and I'm old enough to 

remember that.  They were told that it couldn't be done.  Then 

they were even told that medicare would endanger people's 

lives -- remember that.  It sounds like some of the stuff I've 

been hearing the last couple of days . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Is that right?  In spite of all that opposition, as we all know 

medicare was created in this province and served as a model 

for the rest of the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Well now we are ready to implement the next 

phase.  People are telling us that it can't be done, or we will 

destroy the health care in the process.  Just like 30 years ago 

we have the naysayers, same old story.  But just like 30 years 

ago, our party has the vision and commitment to break with 

tradition and develop a better system. 

 

I am proud to say that the people in the constituency of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster are ready to welcome with open arms a 

new wellness model.  They appreciate and understand the need 

for community-based care.  They understand because they have 

already pulled together and co-operated to develop some very 

innovative services. 

 

The Twin Rivers Home Care district has already established 

one of the first wellness clinics for seniors in Canada.  This 

provides a wide range of service.  It is community based and 

controlled.  It is having a positive impact on many peoples 

lives. 

The Lloydminster Health Board has already amalgamated to 

provide effective and co-ordinated health care.  Remember that 

people in Lloydminster must work with not just one but two 

provincial governments.  Their example proves just how far 

communities can go when co-operation is flourishing. 

 

So I and the people of my constituency would like to say to the 

Hon. Minister of Health -- go for it! 

 

(2045) 

 

This is one corner of the province that understands the concept 

of wellness, and we have been practising it as well.  The health 

care professionals in my area are absolutely delighted to have a 

minister that finally is supportive of the fundamental changes 

and attitudes that they know are required. 

 

Fundamental change -- that's the key message of hope and 

optimism for me in this throne speech.  The world is changing 

around us.  The institutions that were developed decades and 

centuries ago are no longer reflective of society's needs.  If 

institutions are to survive, they are going to have to adapt.  The 

very fact that our party has 11 women sitting in this House, and 

that 4 of those women are also in cabinet, that convinces me 

that this government is prepared to adapt to meet the needs 

around them. 

 

The world is becoming smaller as communication improves.  

Not even political institutions can afford to remain out of 

touch.  I'm going to repeat that again, because some people 

aren't listening.  Not even political institutions can afford to 

remain out of touch. 

 

Our government and our legislature must reflect the needs and 

values of the larger society.  The only way that is possible is to 

include all members of society.  As I have indicated, our party 

has made great gains in ensuring that women are included in 

this government.  There is certainly room for improvement, but 

I am proud of our achievements thus far. 

 

The inclusion of women changes the face of government.  I 

believe our views and perspectives will help the political 

process adapt to the changing needs around us. 

 

In the same manner, it will be important to see more aboriginal 

members in this legislature.  They too will bring a different 

perspective and different emphasis to the processes of this 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech shows that this government is 

not afraid of change.  Out of the rubble of the financial disaster, 

we are going to forge a new economy and a new society.  We 

will do this by linking arms with the people right across this 

province.  And we will work together to make the changes 

required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the Speech from the 

Throne.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise with great pleasure tonight to speak in 

support of the Speech from the Throne which was delivered in 

this Chamber on Monday afternoon.  I want to first 

congratulate my colleague and desk mate, the member from 

Meadow Lake, on the excellent job that he has done in moving 

the throne speech.  I also want to congratulate . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- . . . I also want to take this opportunity to 

congratulate the member from Regina Wascana Plains on her 

excellent job also of seconding the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to at this time to say how 

nice it is to be back in this House where the government 

elected today can finally start putting some of its policies, and 

its dreams, and legislation in place to turn this province around. 

 

I also want to congratulate you, sir, on the decorum that you 

have kept in this Legislative Assembly, and I can see that 

things are going to calm down quite a bit in here with you in 

the Chair, and I thank you for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He's 

calm.  Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne refers to 

actions this government is initiating towards being open, 

honest, and accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Last October, Mr. Speaker, these people served overwhelming 

notice that they had had more than enough of the closed and 

secretive practices of the previous administration -- an 

administration which operated behind closed doors, and which 

actively prevented the public from having access and 

knowledge of its operations on a regular basis. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan rejected this negative approach of 

government, Mr. Speaker, in favour of positive and proactive 

leadership, government, and administration.  This is the type of 

direction that our government has said that we would take and 

bring forward, and this is the type and direction of government 

they said they wanted.  And this is the man that they gave this 

government.  And that is the kind of government that we have 

pledged to provide to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have already begun this process and more -- 

much more, much more -- will be done in the weeks and the 

months ahead.  And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are already beginning to see evidence of our work here, good, 

solid evidence that I will give specific examples of in a 

moment.  And that evidence, Mr. Speaker, is also only a 

beginning.  The people of Saskatchewan will see much more of 

it in the weeks and the months ahead. 

This evidence, Mr. Speaker, reflects the mandate of this 

government to be open, honest, and accountable.  It also 

reflects the commitment of this government to be one that the 

people of Saskatchewan can trust and have faith in as we work 

together to rebuild our province. 

 

Let me give you some specific examples of the positive steps 

this government has already taken to be open, honest, and 

accountable, Mr. Speaker, by contrasting what we have already 

done in only six short months with the kind of mismanaged 

practice by the members opposite during their 10-year reign of 

error.  Let me begin, Mr. Speaker, with our pledge to the 

people of Saskatchewan that the first action of our government 

would be to open the books and contrast our approach to the 

financial state of our province with that of the previous 

administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will remember that 

the previous administration used every tactic in the book to 

stall and delay public scrutiny of the spending habits by the 

Provincial Auditor.  This meant that public account documents 

were up to three years old before they were open to this 

scrutiny. 

 

What's more, Mr. Speaker, is that the previous provincial 

auditor was actually denied access to some of the information 

he needed to do his job, while in other cases the previous 

administration refused to co-operate with him to the extent that 

it was obligated to by law.  This led the previous provincial 

auditor to complain that the former government had perhaps 

broken its own laws, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Activities which we hear even this week may have continued 

year after painful year under the former government.  But what 

did that government do when it was faced with these 

complaints, Mr. Speaker?  Did it do the decent thing and agree 

to subject itself to its own laws?  No, Mr. Speaker, it did not.  

Indeed the former Justice minister himself launched a personal 

and vicious attack on the previous provincial auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have accused our 

government of knowing what the debt was. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You knew. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- We knew.  That's what they said.  And I want to 

quote, Mr. Speaker, from a letter that was written by the late 

minister of Finance, Mr. Hepworth, to the now Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It first says: 

 

 First, you suggest that there is no way of verifying whether 

expenditures undertaken to date, by way of Special Warrants, 

have added to the current year's budget deficit forecast of 

$265 million.  Second, you suggest that announcements in 

recent weeks may have added to the provincial deficit.  Third, 

you question the government's track record on deficit 

forecasts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

 Expenditures of the combined funds up to and including 

August 31, 1991, total 1.9 . . . billion 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

which is 40.9% of the total budget expenditures provided for 

in the 1991-92 budget.  This compares favourably to the 

previous year . . . 

 

 As you see, we have kept an extremely tight rein on 1991-92 

provincial expenditures (is what he reads). 

 

And I go to the end, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from the letter.  It 

says: 

 

 On balance, however, I see no reason to alter our target of a 

$265 million deficit. 

 

Quoted in a letter from the former Finance minister to the now 

Premier, and it says that -- and I repeat again for the members 

opposite: 

 

 On balance, however, I see no reason to alter our target of a 

$265 million deficit. 

 

How would we know when the former Finance minister 

wouldn't tell us the truth?  We campaigned on a budget of $265 

million and now we find out it's over $1 million . . . 1 billion, 

excuse me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk more about the throne 

speech.  I could talk about some of their shenanigans for the 

past several years.  And I think if anyone gets a chance it's all 

writ up in this Report of the Provincial Auditor -- a report 

that is usually one-tenth the thickness of what this one is.  But 

because of nine years of mismanagement . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is truly fitting that the party that created 

hospitalization and medicare should be the same party that is 

embarked on reforming our health care system.  Health care 

has flourished and advanced to a very technical level.  Modern 

medicine is performing miracles in many people's lives. 

 

These advancements are important and needed, but now there 

is a growing awareness that we should take steps to keep 

people healthy.  If we can prevent disease, people will have a 

better quality of life but they will also not have to take 

advantage of the highly advanced and technical health services.  

An example is coronary care.  Rather than waiting for a heart 

attack to occur, which requires quadruple bypass surgery, it 

makes sense to be concentrating on a life-style designed to 

keep our hearts healthy in the first place. 

 

To have health care services co-ordinated and integrated only 

makes common sense.  I commend my government and the 

Minister of Health for steps that they have taken in this regard 

already.  Encouraging people to work co-operatively together 

will be the secret to the success of changes that are made. 

 

The public health care professionals know that changes must be 

made.  They are also counting on us to make those changes in a 

fair and compassionate manner.  We recognize that there must 

be a transition period in many cases.  Wellness and preventive 

programs will need to be firmly established before we will see 

any reduction in people requiring highly intensive health care 

services. 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that this government will deliver 

the needed changes effectively and I am looking forward to a 

new age in health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, if our goal is to ensure that we 

have a healthy population then we must also be addressing the 

issue of poverty.  People that cannot afford a nutritious diet or 

proper housing will not be able to maintain good health.  I'm 

very pleased with the steps this government will take this 

session to break the poverty cycle:  support for children's food 

programs; review of safety net programs; emphasis on training 

and employment.  Unfortunately we will not be able to solve 

the problem instantly.  I know all of my caucus colleagues wish 

that we could but the throne speech has shown that we will 

make a start.  We have much more to do but we have made a 

start. 

 

This government has also made a very significant start in 

correcting some of the injustices that have occurred against our 

aboriginal people.  There are five reserves in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood so I know that there has been much 

unfairness and oppression.  And it is time for our indigenous 

brothers and sisters to be allowed the freedom and the power to 

control their own affairs. 

I welcome the support in the throne speech for 

self-determination and treaty land entitlement settlements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, I am also hopeful that the Metis 

Justice Review Committee and the Indian Justice Review 

Committee will be a start towards implementing needed 

changes in this area.  As a society we can no longer continue to 

ignore the high incarceration rate experienced by Indian and 

Metis.  Again it is high time some action has been taken after 

10 years of neglect and we will take that action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard a lot about agriculture and we have 

heard a lot about farm debt and we've heard a lot about GRIP 

and, Mr. Speaker, we're going to hear a lot more before this 

thing is over.  Why?  Because if you take a few minutes to take 

a good, long, hard look at what has been going on behind the 

scenes, you'll see that the federal government has, without a 

shadow of a doubt, landed our farmers with a massive, 

untenable burden -- a burden that they may not recover from if 

we cannot turn the tide around. 

 

(2100) 

 

The federal government has spent so much of its time trying to 

dump its financial responsibilities on us that they have not paid 

the least bit of attention to the anxiety and the anguish they are 

causing for this agricultural-based province.  Our whole way of 

life is directly affected by the decisions Mr. McKnight is 

making and he is making them as casually as deciding whether 

or not to take an umbrella because it looks like rain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not a whole lot of fun to be placed in the 

situation of being responsible for cleaning up after the 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

horses in a parade.  But this is the situation that we find 

ourselves in, thanks to the members opposite, who for nine 

long and painful years formed what barely passed as a 

government. 

 

We are faced, thanks to them and to the federal Tories, with a 

GRIP program that was shaky in the first place and promised 

all sorts of things it never delivered.  Did anyone see the 

cheques from the interim GRIP payments this year?  Did 

anyone get a bill instead of a cheque?  Indeed they did, Mr. 

Speaker, and it was because of the tricks and the twists and the 

turns the federal Minister of Agriculture has been throwing us 

over the last few months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time that Mr. McKnight got real. The 

Saskatchewan farmers you are trying to rip off have your 

number, Mr. McKnight, and they are demanding that you make 

good on your promise of a third line of defence for the farmers 

of Saskatchewan.  You told us that the third line of defence was 

to be for identifying and solving problems.  Well I suggest to 

you, Mr. McKnight, that our farmers have identified problems 

for you that you have not acted on, and it appears that you have 

no intentions of acting on. 

 

So where does that leave us, Mr. Speaker?  It leaves us trying 

to fix a bad program by trying to make it a little better.  We did 

the best we could with what the former government left us 

with.  Because of the financial restraints and the time restraints, 

the committee has done a remarkable job.  We know what we 

have needs work, and we are prepared to go the additional mile 

to find workable solutions.  But we will need the help to do that 

and we will want input from our farmers. 

 

We did strike a review committee to take a look at the GRIP 

program but as we all know, Mr. Speaker, the committee had 

little time to accomplish what they wanted and needed to.  

They had their backs up against the wall because we were so 

close to the critical deadlines.  The committee did recommend 

some viable alternatives.  We have since included more 

enhancements to GRIP and yes, we still know that we have a 

ways to go to make all the people happy.  But I have to point 

out, Mr. Speaker, that even Rome wasn't built in a month.  We 

know we need to work on the finer points of GRIP.  We also 

know that this will take the help of the people that elected us, 

our farming communities. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture recently stated that we will be 

designing a new safety net program for farmers.  I feel that 

those are words of vision for the next decade.  We are going to 

work towards an equitable solution and we are, Mr. Speaker, 

going to go to the people who have the most to say, our 

farmers.  Admittedly we will spend some time designing the 

process to make it feasible for all those who ultimately 

participate, but that is the key, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

participation of those the most affected.  For our farmers have 

been saying loudly and clearly that they have problems we 

need to work on together. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take a great deal of satisfaction in the 

proposed future direction for an improved agriculture safety net 

program, a program that will be better than GRIP. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- A program that will turn this desperate situation 

around and create some optimism for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech sets this province, that is close 

to bankruptcy, on the road to renewal and new direction.  As 

the speech reads: 

 

 A community that lives beyond its means will not long 

prosper.  A community that has lost faith in its elected 

representatives will not flourish.  A community without 

compassion will not know true progress.  A community 

divided will not succeed. 

 

We as a government are determined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

bring the government spending under control so we that we do 

get back to living within our means. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province lost faith in 

the former government and on October 21, 1991, they showed 

them that they had indeed lost the faith of the people.  And we 

as a government will work very hard to maintain the trust that 

the people have put in us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we as a government are committed to 

dealing with people and groups with fairness, openness and 

compassion.  Because by working with people instead of 

against them there will be true progress in our life-style and the 

life-style that we will leave for our children and our 

grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former government ran this province 

for 10 years by the theory that you divide people and put one 

sector against another -- divide and rule.  We, Mr. Speaker, as a 

government, believe that what is needed is people of all sectors 

working together in the spirit of community and co-operation, 

working together in a mixed economy where the co-operatives, 

the Crown corporations along with the private sector, work 

together to bring this province to the point where they will once 

again have control of their own destiny. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we inherited an overwhelming debt -- a 

debt of some $14 billion -- that is the result of the former 

government's waste and mismanagement and patronage 

rewards to their corporate friends.  Mr. Speaker, this 

horrendous debt threatens our economic stability today and 

jeopardizes our hopes for economic recovery tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are committed to turn this province 

around and by working together, we will meet the challenge.  

We will rebuild Saskatchewan, and we will turn our economy 

around because, Mr. Speaker, we not only do it for the people 

of today, but we do it to provide a brighter future for ourselves 

and our children.  And we do it because we care.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm very pleased tonight to enter 

into the debate on the first throne speech from this new 

government.  And I would want to say, Mr. Deputy 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

Speaker, in the outset, that I find this document to be a very 

radical change from what I've seen and what has been 

presented to this legislature in the past. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I believe that this, 

as is our British parliamentary system, to be the prelude to the 

budget as it always is.  But I want to say that this throne speech 

is a prelude to a different kind of a budget than we've 

experienced in this province since this rump group, this 

opposition across the road, took power in 1982. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in referring to the throne speech, I thought 

one of the most useful things that I could do for my 

constituents and for the people of Saskatchewan is to reaffirm 

some of the headings in the throne speech which clearly 

indicate the direction of this Premier and his government. 

 

One of the headings, the first headings, is mandate for a 

change.  And I believe that this government does have a 

mandate for a change.  People are looking for a change, and 

indeed they will have one. 

 

And the second heading is putting your financial house in 

order.  And clearly, if there's ever been a time in this province 

that we need to put our financial house in order, it's after 10 

years of the leadership of the PC Party and the present Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

And I want to say some of the reasons we need to put our 

financial house in order leads me to the next headline, and 

that's open, honest and accountable government -- something 

which has been sadly lacking in Saskatchewan since the Leader 

of the Opposition took power in 1982. 

 

Jobs and economic opportunities -- another headline, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  Agriculture and the economy -- and another 

headline, Mr. Speaker, quality of life, which has been sadly 

eroded under the misguidance of the former administration in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to say as well that, as I sat in the member in the 

opposition benches prior to the election, one of the points that 

we tried to make and one of the arguments that we tried to 

make to the then government -- the PC government of the day 

-- was that they've got to start putting people first. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were putting some people first.  

We recognize that.  They were putting friends of the PC 

government first.  But I want to say, when you read this 

document, this throne speech that was presented to this 

legislature, our definition of putting people first includes all 

people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- I wanted to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during 

the course of my remarks, refer to the debt load that we carry in 

this province.  I want to speak about why I believe that's 

happened. 

 

But I want to first of all express my disappointment in the 

performance of the new members of the opposition since 

we've been in this legislature.  I can say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

expect no better from the veteran members because we saw 

them perform in this legislature prior to the election when they 

sat in the government benches and sat on the Treasury Board 

and delivered the massive pain and inflicted the hurt upon 

Saskatchewan people that we're all too familiar with. 

 

And I believe that from them, and I understand why that is.  

And I understand why they will stand in this House in this 

throne speech and defend their miserable record of the last ten 

years.  And I understand that because they were part and parcel 

of the destruction of the economy of this province.  So those 

people I can understand. I can understand that, sir. 

 

But what I fail to understand is new members elected to the 

opposition benches.  I can't understand members like the 

member from Maple Creek who spoke tonight.  I can't 

understand where this person comes from.  And I can't 

understand where he intends to go.  Because I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, he's following directly in the path and the direction of 

the veteran opposition members, and surely he must realize, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have had 

enough of that kind of government.  They've had enough of the 

waste, and they've had enough of the gross mismanagement 

and the arrogant attitude of the members that were here and 

sitting on the government side.  And there's been enough of 

that. 

 

What we're looking for, and I think what the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking for with this government -- and that 

includes the members of the opposition -- is some fairness and 

a new direction in getting our financial house in order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all 

sincerity, I understand the . . . I know, and I know members of 

the legislature know, that the now member of . . . or Leader of 

the Opposition, the defeated premier, is not going to be around 

that long.  He's going to be disappearing out of this Chamber 

and out of the political scene and away from the 

embarrassment that he's created . . . some members of his 

political party.  He's going to be gone. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't believe he's 

going to be speaking to many more throne speeches.  And I 

don't believe he'll be addressing budget speeches because I 

think he's going to be gone.  And I want to say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, not only out of this legislature will he be gone.  My 

guess is that he won't be living in this province because he 

doesn't want to face the embarrassment of destroying the 

families, and having them recognize just what's he's done after 

this government has opened the books and let the light shine in 

on just how bad his government was, and how corrupt that that 

government was for the last 10 years.  So I want to speak to 

that just for a minute.  The fact that the Leader of the 

Opposition won't be addressing many more throne speeches in 

this legislature. 

 

(2115) 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

But we have on the other side legislature some bright, shining 

stars.  We have the member from Rosthern, who was part of 

the destruction and now wants to try and lead this . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . group of politicians back into power 

sometime down the road.  My guess is that he'll never live long 

enough to do that because I believe the people of Saskatchewan 

will not elect the PC government for decades and decades. 

 

And then we've got of course the other bright, shining star, the 

House Leader, the member from Thunder Creek, who will be 

clearly as positioning himself and trying to line up some of 

their back-bench members over there for support for this new 

leadership race.  And I want to say I look forward to it.  I look 

forward to this because that's still part and parcel of the 

operation that destroyed this province.  And the people know 

that, and I want to suggest that under the leadership of either 

one of those two members the PC party will go nowhere, and 

we'll be able to continue on with the rebuilding of this province 

with a government that's built fair . . . that's here because of 

compassion and of caring for the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I would be remiss if I didn't mention the member from 

Morse, who sits in the back and one of the triumvirate.  And he 

too may have leadership aspirations.  He too may try to decide 

to lead that group of right-wing, incompetent politicians out of 

the wilderness.  He may be part of the triumverate.  And it will 

be interesting to see just what direction that takes.  But I want 

to say to all three of you . . . I say to you, shame on all of you, 

that you haven't come clean with your back-benchers and at 

least told them and been honest that you were part and parcel 

of the destruction of the economy of this province and that you 

were parts and you were the master-minds of the corruption 

that this government was riddled with for 10 years. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I find it sad that they 

wouldn't have come clean with the new members and have said 

why don't you start on a new course and join with the 

government members and support them in their direction of 

trying to turn this economy around, and support them in terms 

of fairness for all people.  But clearly you got to them before 

they could make their minds up, and the speech by the member 

from Maple Creek tonight was just a very good example of that 

having happened. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Prince Albert Northcote, 

who I want to say I am so proud to represent, have given me a 

message in no uncertain terms in the last four and five years.  

They've been very clear about their expectations and about 

their needs and about what they expect of their member of the 

legislature, and how I react and how I work with this 

government and how I work with them in order to turn this 

province around. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I never wrote this throne 

speech. I never wrote this, but I tell you whoever wrote this 

throne speech clearly understood what the people of Prince 

Albert Northcote were asking of their member of 

the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, two of the key 

words I saw in this throne speech that really spur me on and 

make me feel comfortable what I'm doing and that I'm sitting in 

a New Democrat caucus and that I'm sitting on the government 

side, and two words that really twigged with me are fairness 

and compassion because that's what my folks send me here for.  

They sent me here to work with this government to build a 

budget and to build a direction in this four years with this 

government that demonstrates fairness and compassion and just 

doesn't talk about it.  And they're asking, Mr. Speaker, for 

common sense and they're asking for competence. 

 

And I look around me and I look at the members of the 

legislature that sit in the treasury benches, the members of 

Executive Council, and I tell you it's a small group.  We've got 

a small cabinet, but they're a competent and they're a caring 

bunch of men and women who I know will do the job working 

with the rest of their caucus. 

 

And we're going into this, Mr. Speaker, with our eyes open.  

We know it's a massive challenge and we know we have some 

big problems in Saskatchewan, but we also know that they can 

be addressed.  And working with the people of this province 

we're going to clean up the destruction that members of the 

opposition were such an integral part of building.  And we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that to find $700 million just to pay the 

interest on our provincial debt is not going to be easy. 

 

And we know that if we have that $700 million and if we could 

put that directly into health care or into education or into an 

agriculture program or if we could put that towards feeding 

some of the hungry children that these people on the opposition 

benches were so much a part of creating, we know that if we 

had that $700 million there's so much good that we could do. 

 

But we also know that the reality is, sir, that we just don't have 

that $700 million.  It's money that's going to drift directly out 

of our economy into the bankers and bond dealers in New York 

and Zrich and wherever, and we know that.  We know we 

haven't got the opportunity to take that money and inject it back 

into our economy and do good things with it.  We know that. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there are other things we know 

we're going to have to do.  Some of the things that we would 

rather not have to do.  But we give you the commitment, and 

we give the people of this province a commitment, that those 

changes are going to be done with fairness and compassion. 

 

You know I looked through a list of quotes that came from 

members of the opposition, members of the former PC 

government that helped to develop this massive $14 billion 

debt that we have that then created the 700 million that we 

have to pay in interest every year, and I look at some of the 

quotes. 

 

And the member from Rosthern was quoted as saying: if you 

don't manage today, you'd run out of money for 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

health and education and social services.  And do you want to 

know something, Mr. Speaker?  He was quoted as saying that 

in June 1987.  Right into the new mandate after '86, this 

member then understands that you've got to have good 

management, or you're going to have problems with respect to 

health care and education and social services. 

 

And I want to say another quote from the same member.  He 

said: the alternative is just to let the deficit grow.  And he says, 

and that would not take courage.  It would just put your head in 

the sand and say I don't have the money, and I have a deficit 

now, but I will just continue to borrow, and it won't matter. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what they did.  

They put their heads in the sand, and they kept on spending, 

and they let a deficit grow.  And I'm a firm believer that if they 

had been re-elected, there would have been no change, that 

they would have continued.  They would have taken the easy 

path to just continue borrowing and squandering.  And that's 

the direction they would have gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I tell you what.  The members on this side of the House 

have got the courage and the will to put on the brakes. 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I think after four 

years of this government the difference will be so clear in terms 

of our commitment to turning this province right side up and 

not continuing the way the opposition does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said, it would be easy.  

And that's the easy road to continue, but we've made a 

commitment and I believe we have the support of the people of 

Saskatchewan to turn this province around.  And it's not going 

to be done without pain.  But we have pain now and to 

continue on that road would just compound that pain and it 

would just make it worse for many more families down the 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a different attitude on this side of the 

House.  We're not going to make excuses because we didn't 

create this mess.  They can make all the excuses they want, but 

the people understand.  There are no excuses for the kind of 

incompetence and the kind of mismanagement that they laid on 

the people of this province.  And there is no excuse for putting 

a single person in this province in debt to the tune of $14,000, 

and almost $55,000 for a family of four  

_- a debt that they've put on to the backs of the people -- there 

are no excuses for that. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we're not going to make 

excuses for delivering what will be, I believe, a very hard-nose 

budget.  But the leader of this province and our Premier said it's 

going to be a fair budget and I believe it will too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I guess we've almost 

come full circle.  This province has changed over 

the years, the '70s and the '80s and now the '90s.  And I would 

want to think we're like a family in Saskatchewan and we're 

into the third generation. 

 

We had a generation in Saskatchewan in the 1970s, we had a 

decade where there was a government of compassion and 

competence, balanced budgets, programs, job creation, fairness 

and compassion, as I said before.  And then we went into the 

1980s and we had those that would tell us there was so much 

more we could be and at the same time we're destroying our 

economy.  And we had 10 years of that.  So that was the next 

stage. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we're into a new era in 

Saskatchewan.  We're now governed by a forward looking 

group of men and women who are willing to work with and for 

the people of Saskatchewan.  And I believe the 1990s hold a 

very bright future for us, simply because of those facts. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are business 

men and women in this province who are looking forward to 

working with their government.  And I know that the rural 

community is looking forward to working with their 

government.  And I want to say that we're committed to doing 

just that in the 1990s, and I think that it's going to become 

abundantly clear within about four or five years that we've 

taken the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of members who have many 

words to say with respect to the throne speech, and can 

probably do it in a much more eloquent fashion than I can.  But 

I want to say to you that my words tonight come from the 

bottom of my heart.  I believe that this political party is moving 

in the right direction and this government is moving in the right 

direction, and I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan that 

we're going to work hard with you and work hard for you.  And 

I want them to know that their government feels that we have a 

bright future and this economy can be turned around, and we 

can create jobs and we can keep our young people working 

here in our province.  It's going to take a little time and it's 

going to be a struggle, but we can do it. 

 

I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that to the people of my 

constituency of Prince Albert Northcote, I want to give them a 

special thanks for their patience as we've been working to put 

together this budget that's soon to be presented in this 

legislature.  And I want to say to them that I appreciate the 

support that they've given me -- not the electoral support only 

but the moral support.  And I want them to know that the 

relationship that we've built over the past five years will 

continue, whether in opposition or government, and I will 

continue to be consulting and working with them because that's 

a process that makes this job all worthwhile.  And without that 

process it becomes pretty much meaningless. 

 

(2130) 

 

We're going to rebuild this province, and there's no doubt in my 

mind that we're going to be putting this province back right up 

on top in Canada, with a sound economy, with a good working 

force, and a good relationship with the rest of our country.  

And I firmly believe that we've 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

chosen the right direction to do that.  And I just in closing ask 

them to continue to work with me and the rest of the members 

of the legislature in order to ensure that that happens.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to begin by 

congratulating the member from Meadow Lake, who moved 

the Speech from the Throne, and the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains, who seconded the Speech from the Throne.  

You both had very eloquent and heartfelt words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we embark on the many excellent directions 

put forward in the throne speech, it's important that we pull 

together behind these initiatives so that this province can turn 

the corner and begin to implement the mandate for change that 

was given to us on October 21.  In our excitement over the new 

potential of this mandate, I think it's important that we reflect 

for a moment on what I refer to as a decade of suffering that we 

have just been through.  Because in order to get a clear sense of 

where we're going, we have to know where we have been so 

we can avoid the missteps of the past. 

 

In 1982, the day the Tories were elected in Saskatchewan, not 

only did this province halt in its forward progress, but for many 

the clock began to turn backwards, removing much of the 

progress made possible by sound financial management and 

compassionate public policies demonstrated by Tommy 

Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and Allan Blakeney.  However, 

over the past 10 years, the decade of suffering, we experienced 

the steady implementation of a conservative agenda that 

reaches beyond the boundaries of North America and is at the 

very root of the problems that we face in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether the members opposite were wittingly or 

unwittingly -- I'm not sure if it should be witlessly -- complicit 

in implementing this Tory agenda has been the subject of some 

discussion.  If they were wittingly complicit, they have a great 

deal to answer for.  For not only have they destroyed the 

financial integrity of the province, but they have greatly 

undermined our ability to recover. 

 

The topic I'm about to discuss reflects on the past but it's also a 

starting point for renewal and rebuilding.  As a member of the 

legislative Committee on Crown Corporations, the particular 

area I am referring to is the revenue-generating capacity of the 

Crowns.  Our government has always been aware of the 

cyclical nature of Saskatchewan's resource-based economy.  In 

this province, which has a small population and a relatively 

small tax base compared to provinces such as B.C. and Ontario, 

these two factors led to the government taking a significant role 

in stabilizing the economy. 

 

In terms of the revenues needed to support important health, 

education, social, and economic objectives, the Blakeney 

government established the Crowns.  The Crowns provide three 

essential benefits to Saskatchewan residents.  The first, Mr. 

Speaker, is ownership and control of our provincial resources 

that ensures that decision 

making and benefits are retained in Saskatchewan.  This 

provides us with more control over our destiny. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, where joint ventures are involved, it gave 

Saskatchewan a role in the industry and provided us with 

important information on wealth being taken out of the 

economy and resources and made us an informed participant in 

those decisions.  And I believe this is important in terms of 

stewardship of our resources. 

 

And third, Mr. Speaker, primarily it gave us another direct 

source of revenue aside from taxes to support developmental 

activities and investments in education, health, and social 

services and enabled the establishment of the now defunct 

Heritage Fund.  Overall it greatly strengthened our material 

ability to meet people's needs.  And it was this willingness of 

an NDP government to take a strong role in the economy that 

ensured that revenues did not flow out of the province.  This is 

what public policy is all about -- using resources well to meet 

people's needs. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Speaker, enter the agenda of the Conservative 

government, when we started down the road of using public 

resources to meet private greed.  In the interests of history and 

for the record, let me refresh our memories with a few 

examples which led up to the Crown management financial 

fiasco recently revealed in an April 7 update released by the 

Premier on the audited financial statements for Crown 

Management Board operations still under review. 

 

In order to embark on this discussion, I wish to clarify 

something that the members opposite fail to understand.  Are 

you listening over there?  In order for an expenditure to be 

considered an investment, it has to be able to provide returns to 

self-liquidate the debt. 

 

I would compare this kind of debt to a house mortgage or an 

investment in your education that would provide higher returns 

in the future on your initial investment.  Failure to understand 

this very basic principle is what's gotten us into this mess. 

 

As part of its 1992-93 budget preparation the government 

ordered a thorough review of Crown Management Board's 

major assets, those one million and higher.  This review was 

conducted by the national accounting firm of Ernst & Young 

and was completed early in April. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the book value of our assets has been completely 

eroded.  At the end of the Blakeney administration our assets 

stood at 9,296 million and our liabilities at 6,688 million.  Our 

equity stood at 2,607 million. 

 

At the end of the Conservative administration, our assets stood 

at 14,060 million, and our liabilities at 19,085 million, with a 

resulting net debt or a minus on the balance sheet of 5,024 

million. 

 

In other words, that means if we had sold off all of our assets in 

1982, we would have realized a net benefit of 2,607 million.  If 

we sold off all of our assets today, after nine years of Tory 

mismanagement, we would be in the hole to the tune of 5,024 

million.  And what a black hole it 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we ask ourselves why.  Why did this happen?  Well there's 

two primary reasons.  First, significant losses occurred in the 

privatization initiatives such as the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan and Cameco Corporation.  And second, the 

accumulated operating losses from investments such as -- you'll 

recognize some of these names -- NewGrade Energy Inc., 

which the hon. member from Thunder Creek was bragging 

about recently; and Crown corporations such as Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation; Sask Forest Products; 

STC; Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, that invisible 

corporation; and the Agricultural Development Corporation.  I 

am sure that all of us will recognize these losers as the 

flagships of the Tory government.  If this isn't enough, in 

addition, significant dividends paid by Crown Management 

Board in the last two years have stripped the corporation of its 

retained earnings, leaving no cushion for Crown Management 

Board to absorb the impact of losses in the future and no ability 

to pay dividends. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, with the very diligent help of the 

Tories, the ability for the Crowns to provide significant 

financial resources has been almost totally disabled, for sure in 

the short run.  The net result is the taxpayer having to pick up 

the load that was previously shared by the Crowns.  Prior to 

1982 the Crowns provided 20 per cent of revenue into the 

provincial treasury.  And I ask you to remember, Mr. Speaker, 

who brought Saskatchewan this fiasco.  It was the Tory 

government of the member from Estevan aided by Brian 

Mulroney and the members opposite. 

 

An interesting sidelight of this whole endeavour was the 

misuse of money within the Crowns themselves.  Some of you 

may be familiar with the name Oliver Letwin of Britain's 

Rothschild merchant bank.  Mr. Oliver Letwin was hired from 

Britain at a cost of 64,000 for two months worth of consulting 

to provide us with the same advice he gave to Maggie 

Thatcher's government.  As documented in follow-up studies, 

one of the results of the massive privatizations in Britain was 

the immediate jump in top executive salaries in the privatized 

firms.  But we don't need to go to Britain for these examples. 

 

Who can forget Chuck, right here in Saskatchewan?  With the 

privatization of the Potash Corporation, we saw the 

appointment of Chuck Childers as the president and chief 

executive officer at a salary of 700,000 per year including 

benefits and perks.  Of note is that the corporation further 

guaranteed that Childers' after-tax position, based on his 

income earned, would be no different than had he continued to 

reside in the United States and earn an equivalent amount of 

income in that country.  So not only was Mr. Childers 

guaranteed his salary, wildly in excess of anything the average 

Saskatchewan resident could ever hope to make, but he was 

guaranteed all the benefits of living in Canada with an 

American tax guarantee.  This is what the Tories meant by the 

benefits of privatization and this is who benefitted.  Again we 

have to ask, how did this happen? 

 

The recently tabled Report of the Provincial Auditor for the 

year ended March 31, 1991, on Page 8 states the 

following: 

 

 .13 (for easy reference) Chapter 35 relates to the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Only now are we 

able to report to the Assembly on activities that took place 

two to three years in the past.  Public accountability is not 

well served (these are the words of the Auditor). 

 

 .14  Chapter 34 of Saskatchewan Telecommunications is 

another example.  In February, 1992, we determined we 

could not rely on the appointed auditor's report on the 

financial statements of SaskTel for the year ending 1990.  

There was insufficient evidence for us to form an opinion on 

the recorded value of a significant investment. 

 

Again the Auditor reinforces the public accountability and 

decision making is impaired.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, due to the 

number of ventures that were hidden by the Tories and the 

Crowns, a full 50 per cent of the province's finances were not 

available for public scrutiny.  Our government will change 

these procedures in keeping with our commitment to open, 

honest and accountable government. 

 

Despite the Tory devastation of the Crowns and the immediate 

problems it presents us with, we still have the base within the 

Crowns to again provide strong input into the Saskatchewan 

economy.  Crowns such as SaskTel, Sask Power, SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), SaskEnergy, and our 

remaining 9 per cent share in the Potash Corporation have the 

ability to create new activity and contribute significantly to the 

economic development in the province. 

 

Unfortunately with the Potash Corporation, Saskatchewan 

residents will only now receive 9 per cent of those benefits 

instead of 100 per cent of those benefits as Blakeney intended.  

He understood the cyclical nature of our resource economy and 

that over time the potash industry would continue to provide 

economic benefit to the province.  The Tories, economists that 

they are, did not understand this cyclical nature of the industry 

and used a brief period of downturn as an excuse to privatize, 

thereby denying the taxpayers of Saskatchewan future benefit 

to potash revenues. 

 

Within all the Crowns, the employees are excited about the 

future potential for economic growth as they move into 

international and local markets.  They are people who are 

committed to Saskatchewan, who plan to stay in Saskatchewan, 

and will use all of their creative and productive energy to return 

the Crowns to full financial health. 

 

There are alternatives.  Saskatchewan residents who are 

interested in tax reform will need to direct considerable 

attention to Ottawa which plays the primary role in taxation 

and has the best capacity to act on the larger issues of corporate 

taxation and fairness of the personal income tax structure, as 

well as to deal with the continuing tax holidays and tax 

loopholes for the very wealthy. 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

We need to be willing to deal not only with issues of excessive 

taxation impacting on all of us but also the issue of excessive 

profits.  Ottawa's increasing unwillingness to deal with these 

taxation issues has led to the increased off-loading of federal 

responsibility for cost sharing, health, education, and social 

expenditures. 

 

People in Regina Lake Centre are demanding justice for the 

Tory destruction of our assets and financial well-being.  It's 

with very deep resentment that they recognize that never in the 

history of Saskatchewan have so many had to pay so much for 

the benefit of so few.  People are angry at the members 

opposite, and they have a right to be angry and to demand that 

the Tory government that joined forces with Brian Mulroney to 

attack farmers, small-business people, unions, and all of the 

citizens in Saskatchewan in implementing a Tory agenda that 

has benefitted primarily transnational corporations and the very 

wealthy . . .  

 

In closing I'd like to return, Mr. Speaker, to the theme of the 

throne-speech, a mandate for change.  At the end of a decade of 

suffering I was pleased to see many important new directions 

for Saskatchewan in the '90s. 

 

For me some of the highlights of the throne speech included: 

job creation; improved protection of our environment; 

innovation and research in energy and co-generation; increased 

attention to poverty and child hunger, and a much needed 

review of our health system to change to a wellness model; 

attention to an integrated system of lifelong learning and 

distance education to reduce isolation and inequalities in access 

to education; enhanced human rights legislation; significant 

initiatives involving aboriginal people in the province, and 

particularly in the North; as well as important and long-overdue 

changes to legislation to protect and enhance the quality of life 

for working people in the province. 

 

I've not mentioned everything, to prevent repeating the throne 

speech in its entirety, but I wish to conclude on the topic of 

accountable government, co-operation, and community. 

 

After six months I'm getting to know all the MLAs in the 

government caucus quite well, and I assure you that we're all 

dedicated to serving Saskatchewan in the best way we can.  

What has become increasingly clear is the need to restore 

balance to our thinking.  Our many interests need to be united 

and we need to start working together in a real sense to give 

concrete reality to our words and our intentions.  This will not 

be easy. 

 

We need to look honestly at each other's needs and recognize 

that we have areas of great desperation in this province, 

including the majority of the people who live in the North and 

those living in rural and urban Saskatchewan at and below the 

poverty line.  We need to ask those who can afford it to pay 

their way and we need to find ways for everyone, whether 

they're employed or unemployed, to participate in the 

rebuilding of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2145) 

I think the worst fate that can fall to anyone is to be left on the 

sidelines.  And as the province turns the corner to compassion 

and caring, it will be essential to work in a united way to 

re-establish priorities in Saskatchewan.  The damage of the 

decade of suffering went very deep and we'll need to 

demonstrate patience with each other as we start to put the 

pieces back together.  We will have debates, and perhaps they 

will be heated debates.  But these are necessary because for 10 

years this province was not able to talk openly.  And there's a 

lot of discussion that still needs to take place.  The Minister of 

Social Services has removed the gag clause from 

non-government social agencies, and the gag clause has been 

removed from the province, the unwritten gag clause that 

everyone experienced. 

 

Let's use this opportunity to get together, talk with each other, 

with our MLAs and with our government, and let's get this 

show on the road.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to enter into this throne speech debate, the second 

throne speech presented by this new government and the new 

Premier.  But essentially, Mr. Speaker, as you and other 

members and the people of Saskatchewan know, this 

essentially is the first throne speech to be presented by this 

government -- the speech that sets out the agenda that this 

government will follow for the next four years in restoring this 

province, rebuilding this province to the province we once 

knew, Mr. Speaker.  That's the intention of this government, 

and that will be the goal for the next four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I remind you as I would remind 

my own constituents in Moose Jaw Wakamow, as I remind all 

members and indeed all the citizens of our province, three 

times in our history as a province Saskatchewan people have 

turned to New Democrats and CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) to govern this province.  Three 

times the people of Saskatchewan have turned to this 

movement to bring this province out of a desperate mess.  In 

1944 the people of Saskatchewan turned to Tommy Douglas; in 

1971 the people of this province turned to Allan Blakeney; in 

1991 the people of this province turned to the current member 

from Riversdale, the current Premier.  Three times . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Three times the people of Saskatchewan have 

turned to CCF or NDP governments to bring this province out 

of a mess and, Mr. Speaker, twice we have done it and we'll do 

it again.  We'll do it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be an elected 

member of this government and to be sitting on this side of the 

House as Her Honour read the Speech from the Throne.  I 

would issue and offer my congratulations to Her Honour in her 

reading of this speech.  I would offer my own personal 

congratulations to the mover and the 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1992 

seconder of the speech for their contribution to the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be on this side of the House and 

part of a government that is willing to undertake the task which 

lies before us, not just as government, but which lies before us 

as the people of this province. 

 

In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor 

outlined this direction for our government.  It begins with a 

mandate for change, Mr. Speaker.  If ever this province 

required change, it is today.  Mr. Speaker, look at the situation.  

Mr. Speaker, look at the situation these people, this former 

government put the province in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remind you and I remind the people of my own 

constituency, in 1982 when these people first came to power, if 

at that time you picked up a copy of the financial statement of 

the province, of the budget of the province at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, you would not find in that financial statement any line 

which indicated interest on the public debt.  You wouldn't find 

it, Mr. Speaker.  What you would find was a budgetary surplus 

of $139 million cash -- money in the bank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, after a decade of the 

mismanagement of the party opposite, if you pick up last year's 

budget -- the budget we recall the premier and his minister of 

Finance introduced but didn't have the courage to pass -- if you 

pick up that budget, you will find in that document an interest 

payment in excess of $500 million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, given the massive deficit they ran up in the 

last fiscal year, it's my prediction that the interest payment in 

the current budget will be well over $600 million and perhaps 

approaching $700 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, figure that out in terms of the people of our 

province.  If we have about a million people in our province, 

that means that for every person in our province in the coming 

fiscal year, each person in our province -- each man, women, 

and child in our province -- will be responsible to pay $700 just 

on interest payments. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Two bucks a day each. 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Two dollars a day each per person in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  What for?  To feather the nest of 

Chase Manhattan Bank and the bond dealers and bankers in 

New York City. 

 

Now that's if, that's if, Mr. Speaker, every person in the 

province is paying taxes.  But, Mr. Speaker, as you know and 

as members know, the numbers of taxpayers in our province is 

something in the neighbourhood of 380,000 to 400,000 -- a 

third. 

 

So that means that each taxpayer is required to produce $2,100 

a year just for interest on the debt these people ran up in 10 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the record that this government has left 

behind.  And, Mr. Speaker, if the new government of 

today does not begin to deal with this fiscal crisis left behind, 

there is no future for our province or for our children.  Mr. 

Speaker, if we don't begin to deal with this crisis today there is 

no future for our province.  Mr. Speaker, that's why this throne 

speech delivered by Her Honour indicates as first priority of 

our government that we will put this financial house in order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne 

we have committed this government, as we did in the campaign 

and now as we have done in this Speech from the Throne, to 

that which the people of Saskatchewan are desirous of, and that 

is an open, honest, and accountable government -- an open, 

honest, and accountable government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how well I remember earlier last year, in the 

spring of last year, when a large number of Saskatchewan 

residents gathered on the steps of this legislature to protest the 

actions of their government.  And the member from Morse says 

he can't forget it either.  Well little wonder because he and his 

colleagues that night -- and I will long remember this -- that 

night locked the doors of this building, locked the doors of this 

building and would not let the people of Saskatchewan in this 

building; locked the doors of these galleries, would not let the 

people of Saskatchewan into the people's own legislature. And 

I say shame on that government, and little wonder they were 

defeated. 

 

I contrast that, Mr. Speaker, I contrast that with the day of the 

throne speech when a number of Saskatchewan people came to 

their legislature to protest.  Mr. Speaker, were they locked out 

of this building?  Mr. Speaker, were they locked out of this 

Chamber?  Mr. Speaker, you have today, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have today, an open government willing . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, an open government willing to 

meet the people of this province and more than ready to talk to 

them at any time and at any place, Mr. Speaker.  We're talking 

about an accountable government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this past week, as you well know, we received 

in this House the copy of the Provincial Auditor's report.  Mr. 

Speaker, you'll remember a time when the auditor's report was 

a thin document.  You'll remember those days in the 1970s, in 

the 1960s, in the 1950s, when the Provincial Auditor's report 

was a thin document. 

 

Now what do we have delivered . . . Does anyone have a copy?  

Mr. Speaker, what do we have delivered to us in the House this 

week?  An encyclopedia.  Look at the width of this thing, 

reviewing the last year of their management of the province.  

Page after page, chapter after chapter, of scandal, waste, and 

mismanagement -- an encyclopedia, Mr. Speaker.  Now again I 

ask you to contrast the difference.  I recall in this House, sitting 

on that bench across -- now occupied, I think, by the member 

from Wilkie -- I recall . . . I recall when the Provincial Auditor 

made his report to this House and the 



April 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

government of the day, did they receive that report and commit 

to the people of this province they would act on it?  Now what 

did they do?  They attacked the Provincial Auditor, that's what 

they did.  If we don't like the message, kill the messenger.  

Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the actions of this government. 

 

I point to this very day's copy of the Leader-Post, the front 

page.  This document, this auditor's report, exposes the scandal 

and the corruption that was conducted in the Crown 

corporation, the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, under 

the stewardship of that government, the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, our minister responsible, has 

said we will inquire on what the auditor has presented to the 

people of Saskatchewan and we will find out who is 

responsible for this corruption and it will never happen again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Speaker, to be confident and sure 

that the Provincial Auditor will always have opportunity to do 

his work independent of political interference, independent of 

the interference of the politics of the day, no matter who sits in 

government benches, we will be strengthening in this session 

The Provincial Auditor Act.  And we will be strengthening The 

Financial Administration Act of this province.  And because 

the people of Saskatchewan rightly, Mr. Speaker, rightly 

demand it, this government is prepared in this session to renew 

The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interest 

Act, Mr. Speaker, and we are proposing a select special 

committee of democratic reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we have one goal, one goal that perhaps 

overrides all goals in this legislature, it is to restore public trust 

in members of the legislature, in the legislature itself and in our 

political process because, Mr. Speaker, if there's anything 

surely that we all must treasure, it is the precious democratic 

freedom that allows us to stand and speak in this House. 

 

And if we do not defend the tradition of democracy, if we do 

not defend the offices which we are honoured to hold, if we, 

sir, do not restore trust and confidence in our democratic 

system, then we've lost everything.  Then we've lost 

everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seeing that it's now near 10 o'clock, I would beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


