




















































Hansard: August 25, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3003 

 August 25, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

couple of petitions here to present. 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That Saskatchewan Producers are undergoing extremely 

trying financial times due to drought, grain prices and 

international trade wars and that they are being pressed 

further financially by the NDP government's decision to 

eliminate the Farm Fuel Rebate program and its coloured fuel 

policy; and, that to implement the government's fuel policy 

will cost Co-ops and small independent fuel service stations 

thousands of dollars, leading to the loss of jobs and 

businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I would like to present these petitions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well some 

petitions that relate to the same matter about the fuel concerns 

and the costs associated with it, and I would like to present 

these to the Assembly today.  They come from the east side of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well petitions 

with respect to the farm fuel rebate program.  These petitions 

come from the Eston, Tyner, Lacadena, Kindersley, Smiley, 

Kerrobert, Luseland area, Mr. Speaker.  I'll present those now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions on the gas rebate.  I would like therefore read the 

prayer, and I'll leave out the preamble. 

 

  Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the 

Farm Fuel Rebate program and that they cancel the 

coloured fuel program. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

This is from up in my area, Mr. Speaker -- Dodsland, Plenty, 

Kerrobert, and many others.  And at this time I would like to 

lay this on the Table.  Thank you very much. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions today in the same vein, and we'll just read the prayer 

portion of the petition. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from the communities 

of Dodsland, Plenty, Kelfield -- mostly it looks like, Mr. 

Speaker, people from the community of Dodsland today. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to 

the rest of the Assembly a constituent of mine and good friend, 

Dale Stephens, who is up in the Speaker's gallery today. 

 

Dale is the manager of the credit union in Hazlet and is in town 

taking care of credit union business.  We'd like to welcome him 

and his family -- his wife Karen will be with him in a little 

while and we hope that they will enjoy their stay in the city.  

Dale is also on town council down at Hazlet and is known to be 

at part-time, the best dressed garbage man in Hazlet, but only 

in relief when other people aren't around.  But a very public 

and community spirited individual.  And please help me to 

welcome him to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to members of the House 

three guests of mine that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's my wife Carol who's accompanied today with 

some of our friends and neighbours from our home community, 

Paul and Anne Semeschuk. 

 

Paul is down here in Regina today for a medical appointment, 

and Paul has quite a long history of serving his community.  

Paul has served 10 years as councillor for the R.M. (rural 

municipality) of Clayton, and now on his twelfth year as reeve 

for the R.M. of Clayton.  And during his 22 years in local 

government, he served a number of different boards. 

 

And I think a commitment as Paul has made to his community 

is quite an achievement, Mr. Speaker, and I'm going to ask all 

the members in the House to offer him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I know all members will want to join with me in welcoming in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a number of representatives of the 

construction trade unions who are here to watch the 

proceedings, but probably also as well 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

to hear first reading of the construction and labour relations 

Act.  I know all members want to join me in welcoming them 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, it's not just the 

crops that died last night.  People's hopes died as well in rural 

Saskatchewan, and they are more discouraged, more desperate 

now that spring and summer have come and gone and the 

reality of your decisions have sunken in. 

 

Mr. Minister, your announcement that you will be striking yet 

another committee to look at changes to GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) before the next crop year, is little 

consolation to farmers whose crops have been devastated.  Mr. 

Minister, what use is your promise to revise GRIP yet again to 

farmers who have very little or no crop to sell? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the income crisis in the 

farms of Saskatchewan is well known.  That income crisis is 

the result of years of short crops and trade wars and inadequate 

support.  Farmers have at this point continued to suffer the 

difficulties of these times without adequate support.  The issue 

of the new program has not even come to pass yet.  Farmers 

can't pay their bills now.  I speak to them every day.  And 

they're having difficulty paying their bills now because the 

programs that are in place are inadequate. 

 

That's why the review committee has been put in place.  The 

review committee is going to say GRIP is a failure.  GRIP, old 

GRIP, new GRIP -- it was based on a false premise; it was 

based on inadequate support.  And farmers need to identify 

what kind of a support program really meets their needs and 

then we need to sell it to the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's 

ironic that the day that you finally get changes to GRIP that 

you so eagerly wanted is the very same day that thousands of 

farm families saw their dreams for this season put on ice.  And 

I've spoken to people who designed your GRIP.  They have 

admitted to me that '92 GRIP will not help farmers in crop 

failure.  And that's what we're facing and that's what you 

should have anticipated.  That's your job.  That's what's 

supposed to be within your control.  That's what they had to 

end up taking to the bank and getting nothing for it. 

 

Now you've admitted your mistake in FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program).  You've admitted your mistake as far as 

blacktop being put to gravel and now back to blacktop again.  

Your government's admitted its mistake with Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Put her question. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, will you now admit to the 

people of our province that you are the one who made a 

serious, serious mistake with GRIP '92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the contentions of 

the members opposite with respect to adjustments to programs 

need to be clarified.  Saskatchewan is in no better budgetary 

position to fund livestock programs, to fund pension plans, to 

fund highway systems today than the day we brought down our 

budget. 

 

What we've done is shifted resources internally in order to try 

to meet the immediate concerns in order that we can do some 

better long-term planning, because it's well known that with the 

timing of the election and the first budget, that the schedule 

was tight; that we can further consult in order to create the kind 

of balance that people want in their program. 

 

But there is no more money.  The member opposite knows that.  

The member opposite, if she were to be honest about it, would 

recognize the difficulty with respect to the budgeting in the 

province. 

 

Now with respect to the program, the program support under 

old GRIP was decreasing this year.  The program support under 

the new program, designed according to the wishes of the farm 

groups that participated in the review and in response to the 

materials they heard, provides support at 80 per cent of the 

long-term individual yield.  That's the lowest level of support a 

farmer can get, at 80 per cent of their long-term individual 

production.  Now in any normal environment . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

know that all of the ministers have gone in the back room and 

come up with the statement that all the monies have just merely 

been juggled in a different way and we've got this kind of 

bottom line.  People know that the problems of Saskatchewan 

in terms of economy are pretty bad.  But you are the people 

who have all the resources at your end in terms of expertise.  

You should have been able to anticipate the problems that 

would have happened with the cancellation of FeedGAP, not 

wait until after the fact.  And similarly you should have been 

able to do so with GRIP. 

 

Now you tell us what it is that you're going to do for the people 

who call me -- and the difference between '91 and '92 GRIP is 

whether they have no income or some little income or whether 

they can put food on their table.  And I've shown the Minister 

of Social Services some examples of this.  I want you to 

provide an answer today. And if you can't provide it, then 

there's the wrong Minister of Agriculture in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone has shown examples of Social Services' 

cases for farmers to the Minister of Social Services, it's because 

they have a present income 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

shortfall, a present income shortfall that results from program 

design that is by definition flawed.  Seven thousand farmers 

came out in Regina; 4,000 farmers came out in Weyburn; 4,000 

farmers came out in Rosetown to say that the program design 

was inadequate.  Those are the income difficulties that farmers 

are living with. 

 

And within that context, within a context of an inadequate 

program that is too expensive and provides too little support, 

the Saskatchewan group of representatives on the committee 

designed a program that corrected some major flaws in the old 

program.  The contention that that delivers no support is 

absolutely false.  The support under the new program provides 

the difference for the farmers' long-term individual yields 

between the market price and a target price that's $4.07 for 

wheat.  That's one piece of given support. 

 

The other piece of given support is up to the market price.  The 

farmers have protection against crop loss up to 80 per cent.  I 

want to say that until 19 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  Nearly 4,000 farmers, rural 

residents, and city folk gathered yesterday to voice their utter 

disgust and mistrust of your NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government opposite.  They yelled at the Minister of 

Agriculture, calling him a dictator for the way he went about 

designing changes to the GRIP program. 

 

The Agriculture minister has maintained from the outset that 

his process was democratic and involved consultation through 

his advisory committee.  That was his only defence.  Today, 

Mr. Minister, even that excuse is crumbling.  Your fraud has 

been revealed. 

 

My question to the Minister of Agriculture is this:  is it not true 

that you've manipulated and coerced your own advisory 

committee into developing a GRIP program which suited you 

and your Premier's warped political agenda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, a radio report this 

morning said that members of your GRIP advisory committee 

are saying that you and your department manipulated their 

proceedings from the very outset.  They accused your 

government of putting too much pressure on them, and dictated 

and directed their work to your own purpose. 

 

Mr. Minister, this kind of fraud is what we suspected all along.  

Why don't you come clean for us this afternoon and admit . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd just like to caution the 

member.  Beauchesne's again makes it very clear on using the 

word fraud in the Legislative Assembly.  And so I just caution 

the member from using language which does not help to keep 

order in the House. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Why don't you come clean with us this 

afternoon and admit that you and your Premier's fingerprints 

are all over this GRIP legislation and that you are the one that 

has provided the disaster for the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to be aware that the GRIP process, the GRIP review process 

followed . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll just keep interrupting until the 

members have some respect in here when the minister gets up 

or when the questioner asks a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, while members opposite play 

political games with statements that have no truth in them, 

farmers in Saskatchewan continue to suffer income shortfalls; 

income shortfalls that are the result of the poorly designed set 

of programs by the members opposite that are the result of the 

federal government with whom they work, missing their 

opportunity to pay farmers what they deserved over the years 

of 1990 and 1991.  By anyone's estimate, the measure of 

support for Saskatchewan Agriculture is $900 million short for 

1990 and 1991. 

 

Do you blame farmers for being angry?  Do you blame farmers 

for hurting?  That's a very difficult dilemma into which to place 

a review committee. 

 

Now the members opposite can stand there and make 

contentions about a review committee that they put into place 

with officials who have served this department well, by your 

statements here in the House, and who continue to serve the 

department well and who can make statements, Mr. Speaker, 

with . . . where the members opposite make statements that 

have absolutely no truth, that where the committee worked 

together and presented to us a report, according to a legislation 

the members opposite created, if the members opposite have no 

better to say . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you are denying the very fact -- 

and I'll give you a quote that I heard on the radio today that I 

heard from Mr. Gil Pedersen:  Some of the bureaucrats in the 

department, I always had a feeling that they had their own 

agendas that they were marching to.  They figured out what 

they figured should be good for farmers and they are supplying 

material and in some cases doing some background lobbying to 

the members of the committee to get the committee to come up 

with the conclusions that they felt were the best. 

 

That's a direct quote from Gil Pedersen.  This is a stinging 

indictment of political manipulation, Mr. Minister, and 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

an exploitation for your own selfish agenda.  Given this 

direction from the member of your own advisory committee, 

will you admit that this entire GRIP process has been a political 

misrepresentation by you from the very beginning? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer again is no.  And 

I would say to the member opposite that the member whom he 

was quoting was appointed by me.  He was one of the new 

people to the committee, representing an organization that the 

members opposite repeatedly refused to put on such 

committees.  He was a member who is free to speak the truth as 

he wants to speak it now.  He is a member who wrote and 

signed a minority report attached to the main report.  And the 

contention of the minority report, like the majority report, 

suggests splitting crop insurance and revenue insurance as two 

separate programs. 

 

This farmer is free to speak on his own and has spoken on his 

own and I tell you, submitted a minority report with one other 

member of the committee that said the program should be split.  

It is that contention that you're arguing about in the program.  

It's the 80 per cent crop insurance coverage the members 

opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the report this afternoon at noon on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, other committee 

members said that there were no public hearings as they 

suggested.  They claim that pressure from your department 

compelled them to forego any meaningful, grass roots input.  

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to call the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway to order please. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the advisory committee process 

that you started was a fraud -- a sham.  Sorry, Mr. Speaker.  

How can you use this kind of consultation as defence for your 

own bungling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I take responsibility for the 

process of the GRIP review from the day that we took office in 

fall last year.  I would hope the members opposite would take 

responsibility for the design of the program which was so badly 

flawed that it continues to trouble farmers and continues to 

leave them an inadequate income situation. 

 

The fact is that the members opposite wrote the legislation.  

The members opposite called the election.  The members 

opposite established the time frame within which the report had 

to be due -- February 15.  The committee when it began its 

work had that deadline to work against and none other. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Perhaps I should give you another quote.  

Nettie Wiebe said this morning on the radio that they had 

personnel at the committee who periodically backed up various 

suggestions with data and they certainly were active 

proponents of certain program re-designs and very active 

critics of other re-designs. 

 

Mr. Minister, you got caught with your hand in the cookie jar.  

These admissions from your advisory committee members tell 

us of routine manipulation and direct intervention from your 

government in a process you have claimed to be independent 

and unfettered.  This is simply unacceptable. 

 

Why didn't you tell the farmers at the rally there yesterday that 

that's what you had done?  Why didn't you tell them that?  We 

have told you over and over again and you wouldn't tell those 

farmers there yesterday that you had put your hand in the 

cookie jar.  Why didn't you tell them that there yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Because -- if the member opposite has any 

respect for the truth -- because it's not true.  Nettie Wiebe is the 

other member . . . Nettie Wiebe is the other member who 

participated in the minority report.  Nettie Wiebe may disagree 

with the officials.  I want to say that the members opposite 

have frequently complimented the officials of the department -- 

the same officials that were there in their administration -- who 

have a responsibility to provide the professional support for the 

committee, who did it in a professional fashion without 

direction.  If the member opposite wants to make other 

contentions on that, he is free to do that.  But he does challenge 

the professionalism of departmental staff when he suggests 

that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, we're not challenging your 

department.  We're not challenging the committee.  We're 

challenging you for the statements you made in this House.  

Your advisory committee said they really didn't know what 

they were doing.  Gil Pedersen said, we're spending money and 

not knowing whether it's hitting the bull's eye, whether it's 

hitting half-way out on the target, or not even coming in the 

same direction as the target. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, you heard yesterday in spades that your 

bungling policies are not near where adequate.  You won't 

listen to this side of the House.  You won't listen to farm 

families.  You won't listen to your own advisory committee.  

But you sure jump when the Premier said, this is the way it's 

going to be done.  And then you say, we'll get around it 

somehow. 
 

Mr. Minister, you're a disgrace to the industry, no friend of the 

farm families.  Now do the honourable thing.  Submit your 

resignation, sir, and then treat the farmers to all a treat in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite plays 

his political games in a fashion that is absolutely 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

despicable, with respect to the people who are on the 

committee and with respect to the people who are professionals 

in the department. 

 

I will take my political heat.  I'll answer to what we've done as 

a department.  The member opposite ought to be aware that as 

a government and as ministers, we would love to be able to say 

we have $20 million or we have $50 million.  But I ask the 

member opposite, in the aftermath of the destruction they've 

wrought on this province, from where will we find the money 

that says here is $50 million or here is $20 million?  Do the 

members opposite believe that the Saskatchewan farmers who 

have expressed their concern and their anger about their 

income situation have an opportunity to put money forward for 

that? 

 

Do the members opposite believe the province that is 

bankrupted by their own actions should somehow find the 

money from nowhere?  Or should it be the people of Canada, 

who are not hurt by the prices in Saskatchewan, who do benefit 

from our contribution to international trade, that make these 

payments to farmers and that help farmers out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, farmers 

need help.  They pointed that out to you yesterday.  You're not 

giving it to them.  Somebody has to.  There are severe drought 

problems in the north-east.  Yesterday we had frost all the way 

across the West.  We've had drought in the north-west and 

snow damage.  Farm families are hurting.  They told you that 

yesterday but you didn't listen.  You didn't listen. 

 

Can you tell this Assembly what effect your decision to cut 

crop insurance coverage from 100 per cent coverage of their 

average yield to 80 per cent is going to cost farm families today 

in the province of Saskatchewan?  Can you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

continue to play politics when farmers are hurting out there.  

Farmers are hurting now.  You tell me what the basis of their 

present hurt is.  Tell me, members opposite, what is the basis of 

their present hurt? 

 

They haven't begun to see the benefits or otherwise of the '92 

GRIP that you've talked so much about.  They are living now 

on the outcome of the farm support programs that were in place 

last year.  There has been no payment yet for '92 GRIP.  The 

first payment will be in November.  Farmers are broke now.  

Tell me what the root of that income shortfall is. 

 

And you sit there self-righteously and suggest that somehow 

farmers are hurting for some other reason.  Not only have you 

created the dilemma that's caused farmers to be broke across 

the province, when we've suggested that the federal 

government has a responsibility here, a responsibility that the 

members opposite participated in in negotiating presumably, 

then the members opposite said, say, no.  No to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers -- the four per cent of Canadian 

taxpayers that provide 50 per 

cent of the Canadian grain trade, Canadian export grain trade.  

They should pay. 

 

Well I ask the members opposite whether that's fair, whether it 

should be the Saskatchewan people or it should be the people 

across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, yesterday you 

were very busy.  While you were occupied with defending your 

destruction of rural Saskatchewan to 4,000 farmers, members 

of your caucus were lining up for the Agriculture minister's 

seat which you will soon be vacating. 

 

While you, on CBC radio today, while you were defending 

cutting crop insurance from 100 per cent to 80, your 

back-benchers were guaranteeing farmers that the changes will 

be brought back up to 100 per cent.  And that was on CBC 

radio today. 

 

Can you confirm that this is a policy change that you are 

pursuing, or is it a cabinet change that your back-benchers are 

pursuing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite act as 

though they've been living in a vacuum, and maybe they have 

been.  I don't know. 

 

The fact is they ought to be aware that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, at the Farm Progress Show, proposed a disaster 

relief program for Saskatchewan on the basis that there was 

drought in Saskatchewan and on the basis that there was the 

threat of frost because of late crop, proposed this to the federal 

government, to say that the federal government, who was 

prepared to spend another $150 million in Saskatchewan for a 

program so seriously flawed that the committee had to suggest 

major changes, but somehow they wouldn't spend it in another 

circumstance. 

 

Well we put forward the proposal that the federal government 

ought to be able to support that, to pay that $150 million for 

farmers when we had made changes to the program, as easily 

as they would have before. 

 

Now I ask the members opposite whether that was an act in the 

interest of farmers or whether that was not.  I ask the members 

opposite whether they were aware of that or whether they were 

not.  And I ask the members opposite whether they want to 

continue to play politics or whether they want to help farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, Agriweek has 

a statement here and I want to read it: 

 

 No provincial regime in memory has pulled as many 

farm-policy blunders in as short a time.  What the NDP failed 

to grasp about GRIP is that many farmers, probably the 

majority, see it as a source of additional crop income, not 

mere insurance.  Cutting such support could be tough and 

unpopular even if it were done right. 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Mr. Minister, can you tell us on the GRIP, how much the loss 

was on the 20 per cent that the farmers across the North now 

and across the West are going to lose because of frost, drought, 

and snow?  Can you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say 

that they are concerned about farmers, and I would like to 

believe they were.  The federal government says they are 

concerned about farmers, and I would like to believe they were.  

And there is no doubt that the 55 members here are concerned 

about farmers. 

 

The question that surely comes to mind is, if farmers are 

hurting to the extent that they are, and if farmers are suffering 

still an income shortfall of $900 million from several years ago, 

who should make that payment?  Do you think that the farmers 

themselves and the other taxpayers of the province who are 

virtually all bankrupt as a result of the actions of the members 

opposite, do you think that they should pay for 50 per cent of 

the cost of an international trade war?  Do the members 

opposite really believe that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, you have no 

idea at all of the volume of hurt that you're dealing to those 

farmers on the west side and the north of this province.  In fact 

I want to point out in a paper that I got today called, Canadian 

Political Rating Service, said that if the government . . . And I 

quote: If the government is to regain ground in the agriculture 

sector, Wiens should go.  And it is doubtful that moving him 

into another portfolio would be acceptable since the Premier 

knows literally nothing about agriculture and rural issues, he is 

probably unaware of the damage the minister has inflicted on 

his government. 

 

They gave you an F minus rating, a failure, but they don't have 

very much more to say about the rest of the front benchers 

either. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'd like to call the member from 

Regina Rosemont to order please.  Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, my question 

is this.  You can still cause your cabinet colleagues to reject 

this Bill by not proclaiming this Act.  You can do that, Mr. 

Minister.  The question is:  have you the courage and have you 

the intestinal fortitude to tell those members that you're going 

to do irreparable damage to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan to put food on their tables?  Are you going to do 

that to convince them that it's necessary that they reject that 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, does the member opposite 

have the honesty to admit that since the day of the 

implementation of this program last spring that any contention 

by him and his friends that somehow a '91 program could be 

implemented is absolute folly?  Is the member opposite honest 

enough to admit that?  Their games that are played by the 

members opposite are ludicrous to say the least. 

Does the member opposite have the honesty, does the member 

opposite have the honesty to identify who the organization is 

that wrote these things the member is quoting?  Does the 

member opposite have the integrity to recognize what the 

farmers in Melfort yesterday were really saying? 

 

And let me read the presentation.  Let me read what the 

members in Melfort were asking . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 93 -- An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move first reading of a Bill 

respecting Labour Relations in the Construction Industry. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 93 -- An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to say a few words in 

explanation for the Bill which is currently before the House, 

Mr. Speaker.  Not part of my prepared remarks, but something 

I want to add to these comments, is that I suppose, Mr. 

Speaker, this represents a model of how government should 

operate. 

 

Both the construction industry and the trade unions had their 

own idea of how this ought to be structured.  In the end result 

they were able to agree upon this piece of legislation which 

each would admit represents a significant improvement for 

them, although both would claim that it's not all they wanted. 

 

So in some ways I think, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of 

legislation represents a model of how government should 

operate in a democratic society. 

 

This Act is a product of extensive consultations which began 

almost eight months ago to review the state of labour relations 

in the provincial construction industry.  There was a committee 

set up, Mr. Speaker, composed of representatives from the 

building trade unions and unionized contractors.  The 

committee reported to the Minister of Labour in May 1992 

with recommendations for legislation. 

 

While the Act includes many of the committee's 

recommendations, many other provisions have resulted from 

consultations this summer with the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Council, the 

Saskatchewan Provincial Building & Construction Trades 

Council, the Canadian Federation 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

of Independent Business, and representatives from other 

organizations affecting the committee's recommendations. 

 

The provisions in this Bill reflect a workable compromise for 

both the construction unions and employers.  The Act will 

ensure that fairness, stability, and a measure of prosperity will 

be restored to the construction industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The construction labour relations legislation was first passed in 

1979 by the then Blakeney government.  It furnished a 

framework for labour relations in the provincial construction 

industry which operated successfully until its repeal by the 

Conservative government in 1983.  That repeal spelled the end 

of meaningful collective bargaining in the construction industry 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

I strongly believe that the construction industry employer and 

employee alike are best served through an orderly system of 

collective market bargaining.  This ensures that the interests are 

all taken into account in a balanced and co-operative manner.  

Furthermore, members of the government benches are 

convinced that orderly collective bargaining, when viewed in 

all its aspects, is in the best interests of the people of this 

province. 

 

The Act preserves the basic principles contained in the 1979 

construction labour relations Act with some important changes 

and additions.  The Act creates a framework for province-wide 

collective bargaining by which an employer's organization and 

a trade union negotiate a collective agreement applicable to all 

unionized employers and employees in a trade.  It establishes a 

mandatory conciliation process for collective bargaining before 

a strike or lock-out can occur.  It adopts The Trade Union Act 

provisions which require 48 hours notice of a strike or lock-out. 

 

It precludes unionized contractors from operating through a 

non-union, spin-off company to avoid certification orders or to 

avoid adhering to the terms of a collective bargaining 

agreement.  It applies to spin-off companies which commence 

activities after coming into force of this Act.  Employees of 

companies currently operating on a non-union basis will not be 

affected; those employees continue, however, to have the right 

to unionize if they so choose. 

 

It accommodates the practice of reverse spin-off by allowing 

Labour Relations Board, in exercising its discretion to make a 

declaration under the anti-spin-off provisions, to recognize the 

industry practice by which non-union contractors voluntarily 

recognize the union and do work on a unionized basis through 

a subsidiary. 

 

It creates a mechanism for the settlement of jurisdictional 

disputes between the trade unions by enabling regulations to 

create a jurisdictional assignment plan to determine which 

trade is to perform the various parts of the work on a job site, 

creates a contract administration fee payable to employers and 

employees, to representative employers' organizations and 

trade unions, to offset administrative costs to promote 

unionized construction in the province, creates 

enforcement mechanisms parallel to those in The Trade Union 

Act by empowering Labour Relations Board to determine if 

there has been a violation of the Act and to issue a compliance 

order that is enforceable as an order of the court, establishes 

transitional rules which will be in effect until province-wide 

agreements are negotiated under a new framework. 

 

The Act demonstrates the government's commitment to sound, 

progressive legislation that will modernize and stabilize labour 

relations in the construction industry.  The Act will establish 

fair rules for construction industry labour relations, which will 

result in just treatment for construction workers, the 

development of a skilled work force, and a stable supply of 

tradespeople in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think members of this Assembly will forgive me 

for mentioning the absence of a member.  The Minister of 

Labour had hoped to be here personally to present the second 

reading.  I'm informed he will be back for Committee of the 

Whole, so the questions which members have will be answered 

by the minister directly. 

 

With those words, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to move a second 

reading of An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Bill that's 

presently going through the second-reading stage is certainly 

new in its introduction to this Assembly.  But it is certainly not 

new to the people who have been watching the progress of the 

drafting of this Bill throughout last winter and in fact even 

prior to that, it began last fall. 

 

We of the opposition are happy that the draft Bill that we 

presented in this Assembly and tabled to this Assembly has 

seen considerable amount more work done on it than was first 

indicated might happen.  We are happy with the role that we 

were able to play as an official opposition in bringing together 

the parties who were concerned with the end result of this Bill.  

The one-sided, hand-picked committee that the government 

originally started with certainly had made recommendations.  

And certainly the government was prepared, it appeared, to 

follow those recommendations. 

 

If that had happened, a major portion of our society would have 

been left out of the negotiations, not only the non-unionized 

contractors, but in fact the workers themselves would have 

been left out of the input that was necessary in order to come 

up with a practical Bill that in fact would assist them with their 

everyday lives and the necessities of the work-place as it 

affects workers. 

 

So we are happy, Mr. Speaker, that this consultation process 

finally did get improved on.  It finally did in fact occur.  The 

meetings started to happen.  And we are of the understanding, 

from the various people that we've talked to, that most of the . . 

. as the minister who read the Bill, most of the problem areas 

have been compromised on.  As he pointed out, neither side 

appears to be totally happy with the result.  And I guess that's 

what compromise is all about.  You try to find some middle 

ground that you can 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

live with even though you're not totally happy and not totally 

convinced that you're getting your complete, whole . . . your 

own way. 

 

But the compromise is the important part, and that appears to 

have been achieved.  And if we find in our questioning through 

committee that we have in fact achieved that middle ground 

and that the folks involved and, in particular, the province of 

Saskatchewan will not be seriously hampered or hard done by 

by this Bill, we will be allowing it to continue and to become 

law without an overwhelming amount of further resistance. 

 

However of course if we find in committee that the government 

has not been totally forthright with us and there are other things 

in there that we don't expect, we certainly then will raise those 

objections and the battle of course will be on and the fur will 

fly. 

 

So we caution the government not to try to pull a fast one here.  

And we want to pass that on into the future because we do 

understand that there will be further legislation in this area 

coming in perhaps the next sitting of this Assembly.  If that 

happens, we caution the government that they must have the 

same type of consultation process that we ended up with this 

last round.  If they go back to their original premise to appoint 

hand-picked committees to try to do a snow job on the workers 

of the province and the rest of the people of this province, they 

will run into the same kind of resistance that they have had this 

past time. 

 

(1445) 

 

With that, we can understand the minister's anxiety on the other 

side to not have the past put forward to him in a warning of 

what he can expect.  But he will just have to be tolerant for 

another minute because we are going to allow this to go to 

committee, but he will have to hear us out for a minute or so.  

It's natural that they will be impatient because they've made 

this promise in the election to bring this legislation through, 

and they of course are now doing that. 

 

We hope though, in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that when this 

final Bill is studied through, that it will in fact do what it was 

originally designed to do and that is to help the workers of the 

province.  And we're not particularly concerned about union 

leaders being satisfied or happy.  We want the workers of this 

province to be satisfied and happy.  And with that, we'll allow 

it to continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 92 -- An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill has a clear-cut 

purpose, putting in place a francophone component for 

Saskatchewan's kindergarten to grade 12 school system.  There 

have been years of delay in the form of court cases, studies, 

agreements in principle, public meetings, and still more studies.  

After all this Bill 92 will finally allow Saskatchewan 

francophones to manage and control their own schools. 

This Bill has its origin in section 23 of the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  Section 23 gives linguistic minorities in any 

province the right to have their children educated in either of 

Canada's official languages.  Section 23 is not a special 

privilege available only to French-speaking Canadians.  It 

protects the rights of both French- and English-speaking 

Canadians, guaranteeing them the right to education in the 

official language of their choice. 

 

It also grants the right to have that education provided in 

publicly funded schools under the control and management of 

the linguistic minority where there is a large enough 

population. 

 

In Saskatchewan section 23 gives francophone parents the right 

to have their children educated in French.  It also confers the 

right to have education provided in francophone schools which 

are under the jurisdiction of a francophone education authority. 

 

These rights have been upheld in the courts.  A 1988 court 

decision in Saskatchewan, commonly known as the Wimmer 

decision, found that our existing legislation violated the 

Constitution of Canada.  This was the case because no 

provision was made, Mr. Speaker, for francophone governance 

of schools as guaranteed by section 23. 

 

Following this decision, a consultation process was set up 

which led to establishment of a task force to work towards 

meeting the requirements of section 23, including drafting of 

the required legislation.  The task force was re-implemented in 

February of this year so that I might have the benefit of their 

advice on how best to proceed.  The end result of this 

consultation process is the Bill before you today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is long overdue.  We have a clear legal 

responsibility and an outstanding constitutional obligation to 

Saskatchewan francophones, which we are meeting today.  

Until this Bill is passed, we are not fulfilling our legal 

obligations under section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  If we fail to act, Mr. Speaker, we are risking 

the loss of considerable federal funding.  These are funds the 

federal government had agreed to provide for the specific 

purpose of implementing francophone control of schools.  It is 

money that would not otherwise be available to Saskatchewan.  

Our government is ready to meet its legal obligations.  The 

additional costs will be covered by federal funding. 

 

I'd like now to deal with some of the key points in the Bill 

itself.  This Bill incorporates the structure for francophone 

governance recommended by the 1989 Gallant report.  This 

consists of a two-tiered approach. 

 

The legislation allows establishment of francophone education 

areas roughly equal to school divisions.  Each area will contain 

a francophone school under the management and control of a 

conseil scolaire, an elected francophone board of education.  

We expect that eventually there will be eight to ten such boards 

in the province. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

I should point out that only a small number of students and 

school boards in Saskatchewan will be affected at all.  Schools 

for francophone students are already in operation under 

existing boards in all of the affected communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we're dealing with here is essentially a 

change in administrative procedure, with modest costs and 

minimal impact on the remainder of the school system.  Along 

with the local boards there will be a provincial co-ordinating 

body known as the conseil général.  This council will be made 

up of representatives from the local boards.  It will review all 

proposals for the establishment of boards and ultimately decide 

if in fact they are warranted. 

 

This council will also arrange specialized services on a shared 

basis.  In addition, it will co-ordinate services for francophones 

in areas where a board has not yet been established or in fact 

establishment is simply not practical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that what we are putting in 

place is enabling legislation.  Under this Bill, implementation 

of francophone governance must come from the ground up.  In 

any given community, francophone parents are free to decide 

whether they are interested in establishing a board. 

 

If there is no interest, the existing arrangements remain in 

place.  Francophone students simply continue to attend their 

public school.  Nothing changes until people at the local level 

clearly indicate their desire for change.  If a sufficient number 

of francophone parents want to establish a board, then this Bill 

defines a clear path to follow. 

 

I want to turn now to the question of funding.  This government 

has said all along, Mr. Speaker, that francophone schools will 

not mean an additional drain on the provincial treasury because 

the start-up costs would be fully funded by the federal 

government.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to confirm today that 

this is in fact the case. 

 

The 1988 federal agreement will provide $15 million over the 

next five years.  This will be used to meet the operating and 

capital costs for francophone schools.  Another $12 million has 

been promised to make the program even more comprehensive.  

We will be pressing the federal government to ensure that they 

live up to this further commitment. 

 

The francophone boards will not have the authority to levy 

taxes.  As a result, adjustments will be made to the foundation 

grant to accommodate their access to federal funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have worked closely with the task force in 

drafting this Bill.  All major educational organizations as well 

as the francophone community were represented on the task 

force.  As in any major undertaking of this kind, compromises 

were made, but they were made in a positive atmosphere. 

 

I think everyone came to the realization that they were in 

the process of building something important.  The end result of 

this process was consensus; a Bill which all of the major 

players can accept because it effectively balances their needs 

and concerns. 

 

I indicated, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my remarks that 

the overriding purpose of this Bill is to make The Education 

Act consistent with the requirements of Canada's Constitution 

and the charter of rights.  Passage of this Bill will mean we are 

meeting the requirement of section 23 of the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  It will mean, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is 

obeying the law of the land. 

 

Bill 92 represents a made-in-Saskatchewan solution to the 

question of minority language rights.  Its corner-stones are 

co-operation and consensus -- the corner-stones upon which so 

much has been built in this province.  We are now working to 

build much more. 

 

I am therefore pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move that Bill No. 92, 

An Act to amend The Education Act, 1992 (No. 2) be now read 

a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 

today to be able to rise to speak on this issue.  It's an important 

issue in Saskatchewan and it's been in play for a good many 

years now.  I believe it's been about 12 years since the issue 

first came to a head, and it's taken this long to finally reach the 

floor of the House. 

 

Negotiations have been ongoing for quite a period of time now, 

but I have to wonder why the minister has chosen this 

particular time to bring it forward.  The reason I'm thinking of 

this particular time, and I have talked to the minister about this, 

is because of the constitutional implications that could be 

bound up in this whole matter. 

 

We think back to the problems that happened in Meech Lake 

with the constitutional issues.  We seem to have a 

constitutional package now in play, Mr. Speaker.  And if this 

becomes a positive vehicle, then it is a benefit to 

Saskatchewan.  But if it becomes a negative vehicle, then it 

could harm the whole constitutional affairs that are taking place 

in this country at the present time.  And we have some 

concerns about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The matter of funding, ever since this came . . . the discussion 

of a third French school board came into play, there has been a 

great amount of fear in the general public about the tax base.  

The minister says that there will be no tax implications, that the 

new French school boards will not have the power to tax. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there's a great fear of the unknown out there in 

the general public concerning this.  Because if there is a tax 

implication there it will impact on the local municipalities and 

the local school divisions.  And so the people out there in the 

local areas that will have to deal with the implementation of a 

third French school board in their area, need to have the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to look at the Bill to get an 

understanding of it, to get a feeling of how it will operate and 

what impacts it will have in their immediate area and what 

impacts it will  



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

have within the French community.  My own constituency 

already has a K to 12 French school. 

 

And so the people in the area, Mr. Speaker, need to have the 

opportunity to have a look at how this Bill will impact on the 

local communities and what impact this new Bill will have 

across the country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad that the minister has brought the Bill 

forward, and that the general public will now have the 

opportunity to have a look at it and to get a feel of it and to try 

and understand all that is involved in this new Bill, this 

amendment to The Education Act which is dealing with the 

establishment of a third French school board. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that we 

adjourn debate on this matter. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

officials who are with him here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me today, the deputy minister, Merran Proctor; the assistant 

deputy minister, Ron Kruzeniski; the assistant deputy minister, 

Janis Rathwell; and the assistant executive director of support 

services, Pat Moore. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

welcome the officials and the minister. 

 

And first of all I have been doing a little bit of checking on the 

package that you've presented, so I've written up a couple of 

questions that I'll first of all just read them to you and let you 

respond.  And then after that we'll get into some of the more 

general things that need to be done in order to educate myself 

about your department. 

 

Mr. Minister, we want to thank you for the forthcoming 

answers you provided in response to our written request.  I've 

only a few follow-up questions, and I expect we will be 

through here quite quickly. 

 

To start with, your department states that the category of time 

off called earned days off and special days off are earned by 

employees working longer hours.  I want this very clear for the 

public.  If this is true, assuming that an employee is expected to 

work 40 hours per week, then in two-week period in which an 

EDO (earned day off) would be earned, an employee would be 

expected to work 80 hours.  Such a two week period would 

total 9 working days, accounting for the EDO. 
 

So you are telling me that your departmental employees are 

working approximately nine hours per day to earn the 

day off.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman and to the member, we're 

having a discussion here trying to remember how these earned 

days off came into existence in the Saskatchewan public 

service.  I can say to to the member that this has been around 

since about 1976.  And what happened back then is that the 

employees who had been working a work-week of I think 36 

point-some hours, thirty six and a half hours a week, worked 

longer hours each day, and over a two-week period had done in 

nine days what they used to do in ten working days, so they 

would get a day off, and that was usually every second Friday. 

 

And that system has remained intact through successive 

governments since about mid-term for the Blakeney 

government, and it continues in effect today.  And in the 

material that you have, that's what that day is all about. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

however you total it up, I've had a great deal of experience with 

public union employees, and I suggest that they are not logging 

the extra hours.  Are these so-called extra hours logged on a 

time sheet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the hours are 

logged on time sheets, and I can say to the member from all of 

my own personal experience as a deputy minister years ago and 

as a minister now, that these employees in this department are 

working longer hours than that.  They are really pulling their 

full fair shares. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

considering the policy of the government is now stated that the 

employees must work extra hours to earn the EDOs and the 

SDOs (scheduled day off), will you agree to ask the Provincial 

Auditor to undertake a review to investigate whether or not this 

policy is in fact being followed, and that the hours paid are in 

fact hours worked according to policy?  My understanding is 

that we are talking somewhere in the neighbourhood of $80 

million in EDOs, so this is not a trivial matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll be glad to pick up on 

the member's suggestion and have this system looked at by 

whatever means is appropriate.  I'm not certain that the means 

is the Auditor General, but . . . or the Provincial Auditor.  But 

whoever it is we certainly have no objection to evaluating the 

program after these many years. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you let us know the results of that 

evaluation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In response to 

question 32, you respond that the only manuals you use in the 

department come from the PSC (Public Service Commission).  

I want you to confirm on the record that there are no internal 

policy procedures or administrative manuals dealing with such 

matters as handling union certifications, workers' complaints, 

occupational health and safety matters, or whatever.  Just 

confirm that any manual we find that sets out policy or 

procedure specific 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

to the Department of Labour is a fraudulent document since 

your department has no such manual.  On the other hand, if 

your department -- like most departments -- does in fact have 

such manuals, would you please provide a copy of each such 

manual to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I suspect from the member's question 

that we interpreted the question too narrowly.  There are of 

course procedural documents, procedural manuals, in some of 

the individual programs and the member has mentioned 

occupational health and that is one of them. 

 

In addition there are manuals in respect of the labour standards 

program, to mention two.  But I can say to the hon. member 

that we will be pleased to provide copies of those manuals to 

him and indeed any other procedural manuals, as he has 

requested, that may exist in the department.  And I apologize to 

the member for obviously construing the question too 

narrowly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'll look forward 

to receiving those manuals and if we don't happen to get them, 

we'll be letting you know. 

 

Mr. Minister, on a different subject, recently the construction 

association, yourself as minister, and the official opposition 

engaged in a consultation process regarding the proposal for a 

new construction labour relations Act.  I think it's appropriate 

to indicate that in the end result and pending final consultation 

on the actual draft Bill, we have arrived at an agreement.  Of 

course that Bill introduced here today is presently under the 

scrutiny of several pairs of eyes, I can assure you.  So we will 

have the result of that very shortly. 

 

In the case of this particular issue, we have two important 

lessons.  The first is how not to consult on labour legislation 

and the second is how compromise can be achieved.  I want to 

reiterate the strong objections of the opposition and the 

industry itself had to the committee that the minister appointed.  

It was a sham that included no representation from the 

non-union sector of the industry and it was mandated without 

legitimate input from all of those who had their livelihoods at 

stake.  That was the wrong way, and I hope the minister will 

take that lesson as one well learned. 

 

After the opposition put forward its resistance in the House and 

the industry and the business community made it clear that it 

would not stand by while their basic rights were attacked, the 

government finally undertook honest consultation, and for that, 

Mr. Minister, we would like to commend you personally 

because I think it was your personal intervention that helped to 

save the day in this instance.  And we do appreciate that. 

 

I want to . . . I guess perhaps I should let you respond to that 

before I go on to the next question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I appreciate that a satisfactory 

result has emerged from the process.  I think the member and I 

could get into quite a debate about whether there was ever 

anything wrong with the consultation process in this case.  But 

I suggest we have that at another time. 

I do want to say that from the beginning, my approach and that 

of my staff, was a bona fide, open, direct approach and nobody 

was trying to slip anything by anybody.  I believe that it is 

correct.  I know it is correct that the first employer 

representative that I met with after assuming this office was 

Jim Chase of the Saskatchewan Construction Association.  And 

at that meeting we discussed the concept of a construction 

industry Act and the process that I hope to put in place to 

review the subject.  And indeed there were discussions with 

Mr. Chase prior to the structuring of the committee. 

 

Now I know that he's been critical of that committee since, and 

I just don't think that the world would be advanced by 

reviewing . . . I don't think the subject would be advanced by 

reviewing the course of these matters in any detail. 

 

I think that we're better off if I skip right to the end, and say to 

the hon. member that I appreciate his remarks, that my view is 

that labour legislation must be the subject of intense 

consultation because, after all when we in this legislature are 

finished with a particular piece of labour legislation, we don't 

have to live with it after that.  It is the working people and the 

employers and the trade unions of this province who have to 

live with the legislation.  And so it is only appropriate that all 

of them be consulted in a very intensive way with respect to the 

contents of any Bill that anyone brings to this House.  And that 

will be the case as long as I'm the minister, and I appreciate 

what the member had to say with respect to this Bill. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think I agree that 

the debate could go quite a while about how the process 

worked, and nothing would be served by that except for you 

and I to get it off our chests, and I think we can do that out in 

the wind.  The important thing is that we have a resolution to 

the situation that seems, on the surface at least, to be workable.  

And we are happy that that is going to be the conclusion. 

 

We of course are going to have some questions about the thing 

in committee yet, and so I'm going to leave that part of the 

discussion for that time.  I for example have some questions for 

you about how these companies are set up and how they will 

work now in the future and that sort of thing, so you can just 

put your thought process into that for that future date. 

 

I want to get to the actual Estimates.  And being new to this 

area myself, I want to just go through it kind of briefly, section 

by section, to kind of educate myself and perhaps the public 

along with me.  I'm suspecting I'm probably not the only one in 

Saskatchewan that doesn't really understand where the money 

in the Labour department is really spent.  And taking that 

presumption, maybe too much of a poetic licence but I'm going 

to take it anyway, and go through it and ask you to explain to 

me things like for example to start with, the administrative 

services.  What does that entail?  And could you briefly explain 

to me and to the people of Saskatchewan where that 

$1,029,300 along with other expenses of $325,000 really goes 

to. 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman and to the member, I'm 

pleased to do that.  This is the central management of the 

department and the support services to the central management 

of the department.  It includes the office of the deputy minister 

and the human resources department, the personnel department 

if you wish, and the financial and management support system 

for the entire department -- the administrative officers of 

various sorts and clerical officers in connection with keeping 

track of the department and how it works and managing its 

money, ensuring that it is within budget and that everything is 

being done in accordance with the department's mandates and 

the limitations imposed by this legislature upon the exercise of 

that mandate.  And it also would include the communications 

area. 

 

But to sum up as I began, this is the core of the department's 

management and its support services for various managerial 

functions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay.  Besides ourselves in Estimates 

checking out where these monies go, who polices the spending 

of that department?  And I guess I'll let you answer that first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It is the responsibility of the deputy 

minister to ensure that the department is behaving in an 

appropriate way within its mandate and is functioning within 

its budget.  And in that connection, there's a wide range of 

decisions made every day, and in larger chunks as the member 

can appreciate as the year develops and as adjustments have to 

be made during the year to ensure that the department is doing 

what the department should be doing. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under the second 

item, no. 2, you have the title Labour Relations.  Could you 

explain that to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is in many respects the high profile 

part of the department.  This is where the conciliation officers 

are housed, whose responsibility it is to enter collective 

bargaining and negotiations when they reach crucial critical 

stages and attempt to help the parties reach a settlement. 

 

It also is the part of the department where the Workers' 

Advocate program is located, which is a program that is offered 

to injured workers who are wanting help in dealing with the 

Workers' Compensation Board. 

 

We have also in this branch a small research and policy unit, 

and their focus mainly is statistical information which is used 

by the parties to collective bargaining, by employers and by 

trade unions in helping them with their negotiations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, you mention the Workers' 

Compensation area as falling under the Workers' Advocate 

section.  I guess if there's one area of labour problems that 

comes to mind more often than any others, it would be 

Worker's Compensation.  People seem to chronically have 

problems with the compensation boards and the amounts of 

dollars that they get. 

 

Do you anticipate doing any reviews of the Workers' 

Compensation structure and how it operates and how its 

insurance process will deal with people?  I've had some 

complaints about this whole area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  There actually has 

been a review going on for some time now which was set up by 

the Hon. Grant Schmidt when he was the minister of Labour, 

and that review has continued under this government.  And as a 

matter of fact we expect a report from that committee within 

the next week.  We received an interim report from them some 

two months ago and that will be followed by their final report. 

 

As the member knows, under The Workers' Compensation Act 

this review happens every four years and happens 

automatically.  I agree with the member.  I agree with the 

member that this is an area where we are having problems.  

And that's nobody's fault, I think, except Saskatchewan led the 

way in moving Workers' Compensation towards an 

income-replacement system.  And there have been some bugs 

in the system. 

 

And I know that they've been on the member's desk as they've 

been on mine from time to time as we encounter the idea of 

deeming, for example.  The deeming provisions are a constant 

source of irritation and I've had many letters from members of 

the opposition in connection with cases where the deeming 

provisions have caused problems for their constituents, as it has 

I think to all members of the House.  And similarly, the 

relationship between previously existing conditions, previous 

disabilities and new injuries, and I know that's a problem too. 

 

So we expect that a lot of these are going to be cleared up when 

the results of this review land in my desk in about a week's 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, on 

the next area in your votes here, it has employment 

opportunities.  And I notice that there is a drop in the amount 

of money that's being allocated globally in this area.  And I 

want you to explain exactly what you have going on there. 

 

But given the fact that we have seen a significant downturn in 

the labour market in this province, vis-a-vis a year ago, I 

believe the figures are about 18,000 less jobs. 

 

The fact that we have significant drops in the area of youth 

employment and also in the agricultural sector, I believe it's 

about 2,000 jobs related.  I'm wondering, given those kind of 

overall numbers, say I believe the figures were July to July 

from '91 to '92, why we would see an area that obviously has a 

lot of pressure on it decreased in your budget allocations here, 

and what you exactly have in mind under this area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the drop in the 

budget allocation for this branch is mainly as a result of an 

adjustment agreement for older workers that was carried 

forward in the last fiscal year, that involved an expenditure of 

something over $230,000.  And that was a program that has 

happened already, and so it is not an item in this budget; that 

program having, as I said, been completed. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

Now in this branch we do a number of things.  The 

immigration policy of the government, for example, the 

negotiation of the immigration agreement which has been 

ongoing for the past several months, is done from this branch. 

 

The branch also has an employment equity unit whose mandate 

it is to encourage the employment of women and aboriginals 

and handicapped people within the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There's a third area where I think you could call that an 

employment policy and it is concerned with labour market 

adjustment programs of which the older worker program at 

Simpson Timber in the last fiscal year is an example, and 

where attempts are made to develop appropriate policy around 

those kind of situations where people have been displaced 

because of technological change or mass lay-offs or indeed any 

kind of lay-offs where retraining may be necessary or some 

kind of program is required in order to help those people who 

have been faced with the disaster of losing their job and 

helping them to resume work, resume an employment career.  

Those are the main branches. 

 

This is not the focus of job creation within the government 

although we do participate in committees that are concerned 

with that.  But those are headed by other departments of 

government and that particular responsibility has not been 

placed on the Department of Labour. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would think, Mr. Minister, with 

projects such as Millar Western, Saskferco, the upgrader at 

Lloydminster, several large construction projects in some of 

our cities, this type of thing, that some of the thrust that would 

go forward with equal opportunity hiring in the area of native 

employment . . . certainly Millar Western I know there was 

periphery hirings there that were based on that fact. 

 

With all of these large-type endeavours from the previous 

administration now all coming to an end at once, that your 

government must be concerned about its ability to hire some of 

the more disadvantaged groups in the province without 

anything to sort of come along and replace those.  And that this 

unit is going to have a difficult indeed job if it's looking at 

being sort of a direction or a direction giver from government 

in this area; that you must be really scratching these days to try 

and find areas where you can go equal opportunity hiring, 

where you can involve native employment because there isn't 

sort of anything building on the horizon. 

 

And I wonder if you could give me some indication of the 

areas, the projects, the possibilities for this unit to use its 

expertise in order to provide employment opportunities for 

people that maybe aren't involved in a trade union or in some 

of the mainstream involvement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm advised, Mr. Chairman, that the 

department has not been the . . . has not had as its function the 

actual going out and working with private 

sector employers in attempting to introduce employment equity 

programs into those work places; rather we have been 

participating within government and in the -- as I mentioned in 

my previous answer -- in respect of job creation policies. 

 

I think we're all concerned in this province with the 

employment situation.  Everyone is concerned with economic 

development and job creation, and it is and remains a very, 

very high priority of our government.  We, as I mentioned to 

the member, have been participating in interdepartmental 

committees along those lines ever since I became the minister, 

and we will continue to do that.  Because as I also told the 

member, this is not the department whose responsibility it is to 

encourage economic development and job creation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't want to belabour 

the fact that there is a large drop in employment in the 

province.  And I know that your department is not charged with 

that; that is the minister responsible for Economic 

Development and Trade, and we'll discuss this very topic with 

him at a later date. 

 

But I know, Mr. Minister, that your department has been 

involved in areas such as the co-op programming, for instance, 

initiatives done through the various SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campuses which 

have formed a relationship with the private sector then, where 

you have people -- single parents, the native community, others 

-- that through working through your various educational 

facilities have been able to touch base with some of the 

employment opportunities.  The campus at Prince Albert has 

been able to successfully do that.  I know the Moose Jaw one 

has done it through instrumentation and that type of thing. 

 

And I would think this is the kind of area that your department 

would be concerned about, that these various groupings of 

people that are having a difficult time finding employment in 

our province, that your department would want to co 

_ordinate with others throughout government that would give 

some initiative to other areas to use some of their dollars in a 

wise way.  And certainly the co-op programming that has been 

done through SIAST has been one of those and has had a 

relationship with your department over the years. 

 

And I would think you would want to sort of tell me whether 

that's going to be ongoing or if you've sort of struck out on 

some new initiative for this particular unit that has been 

involved in the past. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The focus of our employment equity 

people has been internal in the last several months.  By 

internal, I mean internal to government. 

 

As the member will know because of his attachment to the 

Indian and Metis Affairs program, for example, the 

representation of Indian and Metis people in the government is 

a problem.  They're grossly underrepresented.  And we have 

been, in the last several months, taking an inventory of that 

situation and trying to get things moving so that we can begin 

to hire more and more Indian and Metis people within 

government 



3016 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

departments and within the Crown corporations.  And our 

department is taking an active lead in that, and I think that's a 

good piece of work.  I think that's a very desirable program and 

it certainly has my full support. 

 

Externally we will do what we can.  As you will know from the 

numbers, this is not a very large branch and in these budgetary 

times it's not likely to get much larger.  But you can do a lot 

with a small number of people if you've got enough motivation, 

and I think we're on a good track there. 

 

I think you can also appreciate that we really have to have our 

own house in order before we can throw our weight around 

with the private sector and try and move them into employment 

equity programs.  First of all, we should have a solid one 

ourselves. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate that statement about having 

your house in order, Mr. Minister.  But time is a moving on and 

we are just about through another summer, which is our prime 

employment season, and we haven't seen a whole lot on the 

horizon. 

 

I know you have a small unit, that it is limited.  And I guess if 

we're going to . . . if your direction is to sort of look after 

government with some of the more disadvantaged groups, our 

aboriginal community and others, that we're still going to want 

to make sure that the individuals hired have the qualifications.  

I don't expect the taxpayers in this province want us to go out 

and hire single moms or aboriginals or anyone else just because 

. . . or someone of a different ethnic background simply 

because they are thus.  That the qualifications, the educational 

background will be there to provide the taxpayer with their 

ultimate kick. 

 

And I would think that this unit is a prime example of one that 

probably can be a little more aggressive, avant-garde, has some 

opportunities to take a small budget but still interact with a lot 

of people.  And I know the educational system is one that 

always needs change and it sometimes needs a little bit of a 

push from another area.  And I would think that this unit would 

be one that could perhaps do that pushing. 

 

You don't have to comment if you want, and I'm going to let 

one of my other colleagues ask a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I just might say that I agree with 

the member's point.  These programs can't be a matter of 

bringing people into jobs that they can't do and never can do 

because they're not trained or educated to do them.  On the 

other hand, as the member will know from past experience, 

there are many jobs around, for bureaucratic reasons, have 

educational requirements that aren't necessary for the job -- sort 

of overwritten in order to earn a certain salary range, or some 

such reason that is important within the administration of 

public pay scales, but yet don't make any sense in relation to 

the job. 

 

These barriers of course have to be re-examined and ensure 

that they're not artificial barriers that prevent, say, aboriginal 

people from getting jobs which they may be perfectly capable 

of doing.  So we're trying to approach it with quite a 

broad-minded framework of analysis. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a number 

of questions on Workers' Compensation Board.  First of all, can 

you give me the estimate of reserves in Workers' Compensation 

Board that there are there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I apologize for that delay, Mr. 

Chairman.  And I'd like to introduce to members of the 

legislature Mr. Jack McLean, who is the acting chair of the 

Workers' Compensation Board who came into the House when 

that question was asked, in order to help me with the answer. 

 

I am looking at the annual report of the Workers' 

Compensation Board for 1991 and let me answer it this way.  

The board has, as of the end of 1991, a balance -- I was going 

to say a cash balance, that's not quite correct -- but it's a credit 

balance of $52 million.  Now there's a lot more money than that 

around that is committed to particular injuries, you know, 

where the reserve has been set aside in respect of that injury.  

And so that reserve has been committed in respect of a 

particular injury to ensure that that claim remains funded.  And 

the balance that I'm talking about is over and above all of those 

committed reserve funds.  And that balance that I mention is 

$52 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What is the total of the committed . . . and 

would you be able to tell me if there are investments in that 

volume of dollars too, that we could put a total figure together 

on the volume that there is that they have to pay out yet, what 

you told me, the 52 million plus any additional investments that 

they have in the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the total assets of the 

board, all in, are 473 million-plus.  And on the other side of the 

balance sheet is the 52 million that I just mentioned plus 421 

million that has to be included in the mix here in trying to 

understand. 

 

There is compensation payable.  The funds dedicated to the 

compensation payable is in excess of $382 million.  And there 

is an annuity fund reserve of in excess of $21 million.  And 

then add in the 52 million that I talked about earlier gives you 

the 473 million that balances the assets, gives you the balanced 

sheet.  I think in all that is the answer to the member's question, 

although not presented in exactly the way that you'd asked it. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a question on the 

volume of those assets is in real estate in drawing income for 

the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is on page 29 of the board's 

annual report, and it shows that among the . . . In the 

investment portfolio of the board is mortgages and real estate, 

about $33.3 million.  There'd be very little mortgage in that and 

most if not all of it in real estate -- 33.3 million.  And that is out 

of a . . . that is of a total of 392 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- An observation I want to make, Mr. Minister, 

is this: that I know that I've had . . . of the problems that I've 

had in dealing with constituents, that 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3017 

the largest single concern that has been raised by individuals is 

the access to what they believe is rightfully theirs because 

they've paid into the Workers' Compensation Board for many 

years. 

 

And there are various kinds of injuries that are far more serious 

than others.  But it seems like the ones that wear people down 

over a period of time, where there's no single incident that they 

can attract a focus to on receiving compensation for that item, 

are the most difficult probably for the board to address and also 

for the individual to address.  And in that whole mix you've got 

to throw in reasonableness in the arguments made by the 

individuals who are looking for compensation. 

 

And that leads me to the point I want to make, Mr. Minister, 

and that is that we have one rehabilitation centre in the city of 

Regina here, and in my view most of these kinds of 

rehabilitation functions travel through -- at least from my 

constituency -- they travel through the rehab centre in Regina 

here.  And because of the investment opportunity that you take 

and put this money into investments -- and we did the same and 

I'm not disqualifying that either -- put this money into 

investments that will give you a return, that perhaps we should 

be thinking about setting up facilities like Wascana in other 

parts of the province where access could be far more readily 

made available to individuals who do have serious injuries and 

would be able to deal with them in a practical kind of way. 

 

I know that travel for many people is significant, and they have 

to be here.  But this rehabilitation centre isn't only for Workers' 

Compensation people; it's also for people who are being 

rehabilitated from accidents of other sorts too. 

 

So I guess because Workers' Compensation . . . and accidents 

occur and people get injured, there is a reason to believe that 

there should be some more facilities made available for these 

people in other parts of the province, and I'd like to have you 

respond to that because these kinds of facilities aren't cheap.  

And they deal with it in a practical sense in a relation to the 

compensation, not in the payment side but in the rehabilitation 

in showing these people how they could perhaps become 

involved in society when they have serious back problems and 

they need to change their vocations. 

 

Maybe it needs to be hooked together to an institution that will 

provide them retraining and all of those kinds of things, and I'd 

just like to have some observations from you on that. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 

some guests. 

 

The Chair -- Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to welcome in the Speaker's gallery some old friends.  

Janice McKnight actually went to school with my wife, Lorna.  

Janice and Lorna have maintained a 

friendship over the years.  With Janice is her husband, Dennis, 

and three children, Sean, Christy, and Spencer.  I ask all hon. 

members to join me in welcoming the McKnights to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the board has invested in 

the Wascana facility about $13 million and has an annual 

expenditure of about $3 million in connection with its use of 

that facility.  The arrangements were that the board would have 

access for about a thousand people per year to use that facility, 

and that has not been the experience.  They've never used as 

much as half of that.  And it's not because it's not needed; but 

it's because of the reluctance of people to leave their homes and 

come down to Regina and, for many of them, live in a motel. 

And we know that's a problem and it's a perplexing one. 

 

These are expensive little facilities, you know.  They take . . . 

as the member observed, it takes some gear, it takes a lot of 

equipment, and it takes some very skilled people to assist 

injured people in their rehabilitation.  So it's an ongoing 

problem and all the more so because it is located in Regina, as 

the member says, and it's awkward for people from outside to 

come here.  I mention that because it is on our minds and we're 

reaching around for solutions to it. 

 

But I want to just expand on that point for a moment.  A lot has 

been learned about rehabilitation in recent years.  A lot has 

been learned.  And surprisingly -- or maybe not surprisingly -- 

a lot of it has been learned in respect of athletes, and sports 

medicine has really taught people a lot about the human body 

and how it recovers.  And if it's challenged early enough and 

severely enough it can make a faster recovery than if it is 

allowed to recover sort of in a more sedentary way.  And the 

board is conscious of these developments also. 

 

There's no question that there are dramatic advances in rehab 

and it's so important to the administration of our program 

because a rehabilitated worker wants of course to be 

rehabilitated, wants to go back to work.  And if that happens, of 

course, it is . . . it contributes to the efficiency of the operation 

of the whole program.  So we're interested and the member 

raises a good point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I would just make a further observation, Mr. 

Minister, that I believe Saskatoon, where we have a learning 

institution as well as a hospital together . . . I would make this 

observation about that, that we could probably utilize some of 

the learning component of this kind of medicine in relation to 

the academic of medicine in a place like in Saskatoon.  And I 

think that some of the facilities would lend themselves to it. 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

There's the other side to it too, in that there is a lot of people 

learn a lot about people's recovery from those people who 

suffer from strokes and heart attacks in the same sense.  And I 

think that we're always going to be learning about the capacity 

of individuals to recover and the determination that they have 

to recover. 

 

We have some of those similar sorts of things.  And I'll just use 

as an analogy, dialysis machines that are located in Regina.  

People from Swift Current have to drive in 150, 200 miles just 

to have that done twice a week.  And I know that that is a stress 

on them just from the very fact that they have to do that.  And 

it's no different for Workers' Compensation people.  And 

having had some personal experience in this sort of thing and 

understanding it from a personal perspective, I think that we 

need to have more of that in other locations in the province.  

And I just make that as a point for you to consider. 

 

And I believe that this is the area that Workers' Compensation 

money should be dedicated towards, to provide those facilities 

for individuals to have access to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I take the point, and without 

wanting to take up any of the member's time, there's certainly 

potential for a lot of development here.  And we're in a 

fortunate position as a result of 50 years anyway, of good, 

sound, sensible administration of that plan in the sense that it 

has never been allowed to sink into a deficit position.  It's 

always been financially strong.  It is presently financially 

strong.  And that provides us with more options and more 

flexibility than many other jurisdictions. 

 

So we'll study the member's remarks. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to jump over to the next page in the Estimates down to the 

Saskatchewan Partnerships '92.  I don't want to suggest that it's 

more important than a lot of the other programs in between, but 

I do want to deal with that program because it affects so many 

young people in our province and their ability to get jobs. 

 

And I want to ask of you if you could give us a little brief 

run-down on how the program is working.  I had noted in the 

past months some people suggesting that the program had been 

reduced, that there were less dollars available.  And yet the 

Estimates from '91-92 and then '92-93 seem to appear to be the 

same.  So I'm wondering if you could clarify that for us and 

give us a little run-down on the program. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The program, as the member observed, 

had the same amount of dollars in it and all of that money was 

committed.  Indeed more than than was committed, although it 

won't come out that way at the end of the day.  There's always 

some slippage in these programs so that we will be within the 

budgeted amount. 

 

We had almost twice as many requests as we could 

accommodate.  We had over 4,000 jobs requested and 2,300 

jobs committed.  The returns on that are just starting 

to trickle in now.  We've had I think 51 applications for 

compensation under the program which had been paid out.  

We've got a lot of work left in front of us. 

 

But it was obviously a popular program and was almost doubly 

subscribed, not just fully subscribed, but twice as much 

demand as we could accommodate. 

 

The member will know that the program was expanded 

somewhat over the previous year.  It's substantially the same 

program, though, but it now covers non-profit organizations 

and regionals parks as well as agriculture. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you for that clarification, Mr. Minister.  

In view of the tremendous demand for this program . . . I guess 

first of all I would hope that that demand reflects a genuine 

usage by those that use the program, and I believe probably 

that that in fact is correct.  And in view of the fact then that if 

it's a program that works well, that is not being abused in any 

way, and if there is double the amount of requests to what you 

can supply results to, have you any anticipation of expanding 

the program in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

member, I would like to expand this program.  I think that this 

ought to be a priority area, and that's certainly going to be my 

representation in the next budgetary process.  We've got to give 

the kids work.  They use the money to go to school.  What 

better use can they make of it?  I'm on all fours with . . . I agree 

entirely with the member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I appreciate that answer, Mr. Minister, 

because certainly our future lies with our youth, and education 

is very expensive.  And certainly there can be nothing better 

that we can do, in my opinion, and I think you agree, than to 

help our young people to achieve that goal of getting better 

educations and to have that feeling of self-worth that they've 

been able to have a job and contribute to their own educational 

process by working even though it has to be supplemented in 

order to encourage employers to provide those jobs. 

 

Perhaps some day our economy will pick up to the extent that 

that won't be necessary although it would seem that these kinds 

of incentives seem to be necessary even in good times as well 

as poor times.  But I really do agree that it's a good program 

and that I hope that you are successful in your arguments to 

have this program expanded in the future.  There might even be 

some other areas that you could expand it into, and certainly 

I'm sure that you will be investigating that. 

 

I wanted to ask you a question about the payments to the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  Where do 

those monies get paid for or what properties are we basically 

talking about? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The minister's personal discretionary 

fund. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- No, I rather doubt that the minister uses that 

as his personal discretionary funds, as the deputy minister of 

Finance is suggesting.  I know the integrity of the minister 

better than that. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With the document I have in my hand, I 

can tell the member that the total that we're paying to 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation is $843,500.  

And of that, 710,000 is for rent, 129,500 for postage, 2,000 for 

record management, and 2,000 for photo services, to give us a 

total of $843,500. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I had a 

couple of . . . three different situations that I wanted to touch on 

with you, constituent concerns with respect to . . . Two of them 

are on maintenance and enforcement, and the other one is with 

respect to workmen's compensation.  The two . . . well we'll 

deal with them all separately I guess. 

 

The first one is a lady by the name of Paula Jones from 

Kindersley.  She had called me some time ago with a concern 

with respect to maintenance and enforcement.  Apparently she's 

dealing with her husband's situation who has failed to make 

maintenance payments and she's wanting to deal with that 

situation a little bit with your . . . apparently your department 

has had a change in policy with respect to that.  The people 

can't phone in updates on maintenance and enforcement cases.  

She thinks that's ludicrous to say the least. 

 

I understand from your department folks that I've talked with 

about this situation, that the policy change was as a result of 

situations where people were phoning in almost daily and in 

some cases several times a day, basically abusing the privilege.  

And I think she's sort of wondering why it can't be done on a 

little more casual basis, I guess you would say, a basis of merit 

perhaps where if people who have been abusing the privilege 

maybe they should be dealt with a little differently than other 

people.  I'm not sure whether that's possible or not but perhaps 

you would like to comment on it. 

 

And I'd appreciate it if you could look into this situation 

yourself and provide me with an update on that particular 

situation.  I'll let you respond to that one and then we'll deal 

with the other two. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll be glad to look into this for the 

member.  The member is quite right, Mr. Chairman, in his 

description of some of the problems that occurred there.  I can 

sum it up this way.  The unit was being just simply swamped 

with telephone calls to the point where far too much of their 

time was being spent just answering the telephone rather than 

trying to actually enforce maintenance orders. 

 

And I realize that the present policy is causing some problems.  

And if we can find out a way to separate the real inquiries from 

the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Cranks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- From the cranks.  That's not a word I 

would have thought of, of course, standing here in my place.  

But if we can find a way of sorting those out, we sure want to 

get right onto it. 

 

In the mean time it's just impossible for this unit to answer the 

phone even though the staff of the unit has been substantially 

increased and everybody's working flat out. 

In part that's an economically driven problem also, as the 

maintenance payments start to fall into arrears.  But I'll look 

into the case of Ms. Jones and perhaps you could give me the 

other case too and I'll look into that. 

 

I might mention just before I sit down that those are 

Department of Justice programs but I'm always glad to answer 

the member's question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, on that.  I recognized 

that after we had dealt with it basically.  The other one that you 

could just look in for and get an update on is Mr. Walter Brown 

of Kindersley as well. 

 

The one that does apparently deal with the circumstances this 

afternoon is the workmen's compensation.  I think it's 

appropriate to ask the questions on that one here.  This has 

been an ongoing difficulty with a gentleman with respect to 

workmen's compensation dating back to the . . . I think back to 

the . . . the first injury was in the early '80s and it's been an 

ongoing saga sort of thing -- Mr. Alfred Deitz of Kindersley as 

well.  Mr. Deitz has asked me to . . . And I've dealt with your 

department on this one for quite some time and we've actually 

got along quite well on this. 

 

The problem has been, though, he received basically a lump 

sum update payment on his past workmen's compensation 

claim and he receives a pension right now, a claim on his back 

injury right now.  Now the problem with it is, though, Mr. 

Minister, it is woefully inadequate.  I think it's something in the 

neighbourhood of $197 per month that he's receiving right 

now. 

 

I know the gentleman.  I've had occasion to meet him.  He's 

come into my office.  I've spoken with his employer, part-time 

employer that he works with in Kindersley and I don't think 

there's any question in anybody's mind that he is certainly 

undergoing a great deal of pain with his back. 

 

And I think the situation basically is that he does not feel that 

he is capable of -- and I think his doctors agree -- that he is 

capable of managing anything but very light work.  And he 

asked me in Estimates if I would appeal on his behalf one more 

time to yourself and to your department to review his situation 

with respect to his claim. 

 

And I would appreciate it if you would undertake that and give 

your commitment that we would have the situation looked at 

and hopefully, hopefully rectified. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, neither Mr. McLean, the 

board chairman, or I can recall the particular facts of Mr. 

Deitz's situation.  But we'll look into it, we'll review it, and 

hopefully rectify it.  We'll be back to the hon. member on the 

case. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, you've heard some of the concerns that my colleagues 

have with some of the areas in your department, and we take it 

at face value that you will be good on your word and take care 

of these matters and do the work that needs to be done.  Other 

than those specific concerns, those are the only ones that our 

constituents have basically brought to our attention for the 

moment 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

and for the time being. 

 

I would like one more commitment from you though, in that 

those things that we find, if we go through the package of 

information that you've delivered to us, those things that we 

find deficient, if you could be good enough to commit to us 

that you would assist us to get the information that we require 

where those deficiencies might happen to occur.  Not to 

suggest that they absolutely will occur, but there may be some 

things that we will find that have been missed or deleted and 

that we would need.  If you would give us a commitment to 

provide us with those informations along with the others that 

you've committed to we'd be prepared to consider moving on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad to give that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- With that assurance, Mr. Chairman, I would 

like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for his 

co-operation.  And I'd like to thank his assistants today for 

assisting him in his answering the questions.  We appreciate the 

forthright manner.  We appreciate the dedication to attempting 

to help Saskatchewan people through this department.  We feel 

that you are doing a reasonably good job and we want to 

compliment you so far.  And we look forward to seeing you the 

next time around. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to thank the member for 

those very gracious remarks and I do hope we can do the things 

that are necessary to fulfil our mandate, and in so doing 

continue to attract the support of the critic who has been doing 

quite a good job in this area from our point of view.  I invite 

the member to feel free to contact my office or the office of the 

deputy minister in the event you need any information in 

respect of any of the work that you're called upon to do as the 

critic. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Chairman, and in advance of 

approving the various items, I'd also like to thank the members 

of my department for coming today and helping the House in 

the consideration of these Estimates. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

(1615) 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 20 

 

Items 1 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 20 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes the Estimates for Labour, 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment.  And I understand 

that next we'll be turning to the Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat. 

 

While the minister is bringing in the officials, I would like to 

make this statement.  Yesterday a point of order was raised 

during consideration of Executive Council Estimates regarding 

officials who are permitted to be in the Chamber with the 

minister.  I have now had the opportunity to review our past 

practice. 

 

Here I might add that our precedents in this area are not very 

extensive.  It appears that most discussions and decisions on 

this question have occurred through the usual channels and 

have not been raised or dealt with on the record. 

 

I have been unable to find in either Hansard or the Journals 

the example offered by the member for Thunder Creek.  A 

review of Hansard, on the contrary, shows several instances 

where the principal secretary, which I understand was the 

equivalent to the current chief of staff, was present in the 

Chamber with the Premier during the review of Executive 

Council Estimates. 

 

I refer members to the following references in the Debates and 

Proceedings, June 23, 1988, page 2,471; May 4, 1983, page 

1,784; and March 8, 1983, page 2,605.  As I understand it, the 

officials who are permitted to be in the Chamber are here at the 

pleasure of the committee only, and there is no right as such for 

the minister to have them here.  Officials are present to 

expedite the business of the committee by providing timely 

information to the minister and to provide assistance in 

answering questions from members. 

 

As I indicated yesterday, the normal practice is for the minister 

to be assisted by line department staff, not the minister's 

personal staff such as ministerial or executive assistants. 

 

The important principle here is that ministers who are 

responsible for their department's activities be assisted in 

answering questions on those activities by staff who have 

administrative and policy-making responsibilities for which 

they, as staff, are held accountable.  From the way in which the 

Premier's office and the Department of Executive Council is 

currently organized, it is clear that the chief of staff 

co-ordinates the normal ministerial office functions -- the 

so-called political functions. 

 

But this position also appears to have administrative 

responsibilities that go beyond the management of the 

Premier's office.  For example, the chief of staff holds a senior 

position and has responsibilities for the communications 

procurement and co-ordination office, the House business 

office, and media services, all of which are functions which 

provide services to government beyond the Premier's office.  

Moreover, these and the other functions of the position involve 

substantial 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

expenditures that may be the subject of questioning during 

Estimates review. 

 

It must be remembered also that the Premier's responsibilities 

are broader than those of any other minister of a particular 

department.  And this is reflected in the responsibilities of the 

senior staff. 

 

In view of all this, I find the particular point of order not well 

taken.  I suggest, however, that this is an area that might 

appropriately be considered in the Rules and Procedures 

Committee to provide further guidance to the Chair. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials who are here with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

introduce to the House Mr. Marv Hendrickson, who's the 

deputy minister; Mr. Vic Taylor, the assistant deputy minister; 

and Mr. John Reid, who is the executive director of 

administration and strategic planning in the secretariat. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   Mr. Minister, I 

first of all want to compliment your staff on providing the 

answers that we had asked earlier, the generic questions.  I will 

have very few questions as pertains to those generic questions.  

They are well laid out, and are very self-explanatory.  And I 

commend your officials for providing that to us. 

 

There are a few policy areas I think, Mr. Minister, that we 

should touch on in your Estimates today before I get down to a 

few specifics, and understanding some of the restraints that 

we're under, we'll try and be brief, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

wondering if you could give us a short run-down of exactly 

where the treaty land entitlement process is at today; and if 

there are any major hurdles that you see in the near future to 

implementation of that particular agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the 

question because it has been such a dramatic development and 

the previous government played a very significant role in 

bringing that matter along towards a conclusion.  After the 

change in government we picked it up and, as the member can 

appreciate, there was a . . . it was a complex matter to review 

and to get control of, get an understanding of, but we've 

overcome . . . at least, we've got all those problems and hurdles 

behind us. 

 

The present status is that we have completed our negotiations 

with the federal government.  The negotiating teams have 

initialled an agreement with respect to the framework part of 

the discussions and that agreement is now before the Treasury 

Board and the cabinet for consideration and approval.  And 

that's the current status of it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate 

the . . . and I think all status Indians in the province of 

Saskatchewan probably appreciate the effort that has gone on 

to solving the problem.  I know it's something that has been a 

long time coming and it's something that I think all of us in the 

province can take some pride in; that we perhaps are leading 

the way with new-found solutions to an age-old problem. 

 

We have another area, Mr. Minister, that doesn't appear to be 

quite so smooth, and in fact at present, I believe, we still have 

an ongoing blockade in north-west Saskatchewan involving 

Metis and non-status Indians.  And that particular situation 

unfortunately is hindering some economic development in the 

province. 

 

It certainly doesn't bode well for some of the communities that 

are near by.  The Meadow Lake Tribal Council are not happy.  

And I think it's a situation that obviously needs some work on 

it and I wonder if you could update the Assembly as to where 

that process is at and then perhaps we can discuss if the Metis 

people in particular are looking for a deal similar to what the 

status Indians have achieved, or what we need to achieve in 

this province so that we don't see an ongoing situation evolving 

that causes us no end of concern in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that certainly is one of the more 

intractable of the problems that we're facing in this area. 

 

It seems to me that the problem in the north-west is that there's 

not enough forest available for all the people who would like to 

claim the benefit of the forests.  That's a generalization, but if 

you look carefully at the situation involving the communities 

up the west side and the Indian bands and the Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council and the activities surrounding the saw mill and 

the Millar Western pulp mill and the demand for pulp, you get 

a lot of competing demands for the available resource. 

 

Complicating all of that of course and overlaying it is the 

question of land and aboriginal land entitlement and treaty land 

entitlement and impending self-government arrangements for 

communities and bands on that side of the province.  And they 

all seem to come together.  All those strands come together on 

that road leading to that particular part of the forest, and it is 

proving to be a very difficult question to resolve. 

 

(1630) 

 

At the present time we have discussions going.  They have in 

various forms been ongoing from the very beginning.  But 

these discussions look quite productive, involving the 

communities on the north-west side and the Metis society and 

the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, and from time to time the 

blockaders.  The member can appreciate the interplay of all 

those forces and we're trying to come to an agreement. 

 

In my view, the area of agreement in the final analysis is a 

co-management structure with respect to the forest resources 

and the land resources in that part of the province.  Now that's a 

very complex idea and of course the details are extremely 

complex.  But in the final 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

analysis the people in the north-west have got to come to an 

agreement as to how these matters will be sorted out and how 

they will each relate to the forest resources and to the land in 

that area.  And we're trying to facilitate that process in every 

way we can.  We're not trying to provide the solution; we're 

trying to help the stakeholders over there come to a solution 

themselves that they can all live with. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I can appreciate the situation 

that you find yourself in.  But the latest news reports have the 

blockaders building cabins so that they can sustain themselves 

through the winter months.  And as you and I both know, that 

that is a prime time to conduct logging activities because a lot 

of the softer terrain is frozen, and you can get about the various 

tracks more easily.  And I suspect that both the Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council through their arrangements with Millar 

Western, and others, are going to have to move some timber 

over these winter months. 

 

And if this looks like a protracted situation, I don't think either 

the players up there or you can wait until we have all aspects of 

native self-government, for instance, in place.  You and I may 

be old and grey before we sort of sort out all of the various 

aspects that aboriginal self-government entail.  And as you 

know from the constitutional round, that is a topic that first 

ministers have on their plate right now in a fairly major way 

and are trying to come to some kind of accommodation. 

 

The simple fact is we have a problem there that no one wants to 

see the police involved in, that no one wants to see physical 

harm occur to anyone.  And yet we have some economic 

realities -- people that have borrowed money, people that have 

undertaken to invest large amounts of money in the north-west 

part of the province.  And they simply can't shut down for the 

winter because someone has decided to build a cabin and block 

the road. 

 

And I think it's incumbent, Mr. Minister, without sort of giving 

away all of your secrets about how you're going to handle this 

situation, that we be reassured that you have a game plan, an 

action plan, and that there are individuals involved right now in 

solving that.  And perhaps you could tell us who those 

individuals are, that if you have someone on special 

assignment, if your deputy minister is in a daily situation.  

Exactly lay out where we're going with this situation so that 

everyone feels comfortable with the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a situation that 

we've been following and involved in closely right from the 

very beginning.  And prior to the blockade we had been paying 

considerable attention to that area because of what we could 

see as a potentially difficult situation where there were 

competing interests so far as the forest resource was concerned. 

 

Much of our early work concerned the Green Lake community 

which is concerned about a supply of lumber for their saw mill.  

And their concern about the continuing availability of timber 

for that saw mill having regard to the lease agreement that the 

tribal council has that takes land right in the vicinity of the 

Green Lake community. 

That is obviously . . . it was obvious to us at an early date that 

that was a potential trouble spot, so we had people working in 

that community trying to work something out.  And we thought 

and we continue to think that it is clearly possible to work out 

the Green Lake situation with the tribal council.  At least it's 

clear to me; I'm not certain that it's clear to everybody else. 

 

But let me tell you what I mean by that.  The Green Lake saw 

mill requires lumber of a certain dimension, pretty big logs, 

bigger than is required at the pulp mill or in the saw mill of the 

tribal council.  So they're after different lumber.  And if you 

could find a way for them to sort out the lumber as it's coming 

down or as it lies having been cut and peel off part of it to 

Green Lake for their saw mill and the rest going in the 

direction of Meadow Lake, then you've got a big part of the 

problem resolved.  You still don't deal with the harvesting 

practices and that sort of thing, but you've got at the basic 

economic problem. 

 

And whether or not that forms the basis of a final resolution of 

this, I'm not sure because the problem has sort of grown with 

the blockade.  And the member will remember in the early days 

of the blockade, the blockaders had a very limited agenda.  And 

with all due respect to them, they kept moving the goal posts 

on us as other people joined the blockade and as some people 

with causes -- if I may use that term -- made the cause of the 

blockade their own in pursuit of whatever agenda it was that 

they were pursuing, all of which is to say that it got very, very 

complex and it remains very complex. 

 

But at the root of it it is as I said, a question of trying to divide 

up the forest and to create a management system with respect 

to the forest and the land that everybody up there can live with.  

And this is taking a good deal of time. 

 

But I want to assure the member that we have people on site 

regularly.  Bonita Beatty of the secretariat is the individual who 

is responsible.  She is well known in the area and is up there a 

lot and contacting everyone, including the people on the 

blockade. 

 

Mr. Hendrickson also is well known to everyone in that part of 

the province and he is in regular touch with all of the people 

involved, and especially with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council 

and the communities in the north-west. 

 

And we're trying everything we can think of to make the 

process work.  And I just say again to the member that what 

has to happen in the end is that the people involved in the 

north-west will negotiate their way to a satisfactory resolution 

of this and we're trying everything we can to help them get to 

that negotiated agreement. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your endeavour, Mr. Minister, 

but my question was, we're going to get into a situation here 

where some permanence is going to take place.  You don't 

build log cabins on the road without anticipating a fairly 

lengthy situation.  And as you said, we have other folks who 

are against the Free Trade Agreement and some that are against 

cutting down rain forests, and we have all sorts of people now 

involved in this thing.  But the simple fact is, Mr. Minister, that 

saw mills can't run and employ people unless they have logs 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

coming in to them, and paper mills can't run unless they've got 

logs coming in to them.  And we have mechanisms as you well 

know in labour in this province, and you as Labour minister 

can come in and bring in binding arbitration. 

 

There are ways to sort of get the parties to the table and say this 

is sort of where we're at.  We've got to cool down here and get 

on with life.  And life right now is not well there.  So I'm 

wondering if you would be prepared, as a minister responsible, 

to say it's time to get down to the table.  Here's the solution.  It 

may not be perfect, but let's sort of all go back to work for a 

while and then see what happens.  And I'm thinking that we 

have a deadline coming up of freezeup when the logging really 

has to get on with it.  And I'm wondering if you're prepared to 

move into that situation and say it's time to stop for a while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the situation has to 

be resolved; the member's right.  And the secretariat has got 

responsibilities in that area, and I tell the member that we will 

do everything we can to make this thing happen. 

 

The other department up there is Natural Resources who have 

been trying to take a lead role and have been doing a lot of 

very, very good work but no resolution has yet come.  We 

haven't given any consideration at all to anything like 

compulsory arbitration.  We very much want all of the people 

up there to resolve the problem themselves because they're 

going to live with the solution for a very, very long time.  And 

there are many, many forces at play as the member will well 

know from his days as minister. 

 

I'm saying to him, Mr. Chairman, that I and the secretariat will 

continue to do everything we can to create pressure and to 

otherwise induce the parties involved to get this thing resolved.  

So that, as he says, the pulp mill can do what it does and the 

saw mills do what they do and the people up there live in 

harmony with each other with respect to the forest and its use 

and its conservation and all the other issues that are involved in 

this blockade. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well just one final point on this, Mr. 

Minister.  I understand the delicacy of the situation, and having 

been in the portfolio, I fully understand a lot of the people that 

play in this business.  But I also know that we cannot solve 

some age-old problems in a few months.  And I would like you 

to suggest a date somewhere along here that is reasonable. 

 

The bush is going to start to freeze up there about November 1 

and you and I both know that there are certain activities that are 

going to have to be ready to go.  And I would think that you've 

given a time line to your officials to sort of work some things 

out or there's something else going to give here. 

 

We may not meet in this legislature again until next spring.  

And I think it's reasonable in your Estimates that you would 

have some time lines kind of laid out, of where we're going 

with this thing, and that you could maybe -- and you don't have 

to give me the exact day, but you can ballpark it a little, of 

when this action plan is going to come to some kind of fruition. 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's a tough one.  I don't have a date 

at the moment and there is not one within the department.  

We've been coming at it from the other end of trying to 

facilitate the process and trying to get people involved in it and 

committed to it and work towards a solution.  So we haven't 

sort of come at it from the point of view of creating the 

deadline and then creating that kind of pressure, although it's 

not a bad idea. 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources was up there yesterday and 

I haven't yet had a chance to talk to him about what happened 

up there yesterday.  But let me deal with it this way, Mr. 

Chairman.  We'll give some consideration to the creation of a 

deadline, or the creation of some kind of time lines at least, and 

see if that makes any contribution to this very difficult 

situation. 

 

In the mean time, I just repeat my assurance that we want this 

thing settled, and settled soon, and we're doing our best to 

make it happen. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  Sometimes 

when people have time lines to work within, they tend to get 

busy. 

 

I've got a couple of questions from your Estimates here.  I 

notice that on the grants to Indian and Metis organizations that 

there's been a substantial increase from last year to this year.  

Could you just . . . there's about oh, 250, 60-odd-thousand here 

increase.  Can you tell me exactly where that's going? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The increase in funding in that area 

consists of the following.  The Metis Society of Saskatchewan 

will receive $165,000 in respect of the funding of that 

organization.  And in addition we're committing funds to the 

development of what we internally refer to as public 

authorities.  Let me describe to the member what we mean 

when we say that term. 

 

We are entering into agreements with the Metis Society and 

with FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) with 

respect to the delivery of a number of programs that have 

heretofore been delivered by the government.  It was an 

initiative on the way to a greater measure of self-government.  

And if you think about it as a two-stage process, you will see 

what I mean. 

 

On the way to self-government are the public authorities which 

will be jointly administered by the government and by the 

aboriginal group.  And that joint mechanism will employ the 

staff and deliver the program.  In that way it is, as you can see, 

a step along the road to evolving the program to the aboriginal 

group and it is a half-way point in that sense.  And it builds 

capacity within the Indian community and the Metis 

community with respect to that program so that in due course 

they can take over the program and run it themselves. 

 

And we are planning to spend $125,000 in pursuit of that 

program.  That will be roughly in the following divisions: 

about a third of it with respect to Metis programming, and a 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

third of it with respect to Indian programming, and a third of it 

with respect to northern communities which are in a little 

different category, as the member will know. 

 

Now in addition to that of course is the funds from the program 

that is being devolved.  And I think that's sufficient answer for 

the member's question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So those are the principal changes that are 

involved in that funding increase.  Everything else is basically 

the way it was last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Does this in any way make up for the 

termination of the Indian heritage trust fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is no, Mr. Chairman.  That 

concept has been the subject of some considerable and ongoing 

discussion with Chief Crowe and the other vice-chiefs of the 

FSIN.  We are, all of us, looking forward to self-government.  

And it is certain that the bands of Saskatchewan and the FSIN 

are going to move in quite significant ways towards 

self-government, which will include as a matter of necessity, 

arrangements with respect to the financing of Indian 

government by the federal and by the provincial governments.  

And the approach that we plan to take in this connection is to 

meld all this together and find appropriate ways of financing 

Indian government within the context of self-government 

negotiations. 

 

And so the Indian heritage trust fund kind of flows into that 

and we plan to make no contribution to that trust fund in this 

year's budget.  And that's the reason why it doesn't appear in 

the Estimates as an item. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate a new initiative, Mr. 

Minister.  Unfortunately, I guess, when one sort of analyses the 

divvying of the pie here, that the usual solution has been taken 

to sort of treat everybody equally rather than perhaps those that 

are closer to self-government getting a little more than those 

that are not quite . . . I understand how these things work in this 

regard, but it sometimes maybe isn't the best use of scarce 

dollars. 

 

I would like to ask you about another item here on your native 

career development program, training employment projects.  I 

notice we have a drop in budget numbers, and we talked about 

this a little bit earlier in your Labour Estimates. 

 

If anything is critical to aboriginal development in this 

province, it obviously has to do with some educational 

opportunities that exist in conjunction with other entities in our 

province.  And I'm wondering if this is the appropriate time to 

have those kinds of cut-backs in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, there is a reduction of 

funding here and the pressure is on this program, as on all 

programs, to reduce expenditures in these difficult times.  We 

have tried to tailor our approach to this situation and try and 

even increase our impact on the problem by focussing on the 

existing federal training and employment initiatives that exist, 

and try and bring those 

in closer contact with the Indian community and the Metis 

community so that we will in effect be promoting agreements 

between the employers in Saskatchewan and the federal 

programming and the Indian-Metis community, and try using 

other people's money, as it were, to increase employment of 

Indian and Metis people in Saskatchewan.  Now I think that's a 

clever approach, if I may say so, or at least it's one that we're 

quite pleased with. 

 

And there's a lot of potential there without spending any great 

amount of provincial dollars, to actually go some distance in 

resolving this problem.  So we're quite hopeful that even 

though the amount spent is less, we're going to be able to have 

a good result. 

 

And I'm not comparing that to the previous administration or 

anything.  I mean I'm just not into that today.  But I think that 

we will produce a result that people will look at and say, that's 

a pretty good job.  We're sure going to devote a lot of attention 

to it anyway. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate you trying to make it work, 

Mr. Minister.  A lot of those programs have been around a 

while and my experience with the feds is that they, you know, 

it's the old quid pro quo sort of thing.  I'll put a buck or two up, 

but I want a little bit.  And unless you've solved something that 

I never saw as far as making that work, there's still the need for 

provincial dollars involved in most of these schemes. 

 

And I'll leave it at that, and give you lots of rope here to see 

how it goes.  But it's an area that we'll be watching very 

carefully to see how it goes. 

 

Now I just have one area here that . . . I believe it was 

attachment no. 3 and the answers that you gave back.  You've 

had a fair number of people come to work for you in the last 

little while on short-term contract for various things.  You've 

mentioned one today a Bonita Beatty who was May 11 to July 

31 at $190 a day.  You now say that she's still working on the 

Meadow Lake situation.  Is she under a new contract, the same 

per diem, or have you brought her on in some other capacity 

beyond this initial contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As the member will know from the 

material we provided, Ms. Beatty was contracted for the period 

May 11 to July 31 of this year.  And we extended her contract 

until the end of September.  And in the mean time we are 

posting the position and there will be a competition for the 

position that she is presently occupying to take effect when her 

contract ends. 

 

At this point we have no idea whether she would be a candidate 

for that position or not.  She's a wonderfully qualified person 

but she hasn't told us and we don't know whether she would be 

a candidate or not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The other one that I am curious about is Mr. 

Wayne McKenzie from July 2 to August 31 at $250 a day.  I 

notice by the contract that's about $10,000.  And I suspect that 

all got used up.  Is this in relationship to the REDA (Regina 

Economic Development Authority) organization in Regina or 

are we on a different game plan than the one I was familiar 

with last year? 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Wayne has been focusing on two things, 

and one is REDA.  And I think the member knows the work 

that we're trying to do there to get involved in those projects at 

an early date to try and encourage the participation of Indian 

and Metis people on new developments that occur from the 

REDA.  The main focus of his work though is on the 

employment equity side, trying to do as the name indicates to 

encourage the employment of Indian and Metis people. 

 

We had him employed in the Department of Labour prior to 

that, doing exactly the same things.  He did a lot of work that I 

described earlier to the member on the inventorying the 

situation with respect to departments and corporations and 

trying to encourage those departments and Crown corporations 

to get with it and to get their employment equity programs 

dusted off and active and actually start to employ people. 

 

I think that the member knows Wayne and knows his abilities.  

And he's brought all of that enthusiasm to the job.  And we're 

quite pleased with the work that he's done at this point.  As to 

his future, I can't say, but he's doing just fine up to this point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm quite sure, Mr. Minister, that he'll look 

after his future quite nicely.  Would you be prepared to share 

this study with the public, with the Assembly at a fairly short 

time so that we can sort of see what direction we're going in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The study is not as such in the sense that 

he produced a report, but it has led to the development of a 

cabinet decision item, a cabinet submission with respect to 

employment equity programs in the departments and the 

Crowns.  And I'm reluctant to share that with the member 

because of the nature of the document, and I can't do it. 

 

But let me tell you that we're satisfied with the work.  And it's 

the basis for the decision that we're going to ask cabinet to 

make with respect to employment equity programs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now there must be something, Mr. Minister, 

that he has done in regard to the REDA portion of the thing, 

that surely can't be classified as a cabinet document.  And I 

would just like to see . . . at some point in here there must be 

something that for 10,000 bucks, that the taxpayer can have as 

some sort of assurance that the goods are there.  And I think 

that's a fairly large amount of money on an issue that is very 

pertinent to particularly the Regina community.  There must be 

something there that you could share with us in a public way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, there's certainly information we 

can share.  And there probably are some documents we can 

share that would be sort of file memos or notes to show the 

kinds of things we've been doing and sorts of agreements that 

we've been trying to get developed.  And perhaps we could 

leave it, Mr. Chairman, on the basis that I'll provide the 

member with information in that area, either in the form of a 

memo or a letter with documents 

attached as I indicated earlier.  And if that's satisfactory, I'll 

undertake to do that. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 25 

 

Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before we get to the Estimates of the 

Ombudsman, I'd like to thank the officials of the secretariat for 

coming today and assisting the legislature in the consideration 

of these Estimates.  These are very hard-working people, and I 

really appreciate the support that they've given to me. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also would like 

to thank the officials for coming today and the answers that 

they have provided for the minister.  As I said, they were very 

concise and we appreciate it.  I do look forward, Mr. Minister, 

to some of those documents. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ombudsman 

Vote 21 

 

Item 13 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 21 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 21 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 21 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Legislation 

Freedom of Information and Privacy 

Vote 21 

 

Item 14 agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


