




















































Hansard: June 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1061 

 June 11, 1992 

 

[Note: On June 11, 1992 a recorded vote was called on first 

reading of Bill No. 58. The division bells rang from June 11, 

1992 until June 29, 1992.] 
 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

Prayers 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 
 

 Regarding the disclosure by the Financial Management 

Review Commission on page 92 of their report, that the 

provincial government provided a tax expenditure to a 

partner in one of its previous equity investments (and that is 

the previous provincial government; I shall ask the 

following): 
 

 (1) Who was the recipient of this tax break? (2) What amount 

of tax revenue did the government forgo as a result of this tax 

break? and (3) Why has the present government not yet made 

the details of this tax break agreement available? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm delighted to 

introduce to you and through you to this Assembly 20 grade 4 

students from White City School, who are seated in your west 

gallery.  They are accompanied by their teacher Ms. Noelle 

DeCorby and their chaperons Irene Temple and Carol Seipp. 

 

I'm really looking forward to meeting with them later on after 

question period for photos and refreshments and no doubt to 

answer some questions they'll have on the proceedings of the 

House this afternoon. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly, first a school group that's with us this afternoon, and 

then a friend visiting from the United States. 

 

The school tour group is a group of grade 4 students, 27 in 

number, from Wilfrid Walker School in our constituency.  

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Becker, and 

chaperons Margo Gerhardt and Mrs. Bolingbroke. 

 

I'm looking forward to meeting with them for pictures after 

question period, and later on in the members' dining room -- 

refreshments -- and I'm sure a number of questions they'll have 

about the proceedings in the Assembly and their tour. 

 

So I'm pleased to see them here today and would ask members 

to join me in greeting the 27 grade 4 students from Wilfrid 

Walker School in the west gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, my second guest that I 

would like to introduce, thank you, that has already been 

introduced to you, Mr. Speaker, and you share some 

information in common.  I believe you've been close to where 

this person comes from and share in-laws from the same place. 

 

We have with us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Esther 

Talsness from International Falls in Minnesota.  Esther and I 

met earlier for lunch and I'm looking forward to again saying 

hello to her after question period and hopefully be able to join 

them for refreshments. 

 

So I'd ask all members to join in welcoming Esther here, a 

good, warm friend from the United States. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 

to you and the rest of the Assembly, 19 students from Vawn 

Elementary School in Vawn.  They are seated in your gallery.  

I will be meeting with them at 10 minutes to 3 outside.  And 

also I'd like to introduce their teacher, Louise Baillargeon; 

chaperons, Dennis and Camille Jullion, Marilyn Russett, and 

bus driver, Shirley Godbout.  And I would like to ask the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this 

opportunity to introduce through you and to you to the 

members of the legislature the president of the Farm Credit 

Corporation of Canada.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Farm 

Credit Corporation in large part is moving to the province of 

Saskatchewan and the city of Regina.  And seated in the 

Speaker's gallery is the president, Mr. Jim Hewitt. 

 

We expect to see a lot more of him here in the province of 

Saskatchewan as a result of the co-operation between the 

federal government and the people of Saskatchewan in moving 

institutions out west.  So would the members of the legislature 

please welcome the president of the Farm Credit Corporation, 

Mr. Jim Hewitt. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join the Leader of 

the Opposition in welcoming Mr. Hewitt to the House on 

behalf of the government.  We've appreciated our dialogue over 

the last number of months over a number of issues and 

anticipate the continuing good relationship with the Farm 

Credit Corporation as we proceed to welcome you to the city of 

Regina, the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a group of 

students from Pangman School -- there's 20 of them seated in 

the east gallery.  They're accompanied today by their teachers, 

Dorothy Madigan and Delores Feltmate, who are colleagues of 

mine from Prairie View School Division; chaperons, Gail 

Howse, and bus driver, 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

Yvette Longley. 
 

I'm looking forward to meeting with the students; they're 

grades 7 and 8 students.  I'll be meeting with them afterwards 

for pictures and refreshments, and I'm sure a lot of good 

questions and answer period then too. 

 

I'd like all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to introduce to you and through a couple of constituents of 

mine that are seated up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Chester 

Olson and his daughter Corinne are in town here today on 

business.  Chester is a business man from the town of Kamsack 

and also a very good friend of mine.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

Chester has told me that when we get together later this 

evening, he'll be the one buying the refreshments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like all the members to welcome Chester and 

his daughter. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I was remiss in my 

introductions today when I introduced the Wilfrid Walker 

School group.  And I notice also that with them is a chaperon, 

Mr. Kapadia.  And I'm sorry that I forgot to mention him.  It's 

so good to see dads with the school tours, and I will look 

forward to meeting with him in the group after, for 

refreshments.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly the president 

of the Western Brewers Association, Mr. Jerry Kristianson, 

who's in the Speaker's gallery.  Mr. Kristianson is here today 

for a reception later today at the Saskatchewan Hotel with 

members of the Assembly.  And I'm sure many of us will be 

joining you later, Jerry. 

 

One other thing I'd like to say is that Mr. Kristianson, who is 

now a consultant and also works as president of the Western 

Brewers Association, goes back a long way to a farm boy from 

the Shaunavon area many years ago when we were both much 

younger. 

 

So welcome to the Assembly today, and we look forward to 

meeting with you later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

opposition, we'd also like to welcome the president of the 

Western Brewers Association, and we hope that he has a nice 

stay here in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the House, the legislature, 

a group of 22 grade 5 and 6 students from the 

Theodore School.  Theodore is a beautiful little town in my 

riding, and I'm glad to introduce the students here.  They're 

accompanied today by their teacher Valerie Jeske; chaperons 

Dolores Anderson, Noella Kucheran, Marty Roebuck, Brenda 

Scheller, and Barry Kozak.  And I'm looking forward to 

refreshments with them later.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to announce that an 

agreement has been signed today that will create the first 

nations forest-fire protection service.  This agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, is an excellent example of co-operative federalism, an 

example that might be wisely followed in other areas.  The 

Saskatchewan government through the Department of Natural 

Resources, the federal government through the Department of 

Indian Affairs and Northern Development, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, three tribal councils, and 16 

Indian bands are all participants in this agreement.  And each 

level of government is contributing to the cost of the program. 

 

This program will create employment and training for Indian 

bands across the North, and it will provide a well-trained pool 

of fire-fighters to help defend northern communities and forest 

resources from fire.  When they are not engaged in forest-fire 

work, the six-member crews will work on community 

improvement projects under supervision of local Indian bands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Minister of Natural Resources 

and his department as well as the Indian leaders who have 

come together to protect this precious natural resource and to 

provide training and employment at the same time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to draw your 

attention and the attention of the Assembly to the Regina 

International Children's Festival in Regina from June 9 to 11 in 

Wascana Park near Darke Hall.  I had the privilege of attending 

the opening ceremonies and was very impressed and well 

entertained.  I was amazed at how good the entertainment was.  

There was international, Canadian, and Saskatchewan 

performers, including Juno award winners. 

 

The festival is the result of hard work by a community board 

and staff and receives both public and substantial corporate 

funding.  This is money well spent on behalf of high quality, 

high participation entertainment for families and children.  And 

as the government works to enhance tourism in this province, 

the children's festival is a good example of a destination event.  

And I encourage families and the young at heart to make this 

their destination before Friday evening.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take 

these few moments to commend the government and in 

particular the Minister of Social Services on her 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

prompt action and decisive commitment to creating a means by 

which children in our province can be heard and their interests 

well represented. 

 

I hope that our province will not follow the lead of Alberta and 

the Government of Ontario, both of whom have their children's 

advocate reporting to the minister in charge.  Instead it is the 

belief of those who have been involved in child advocacy that 

the individual should be responsible to the legislature, thereby 

ensuring far greater independence. 

 

And what I wish to do at this time is to offer the assistance not 

only of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party but the Manitoba 

Liberal Party, who have a 250-page document and as we speak 

are filibustering on this topic, and the help and assistance of 

Reg Allcock who has worked with your deputy minister, and 

he has indicated today that he'd be more than willing to share 

this information with the government.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, on Monday, June 8, I had the 

privilege along with some of my colleagues to meet with 

people in the Hudson Bay area.  The people of Hudson Bay of 

course are very interested in the forest industry. 

 

We had the opportunity to listen and to learn about concerns in 

regards to the depleting softwood, about the existing industry 

and about management of a mixed forest, a forest of both 

hardwood and softwood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, business workers, farmers and professionals, 

many of them experienced in the forest industry, proposed a 

forest vision and outlined a strategy for this Hudson Bay forest 

area and for the local communities affected by this very 

important industry. 

 

This vision, Mr. Speaker, has been forwarded to the caucus 

committee on the environment and resources for the 

information and future planning of the forest policy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to thank these fine people who took time from 

their very busy schedule to meet with us in regards to that 

vision for the forest industry in north-east Saskatchewan.  The 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in attendance, 

MLAs from many different areas of Saskatchewan, enjoyed the 

learning experience and would like to revisit Hudson Bay in 

the very near future.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to make 

a short report to you, Mr. Speaker, on a meeting that I attended 

in Macklin; that's a town in my constituency. 

 

There was about 700 people at that meeting, Mr. Speaker, and 

they were there to discuss the cutting-off of funding for their 

new hospital, St. Joseph's Hospital in Macklin.  And they were 

really concerned because the contract had 

been written in 1990, and they felt that it was very unfair.  And 

they certainly felt that it wasn't cost-effective when you take 

into consideration that they had spent in excess of $200,000 

getting ready -- land and architectural fees and stuff like that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while they agreed that in a recession there is some 

restraint needed, they felt that maybe the Department of Health 

was going too fast and too far in some of their cut-backs, when 

you realize that the hospital in Macklin was built in 1926 and it 

is totally ready for a new hospital.  And the recommendation 

from the Department of Health to renovate the old hospital was 

less cost-effective, Mr. Speaker, than going ahead with a new 

one. 

 

And they felt very concerned that what's happening in rural 

Saskatchewan in the health, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk about an event 

that's going to be happening in Melville tomorrow.  It's a 

sod-turning ceremony for Legion Manor project.  It's close to 

the downtown core, Mr. Speaker, for accessibility for the 

seniors to shopping.  It's an 18-unit project at about a cost of 

$1.3 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, shelter is one of our basic needs of very 

importance to individuals and certainly to our seniors in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to congratulate everybody involved in bringing this 

project forward. A lot of hard work and a lot of long hours 

were involved in it.  I want to again, I'd just like to congratulate 

everybody involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure this past 

Monday to attend the kick-off for the Northern Pike Festival.  

This festival has been going on now for 22 years and has been 

attracting fishermen and fisherwomen from all over Canada 

and across the United States to Tobin Lake.  It now includes 

Codette Lake, the new lake that was created because of the 

hydro dam that's built right at the town of Nipawin. 

 

During the past 22 years, record-size catches of northern pike 

and wall-eye, perch and goldeye have been recorded.  And 

Monday was the kick-off or media day for the event which will 

last until mid-August.  The local fishermen gave the media and 

myself, as the MLA for the area, a day that we will not soon 

forget.  The weather was beautiful.  The hospitality was 

excellent, and the fishing, Mr. Speaker, was almost 

unbelievable. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the boat that I was in with the two other 

gentlemen that I met that morning, we caught well over 40 

wall-eye in less than four hours.  We caught and released them.  

And very many of these were large and impressive-sized fish -- 

the biggest that I've ever had the pleasure of catching. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sounds like a fish story to me. 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

Mr. Keeping: -- It is.  It's a good one. 

 

But the best part of the day, Mr. Speaker, is the people you 

meet as the day progresses and as you fish.  As I mentioned, I 

met those men that morning in the boat, and as we shared the 

day as we fished, it's a very enjoyable experience. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, on May 14, an important 

business development took place in my constituency, the one I 

represent, Regina North West.  The official opening of the 

largest SAAN store in Canada took place, and I was there to 

participate on behalf of the provincial government.  The SAAN 

store chain has 260 stores in Canada, and it is Canada's largest 

family clothing store chain with its head office in Winnipeg, 

Manitoba.  While retail stores are closing throughout Canada, it 

is comforting and hopeful to see businesses like the SAAN 

store expand operations in Saskatchewan and particularly in 

Regina. 

 

The SAAN store chain is owned by a successful Canadian 

company called Gendis Inc., which has investments as well in 

the oil and gas industry through Trimac Limited of Calgary, 

and in Sony, the Japanese electronics giant -- and in fact they 

hold the Canada franchise for Sony products. 

 

Gendis Inc. has invested $1 million in this SAAN store in 

Regina North West and by doing so created 80 jobs during 

construction and has created 20 new jobs at the store, tripling 

the size of those people employed at the previous store. 

 

The president of Gendis Inc., Mr. A.D. Cohen of Winnipeg, 

who is also a member of the Order of Canada, stated at the 

opening he sees this investment as a good business opportunity 

for his company, and he has great confidence in Regina's 

economy and Saskatchewan's economy.  That is why they have 

made the substantial commitment to the province.  I wish to 

acknowledge this company's investment and confidence in 

Saskatchewan and offer my best wishes for a successful 

venture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I would like to ask leave of the members 

to revert back to question period, if I may, to introduce some 

guests.  During the statements by members, I believe a school, 

St. John's school, came into the galleries.  Is that correct?  I 

think they're in the Speaker's gallery.  St. John's grade 8 

students, 31 in number, came into the Assembly during the 

statements by members.  They are accompanied by Mrs. J. 

Block, Mrs. R. Zuk, and Mrs. M. Popoff. 

 

I do want to take this opportunity to welcome the students to 

the Assembly.  I hope you have enjoyed the proceedings so far 

and will enjoy question period which 

will follow immediately after.  I will be meeting with you 

approximately a quarter to three and I'll try and answer your 

questions at that time. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the students 

from St. John Lake. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- If I may make a correction, that is John 

Lake School. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I would ask leave also, to make an 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join you in 

welcoming your guests, one young gentleman in particular.  

His name is David Dyck.  And the reason I'm introducing 

David particularly is because his mother is a special niece of 

mine. 

 

And I know, David, that when your mom was still living in the 

Asquith area, your dad had a lot of potatoes, and your mom's 

reputation was quickly enhanced as being the fastest potato 

picker west of Vanscoy.  And I'd like you to take that message 

back to her.  And at the same time, David, when Mr. Speaker 

meets with you and hands out drinks, I would want you to ask 

him for an extra drink to take home for your mom.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Action on Agriculture Crisis 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that there is a crisis in agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It is also common knowledge that the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) Premier is not particularly interested 

in agriculture or in economic problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the NDP Premier is completely consumed 

in the secret, tight-lipped constitutional dickering that he's 

doing down East, his province and the people are demanding 

attention to our own problems.  Farmers are going broke.  The 

drought needs action.  Economic deals are falling apart.  Our 

credit rating is going down.  And, Mr. Speaker, today in the 

newspaper we see Mr. Bob MacLeod of Synergy in Saskatoon 

saying, and I quote:  "We are tired of the party line and partisan 

politics."  And that: 

 

 Premier Roy Romanow should spend less time on the 

Constitution and more . . . tending to the provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  

Will the minister not admit that Mr. MacLeod of Saskatoon is 

absolutely right about his observations about the NDP Premier.  

And number two, will the minister now call the Premier home 

to deal with the drought and the agricultural conference?  

Away from the . . . 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think we'll let the minister 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, if the interest the member 

opposite has in Saskatchewan and our agriculture and all other 

elements of our economy are reflected in his frequency of 

attendance here, I suspect our Premier is in a much stronger . . . 

demonstrates much stronger support for all elements of 

Saskatchewan than the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the complete disregard in which 

the Minister of Agriculture holds the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

the contempt that he holds for them by just trying to be smart 

alec in the legislature, is an indication, Mr. Speaker, of how he 

really feels. 

 

Mr. MacLeod in Saskatoon said: Mr. Minister, you and your 

Premier should stop playing politics, stop with the partisanship 

and get on with dealing with economic activity, dealing with 

the rural crisis.  Your Premier has his secret meetings down 

East.  The NDP Premier is tight-lipped about all the things he's 

going to do about human rights and other rights. 

 

Will you today agree to call him home and put his nose to the 

grindstone and deal with agriculture and economic and things 

that really matter in the province of Saskatchewan?  Will you 

do that today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the people in Saskatchewan 

have a great faith in our Premier and they're quite fed up with 

the theatrics of the member opposite.  They were fed up with it 

for nine an a half years and are fed up with it now.  And I 

assure you that they have a very strong confidence in the 

leadership of our Premier, whether it's on constitutional matters 

which are of serious concern to all of us, or whether it's on the 

interest and the actions of an agriculture policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the media is recognized and it's in 

the newspapers, it's in magazines, the constitutional experts are 

saying these tight-lipped ideas of his aren't working.  All we're 

asking him -- and the people of Saskatoon and the people in 

rural Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan are saying -- 

why don't you get your Premier home and deal with business?  

Why don't you stay here and help farmers? 

 

We've got the head of the Farm Credit Corporation in here 

today, prepared to talk about helping farmers.  We've got 

people across the province who say, stay home; deals are 

falling apart.  The largest computer company that was 

manufacturing computers in the province of Saskatchewan just 

went belly-up.  Deals are folding before our very eyes.  And 

the Premier's somewhere between Montreal, New York, and 

Paris, saying he's got some tight-lipped ideas on saving the 

country. 

 

Mr. Minister, won't you please ask him to come home 

and deal with business here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, our Premier, our members, 

our cabinet ministers, are very concerned about farmers from 

every corner of the province.  They, differently from you, 

decided to take a drive and visit with the farmers of the 

south-west to look at the serious situation there, introduce a 

motion in the House yesterday, to which your side responded 

by talking it out in a frivolous fashion rather than calling on the 

federal government to deal with the serious crisis we have 

there.  I don't think anybody is fooled by the theatrics of the 

member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I just want to tell the members 

that I will not allow question period to deteriorate to the extent 

that it is right now.  I ask all members to please come to order, 

let the members ask their questions, and let the minister answer 

them. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The fact is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've just asked members not to make 

those comments, and immediately we're having those 

comments made already.  I'll ask the Leader of the Opposition 

to put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What happened, Mr. 

Minister, was yesterday you introduced a motion and then you 

left the House.  Your Premier has left the province.  The front 

row of this Legislative Assembly is nowhere to be found. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The Government House 

Leader had listened before.  The Minister of Agriculture 

referred to his lack of attendance in the House.  Well I think if 

we want the rules of the House to be obeyed, then both sides 

should abide by them. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture and the House Leader or anybody else on the front 

row can address the question. 

 

People are in a crisis in rural Saskatchewan.  You've known 

about it since last fall because you campaigned on it.  There's a 

drought that you apparently went to see.  You need economic 

assistance, you need help from the federal government, you 

need farm organizations to come in here to deal with the 

problem. 

 

We can't find the NDP Premier.  We don't know where he is.  

Would you take the time to call him, whether he's in New York 

or Montreal or Paris or Ottawa or whatever he's doing, 

wherever he is, and would you ask him to come home today or 

as soon as possible to deal with the agricultural crisis.  We have 

federal . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I think the Leader 

of the Opposition knows full well that when I'm on my feet and 

call order, I want him to come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know what the 

member opposite did when he flew over to Belgium in the 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

supposed interest of Saskatchewan farmers and Canadian 

farmers, but I know the level of success that he had.  And I 

know he was not found.  And if he pretends that our Premier 

acts in the same way, flitting around when there's business to 

be done, the member opposite is wrong. 

 

The Premier is in daily contact, as you well know any 

responsible Premier would be, and is very much here in touch 

with the problems here and knows that the members on this 

side of the House and the cabinet ministers here are interested 

in the well-being of Saskatchewan and not interested in 

empty-headed statements like we've been hearing for the last 

10 minutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as the public and the media well 

know, I am quoting the public in Saskatchewan who are asking 

where the NDP Premier is.  Synergy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Bob 

MacLeod is saying: I don't know whether the Premier's afraid 

to attend to the Promavia activity or to Piper activity or the fact 

that you've got conflicting arguments between AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) and your provincial minister. 

 

And you have nothing happening with respect to agriculture.  

And Mr. MacLeod says, well why doesn't the new NDP 

Premier stop the partisan politics and get home and deal with 

this? 

 

Secondly, why does he think that all of a sudden he's really 

going to be relevant when he's using secret meetings down 

East, tight-lipped meetings?  He criticized and you criticized 

and the House Leader criticized anybody for secret . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan 

has demonstrated his concern and his constant attention to the 

matters of the province here.  And the member opposite talks 

frivolously about matters that people know to be simply 

theatrics. 

 

The actions of the federal government have appalled all of 

Saskatchewan citizens.  Whether it's been the off-loading on to 

our agricultural sector, whether it's been the off-loading in 

health or education; whether it's been a tax on the province, 

relative to agreements, relative to the upgrader in 

Lloydminster, talks about cutting off Saskatchewan fuel stocks 

to the agreement; whether it's been on specific matters with 

respect to agriculture where in response to producer-oriented 

policy direction, the federal minister stands up and balks. 

 

Mr. Member opposite, I want you to know that Saskatchewan 

knows who's beginning the politics and who's facing a federal 

election and what kind of game they're playing, and they're 

tired of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture if he anticipates the NDP Premier coming home 

with any money from Ottawa for farmers. 

Yesterday, as recent as yesterday the government continued, 

the NDP government continued to lose its battle, its legal battle 

to destroy a co-operative program between the federal 

government and the provincial government. 

 

Now all other governments in Canada are working in GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program).  Your Premier, the NDP 

Premier who doesn't understand agriculture, number one, 

wrecks GRIP.  The court tells him that it's illegal. Now he's 

down East. 

 

Can you tell the farmers of Saskatchewan whether the media 

and the public can line up at the airport when the NDP Premier 

comes home because he's coming home with money from 

Ottawa.  Can you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are quite aware that we are addressing the serious questions of 

farm income and debt in Saskatchewan and they have had quite 

enough of members opposite sitting in their chairs squawking 

while we are working with farmers to develop policies which 

stabilize Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  And all his colleagues know, if you go to the 

University of Saskatchewan today and you ask them about your 

GRIP program, they'll say one of the biggest concerns that they 

have is that there just might be pockets of drought.  And that's a 

fact.  Because as you designed it in all of your wisdom and 

consultation, you forgot about why Saskatchewan's significant 

in agriculture -- we have almost half the farm land in Canada. 

 

Would you not admit your 1992 drought program, GRIP 

program addressing drought, when you cancelled it with the 

federal government, has removed a great deal of support and 

financial help from the federal government that would 

normally come into the province of Saskatchewan in case of 

drought? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think what needs to be 

brought to the attention of the member opposite is that over the 

last four or five years he has brought to Saskatchewan a debt in 

agriculture and a debt to the provincial economy that is 

virtually unfathomable.  A $15 billion provincial debt overall 

which cripples many aspects of good government policy. 

 

But in addition to that, with respect to agricultural policy, in 

1988 he made an agreement that committed the province to in 

excess of $100 million on drought assistance.  Then he took on 

half of the crop insurance contributions by the federal 

government, 40 to $60 million.  And then took from the 

western grain stabilization program onto the GRIP program on 

another 140 or $150 million, and another 25 or 30 with respect 

to NISA (net income stabilization account). 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have made agreements 

with the federal government in exchange for that which 

supposedly brought us third line of defence support.  The 

second line was to cover the regular matters covered by GRIP 

and NISA.  Third line was to be extraordinary support.  Where 

has the member opposite been as his federal minister has 

continually said, we have no money.  Even the Prime Minister 

recognizes Saskatchewan does not have the capacity to pay the 

bill, to give itself a blood transfusion when it's bleeding to 

death. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that the public 

doesn't believe that and the media doesn't believe that.  I want 

to quote the minister, Mr. Speaker.  This is what you said.  I 

think it was June 11, about the south-west drought: 

 

 Wiens told reporters later the 1992 version of GRIP will give 

farmers "some" drought protection (some).  He admitted, 

however, the 1991 version would provide better protection 

"in the event of a crop failure or below-average production." 

 

Now that's what you say.  And you stand in your place, looking 

for your new NDP Premier saying, I don't have any money.  

The program that I just destroyed is going to remove the 

protection for drought.  You've got federal people here 

prepared to co-operate with you. 

 

I ask you again: in your knowledge and in Professor Furtan's 

admission and knowledge that the 1992 GRIP program doesn't 

help with respect to drought, will you give the farmers the 

option -- now that the court has said you're haywire, we don't 

believe you, you broke the law -- will you give them the option 

to go 1991 or 1992 so they can get the kind of protection they 

bought and paid for?  Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is well 

aware, even though he claims to not himself agree with the 

agreement he made.  His counterpart in Manitoba very strongly 

came with us to Ottawa, while he would not, and confronted 

the federal government and said we had an agreement on third 

line of defence.  You offered to pay extraordinary farm 

support.  This is a Conservative colleague, a Minister of 

Agriculture from the province of Manitoba who stood up with 

Saskatchewan farmers, with Alberta farmers, and with 

Manitoba farmers and said, you promised us third line of 

defence when we made the agreement on second line, when we 

contributed $140 million on GRIP and $27 million on NISA.  

You made a commitment, now where is it?  Where was the 

member opposite when that challenge was made to the federal 

government? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP Premier, who admits that 

he doesn't understand agriculture and is not interested in it, has 

his hand-picked minister, his hand-picked minister and some 

farmers that go down to Ottawa, and what did you come home 

with?  A bill to the 

farmers for 150 or $160,000.  That's all you've ever got out of 

Ottawa using your tactics. 

 

Now as a result of you wrecking GRIP, as a result of you 

breaking the law, will you now tell the farmers of 

Saskatchewan exactly what's going to be in the legislation that 

that House Leader, that new NDP House Leader, is going to 

bring in here and retroactively change history in the province 

of Saskatchewan?  Will you tell us . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite not 

only did long-term damage to Saskatchewan but long-term 

damage to all other provinces with respect to agricultural 

funding across Canada.  In the member opposite's haste . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the Leader of the 

Opposition had ample time to ask his question.  I wish now that 

he would listen to the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In the member opposite's haste to 

introduce programs to fit a political agenda, he undermined not 

only Saskatchewan farmers but Alberta farmers and Manitoba 

farmers, took onto not only Saskatchewan taxpayers a huge 

debt but onto all other farmers a huge debt.  I think the member 

opposite should be ashamed of his antics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, all those watching television or 

listening to this in the media know that you have not answered 

the question.  You are the minister.  There is a rural crisis.  You 

are the minister.  Those front benches have access to the kinds 

of things that could help farmers today.  And all you do is point 

fingers at me or point fingers at Americans or point fingers at 

somebody else. 

 

What are you going to do?  And I'm asking you just a simple 

question.  What do you have in mind in the legislation that 

you're going to bring into this House to change history and to 

overcome the fact that the court says that you illegally broke 

the GRIP contract and will hurt farmers that are suffering from 

drought?  Please tell us, the taxpayers, what it is in that Bill so 

we know what to expect from the NDP in this province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 

about these front benches having access to resources.  Well I 

want to tell you about what you've done to Saskatchewan's 

resources over the last nine and a half years, if you were not 

awake enough to realize the damage you yourself were 

causing.  People across Saskatchewan, the farmers in the 

south-west, the farmers at Orkney and Mankota, and 

Bengough, they know the situation Saskatchewan is in.  They 

understand the tough times we're in and they know we have to 

take tough measures to address it. 

 

The irresponsibility that you exercised for in excess of nine 

years is disrespected from one corner of this 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

province to the other.   And we will work with the remaining 

resources to bring stability to the province and correct the ills 

that the member opposite brought here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope the media records this well, 

that he has not answered a single question in this legislature.  

Mr. Minister, what are you afraid of?  Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, what is the NDP . . . what are you afraid, what's 

your Premier afraid of in answering the question?  What's in 

the legislation?  What's in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member has asked 

his question.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that the member 

opposite will have his curiosity satisfied when the Bill's 

introduced in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, that's not good enough.  What are 

you afraid of, Mr. Minister?  Would you agree, Mr. Minister, to 

hold the introduction of that legislation until the court 

proceeding is finished?  Would you do that?  Would you just 

sit on that legislation, as Draconian as it might be, as 

retroactive as it might be, as unfair as it might be, would you sit 

on it and hold it until the court proceedings are finished and let 

the farmers have their day in court?  Would you do that for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, like 

other members of his caucus, seem to have trouble deciding 

which way they want to go.  One minute they want to see it and 

the next minute they don't.  Our House Leader will make the 

decision when the legislation is introduced, I assure you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, again I call the media and the 

public's attention to this.  Clearly the NDP Premier is afraid to 

face the farmers.  Let's go to the country.  Come on.  The 

Minister of Agriculture is afraid to answer the questions. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to call the attention to the 

member from Cumberland that he is not to intercede and 

interrupt on the continuous basis he's done this this afternoon.  

And I ask him to please cease. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's too bad question period wasn't 

at least three or four hours so that we could ask the same 

questions over and over as we will in Estimates: when will you 

tell the farmers what you're going to do? 

 

I've asked you, will you table the Bill?  Will you just tell us 

what's in it?  No response.  I've asked you, will you then hold it 

and let the farmers go to court and let the court decide?  No 

response.  I've asked you how much money your NDP 

Premier's going to bring back to the province of Saskatchewan.  

No response. 

 

I'm asking you today, Mr. Minister, why are you so afraid 

of farmers that you won't answer those questions in the 

legislature today, and why won't you go and call your NDP 

Premier and bring him home and tell him to go to work in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Because in case you forgot . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's curious to me that the 

member opposite would talk about rural crisis as he sits here 

when our members have been out talking with farmers from 

one corner of the province to the other and listening to their 

concerns and listening to their solutions. 

 

When the member opposite had the opportunity to meet with 

7,000 farmers or 4,000 farmers last year in Rosetown, what did 

he do?  He had a scheduling difficulty.  Well let me tell you 

what farmers thought about that and what farmers think about 

the antics you're engaged in today. 

 

Farmers know about reality and farmers know about the 

practical concerns that need to be addressed in a farm economy 

and in a provincial economy.  And they will work with this 

government in bringing a brighter future to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, now we see, Mr. Speaker, that the 

NDP Minister of Agriculture not only won't answer the 

questions, he has to revert back to the fall when he wouldn't tell 

the farmers the truth.  If you'd have told them the truth, you 

wouldn't be here and you know it.  You got less support than 

your counterparts did in years gone by.  If you told the truth of 

what you were going to do, you wouldn't be here. 

 

All right.  I want you to tell the truth now.  Be truthful now.  

Come clean, up front.  Tell the farmers, tell the media what 

your plan is with respect to the court action and GRIP and the 

fact that you just might owe farmers, on average, $27 or $30 an 

acre.  If you don't come clean and tell us what's happening, you 

just might owe them that. 

 

Would you tell us . . . have you figured out the amount of 

money that you will owe farmers if in fact the court says, 

whoops, Mr. Minister, you've broken the law?  You're going to 

have to give them the choice 1991-92.  Would you tell this 

House how much you think farmers could expect to get if that 

happens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, last year what we promised 

was that we would sit down with farmers and design farm 

policy that was appropriate for Saskatchewan under our 

circumstances -- circumstances seriously altered by the 

members opposite in their irresponsibility for nine and a half 

years.  Our first commitment to all the people of Saskatchewan 

was that we would clean up the financial mess so that we could 

create some kind of stability so that we can have programs that 

go on.  We know it's going to cause pain for people across 

Saskatchewan to deal with the financial crises here.  We did 

not create that financial crisis.  The crisis is real and the 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

crisis is here, and the crisis is a result of the mess that you 

fellows made, and you ought to be ashamed of yourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, if the minister won't give the 

answers on the legislation that he's about to put in here and 

what he's going to do in court, then perhaps the public can 

begin to give him a little bit of the answers themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it not true that the only reason for your 

continued delays in the courts is that you know that you will 

lose without your retroactive legislation that rewrites history?  

Could you tell the people in this room and the media if your 

legal advice says: Mr. Minister, you're going to lose, and the 

only way you can protect yourself against the farmers and 

against the courts is to bring in retroactive legislation that has 

the NDP rewriting history because you will have deemed to 

have done the right thing for farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, what our legal advice tells us 

is that the mess that was created not only in the program but in 

the legal constructing of it and the process of implementing it 

needed serious remedy -- a mess in legality that's not different 

than the mess in finances that the members opposite left.  I 

think the people of Saskatchewan have adequately observed the 

absolute mismanagement of the members opposite whether it 

was the financial matters of the province, the legal matters of 

the province, or the social matters of the province.  And I think 

they're just delighted to have a new government to try and put 

some order into the province again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before I call the next order of 

business, I want to say I think the behaviour of the members in 

the House was disgraceful today in question period.  I want to 

apologize to the . . . on both sides of the House, on both sides.  

I want to apologize to the people in the galleries and the people 

out in Saskatchewan on behalf of the members. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Farm Financial Stability Act (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act (No. 3) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Farm Financial Stability Act (No. 3) be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Personal Property Security Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I shall be relatively brief on this.  It's I think neither complex 

nor terribly contentious.  I'm rising . . .  Of course at the end of 

my comments I will move second reading of this legislation. 

 

The mortgage protection plan was introduced in 1986.  The 

program basically subsidizes home mortgages down to an 

interest rate of thirteen and a quarter per cent, where I may say 

they have not been for some years.  Because of the operation of 

the Bill, however, somewhat over a thousand mortgages are 

still receiving some subsidy.  But there are only a thousand 

mortgages receiving subsidy.  This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will 

effectively end the mortgage protection plan on June 30, 1992.  

Eligible home owners will continue to receive benefits until 

that day. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the elimination of the mortgage 

protection plan was not an easy decision.  However the fiscal 

crisis facing this province, brought on by a decade of 

mismanagement, makes it necessary to reduce expenditures 

wherever possible.  The mortgage protection plan is thought by 

this government to be a program that can be eliminated without 

seriously affecting the right of people to own their homes or the 

security of those who already own them. 

 

Saskatchewan housing prices are among the most affordable in 

Canada.  Therefore, with a mortgage interest rate at a relatively 

low level, elimination of the program should affect an 

individual's decision to purchase a new home.  Since one-year 

closed mortgages are currently available at rates under 8 per 

cent, a change will not have 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

any effect on Saskatchewan home owners negotiating new or 

renewed mortgages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I announced this . . .  Mr. Speaker, my colleague, 

the Minister of Finance, announced this change in the May 7 

budget address.  By eliminating the program on July 1, 1992, 

home owners were given time to adjust to losing those benefits.  

As I said, somewhat in excess of 1,000 home owners -- I 

believe about 1,500 in total will be losing an average . . . will 

benefit.  The average monthly benefit, Mr. Speaker, is only $18 

a month, so it should not be thought to be crucial to anyone. 

 

With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act 

to amend The Mortgage Protection Act now be read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a 

few observations, and then I will be adjourning the debate, Mr. 

Speaker.  I just want to point out a number of things that I think 

are pertinent to the discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in question period today we dealt with a number 

of issues that related to the economy and to the provincial 

agriculture scene.  Well, Mr. Speaker, at the time when this Bill 

was introduced, the people were paying upwards of seventeen 

and a quarter per cent interest.  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 

at that time the people of the province of Saskatchewan, when 

we introduced this legislation, were losing their homes.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why that legislation was 

brought in.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was an important part of 

the opportunity for people.  It was a special opportunity for 

people in the province of Saskatchewan to take the capacity in 

and the opportunity to save their own homes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many, many people . . . the only reason they 

have their homes today is this very simple Act that is being 

repealed right here today.  That, Mr. Minister, was the reason 

why that was brought in.  And the only reason that you can 

take it out today without any people complaining about it is 

that the interest rates have gone down to 7 per cent. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The interest rate that this 

set the ceiling on was thirteen and a quarter.  It was thirteen 

and a quarter, and people were paying upwards of 17 per cent, 

some as high as 24 per cent in the way that they dealt with their 

home mortgages.  And that, Mr. Speaker . . . people were afraid 

of losing their homes.  All across Saskatchewan, people were 

afraid of losing their homes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was the opportunity that we gave back 

to the people of Saskatchewan, the freedom to own their own 

homes.  And that, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of.  We did that. 

 

And you want to talk about waste and mismanagement.  I'll tell 

you, Mr. Minister, that was the best waste and mismanagement, 

one of the best programs we've provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That waste and mismanagement was given to 

people who could provide for opportunity for their families to 

live in decency in their own homes.  And that's what that Bill 

provided.  And all of 

you said that was waste and mismanagement, years and years 

of waste and mismanagement. 

 

You wouldn't put the treasury of the province to the people of 

Saskatchewan for their benefit in the '70s, and your premier 

went and said -- and I clearly remember this because I 

campaigned on it in 1981 and 1982 -- and he says, oh we can't 

effectively change the interest rate because that's a national 

program.  Well we heard all through question period about this 

national program.  The involvement of those members opposite 

say that you can't deal with the changes in those cycles.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, the government at the time did, they promised the 

people and they kept their promise. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have their 

homes today in a whole lot better position than they had in 

1982 because of this Act.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is because of 

this Act that the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity 

to have saved their homes, because at 24 per cent interest, who 

could have kept it.  And they, Mr. Speaker, had an opportunity 

to keep it.  The member responsible for this will be having far 

more to say about it later and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Financial 

Administration Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this is another Act that I 

think is relatively . . . it is not routine in its import, I think it is 

relatively non-controversial, though.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 

one of the many steps that the government is taking to act on 

the recommendations of the Financial Management Review 

Commission, or as it is more properly known, the Gass report. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Gass report was established to 

conduct an independent review and to suggest ways to improve 

accountability and control.  I may say members opposite spent 

the month of December trying to defend themselves against the 

report they had not yet seen and continually attacked the 

independence of the members of the commission. 

 

In fact they misjudged the report.  This was not a litany of the 

financial shortcomings of the former administration -- although 

that could be done and would be a relatively long report.  

Instead, the Gass report, Mr. Speaker, focused on the means 

and the method by which a repetition of the decade could be 

avoided.  So, in fact, what the Gass Commission sought to do 

was not list all the shortcomings of the former administration, 

but to suggest ways to this government that such a thing could 

be avoided in the future. 

 

The emphasis of the Gass report is on accountability.  Stripped 

of all its complexity, and there's some 50 recommendations, if 

my memory serves me correct, the essence of the Gass report is 

that the only sure way of 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

avoiding a repetition of what happened under the former 

administration is to provide the public with full knowledge of 

what's going on and, more important, to provide their 

representatives in this Assembly -- the members of the 

Assembly -- with what's going on.  That, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

is very much in accordance with modern, current-day thinking. 

 

When I was campaigning in the last election, the public said to 

me time and time again, they complained of the lack of 

accountability.  Most members of the public, Mr. Speaker, 

could relate to the comments by the editors of the Maclean's 

magazine who said that Canada, in at least in the minds of its 

citizens, has an elected dictatorship.  You elect a government, 

and then for four years you have absolutely no control over 

them.  They do whatever they want. 

 

The public whom I met during the election repeated that and 

were able to relate to it.  Mr. Gass and his commission, rather 

than pointing out all the shortcomings of the former 

administration, zeroed in on that problem.  And what they said, 

Mr. Speaker, is the only means of avoiding that is to ensure 

that the public and their representatives are fully informed as to 

what's going on. 

 

Accountants call it accountability, and I guess we do too -- 

accountability of the Executive Council and the administration 

to this Assembly.  And thus the report is all about 

accountability. 

 

First, to improve accountability, the government proposes a 

deadline for the release of the Public Accounts of the province 

on October 31 following the end of the fiscal year, whether or 

not the legislature is in session.  And that is an important 

change. 

 

For many, many years, Mr. Speaker, Public Accounts were 

released regularly at the opening of the session.  Then the 

former administration began to have some problems with that.  

I remember Paul Rousseau, then minister of Financial Services, 

I recall the name of the department, released the reports early, 

found people asking awkward questions about it, and said if 

they were going to "play politics" in Public Accounts, he wasn't 

going to release them any more.  It really became the attitude 

of the former administration: if you're going to ask us nasty 

questions, we aren't going to give you any information. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, seeks to enshrine in legislation, the right of 

members of this Assembly to full knowledge.  It seeks to 

enshrine in legislation accountability so that members of this 

Assembly may ask the questions and so that members of 

Executive Council will know that their actions will be fully 

scrutinized by an Assembly which has all the necessary 

information to do the scrutinizing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, secondly, the government wishes to make more 

complete and understandable, the financial statements which 

are being released.  As pointed out by the commission, one 

aspect of this would be to record provisions for losses and 

write-downs for a number of investments in Crown 

corporations including Sask Water, SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development 

Corporation), Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. 

 

We propose, Mr. Speaker, that the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council have the ability to cancel -- in whole or in part, amend 

or transfer -- loans and advances between Crown and the 

Crown entities.  This will result in more accurate financial 

statements for the province, thereby provide members of this 

Assembly with the tools they need to do the job for which they 

were elected. 

 

Third, as pointed out by the Financial Management Review 

Commission, accountability is going to be improved by 

providing net operating losses for the Crown corporations.  

This was the subject, Mr. Speaker, of a great deal of criticism 

over many years by the Provincial Auditor who stated that the 

failure of the Crown corporations to provide separate annual 

reports made it impossible for him -- and of course when it was 

impossible for him, it was impossible for members of the 

Assembly -- to identify operating losses and to hold the 

ministers and those Crown corporations fully accountable 

either to this Assembly or to the Crown Corporations 

Committee. 

 

The accountability is therefore going to be improved by 

providing for net operating losses of Crown corporations to be 

financed by appropriations from the Consolidated Fund.  This 

will hold the Crown corporations accountable for their 

operating losses when the legislature is asked to finance the 

shortfall. 

 

The amendment also proposes that the . . . also proposes 

legislative authority be provided for the payment of grants to 

Crown corporations in the amount of their net operating losses.  

This Act, Mr. Speaker, is one of the many steps the 

government is taking to restore open, honest, and accountable 

government in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in many ways I think this is one of the more 

profound and important Bills to come before this Assembly.  

The inability of members of this Assembly to hold the former 

administration accountable for their losses and for their actions 

went to the very root of what went wrong in the '80s. 

 

It wasn't so much, Mr. Speaker, that incompetent or dishonest 

people were in office, although that's been suggested, the real 

problem was they were not accountable to anyone.  Because 

only they had the information, they were really accountable to 

no one.  Someone said: power corrupts and absolute power 

corrupts absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we seek to bring an end to that situation by 

providing that the government is going to be fully accountable 

to this legislature for all its actions and for the Crown 

corporations.  I therefore, Mr. Speaker, take great pleasure in 

moving second reading of An Act to amend The Financial 

Administration Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Just a 

few comments on behalf of my colleague, the critic for 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

Finance, from Thunder Creek.  It's kind of scary, Mr. Speaker, 

when one hears the associate minister, the toy minister get up 

as he says, and try to talk about his government being fully 

accountable -- fully accountable, open and honest to the people 

and with the people of Saskatchewan, where we just witnessed 

quite a charade during question period of exactly the opposite 

from the Minister of Agriculture from whom we're trying to 

elicit some very pertinent and some very significant and 

important information for the people of this province, and in 

particular the farmers of this province who are undergoing a 

great deal of stress, a great deal of financial difficulty. 

 

And we simply want an accounting from the government so 

that we know what their plans are, what their actions are, and 

more importantly, what the future holds for the people of this 

province and in particular again, the farmers of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, for you to talk about accountability so glibly 

lacks, I think, some credibility from whence you come.  And I 

just want to draw that to your attention. 

 

I am glad, however, that you start talking about the Financial 

Review Commission and its desire for openness.  And, Mr. 

Minister, we agree with you that there should be accountability, 

that there should be openness. 

 

We're very pleased that the Gass Commission did come out 

with its report, and we're very pleased to see the tenor of its 

report which, Mr. Minister, I would contend that it exonerated 

the previous government from many of the accusations that you 

have been levying against it, in the fact that Mr. Donald Gass 

himself said yes, the books were open. The facts were there for 

anyone who had, number one, the intelligence and the desire to 

read it and had the understanding and the ability to interpret 

what was there for them. 

 

So it was there.  That was the contention that we have always 

made on this side of the House -- that the information was there 

last fall for you folks to interpret what the financial position of 

this province was. 

 

And you, sir, and your colleagues on that side of the House, 

said that is not significant at this point because the significant 

features that we're most predominantly interested in is to win 

the election.  So we'll ignore that, and we will go on in spite of 

all the information that was available to you.  You chose to 

ignore that and go on and then promise the people of 

Saskatchewan more for less, that you would spend more and 

you would have no taxes -- no taxes, Mr. Minister. 

 

We've used that quote on you in this House previously where 

you said, no tax increases for two years.  And yet, Mr. 

Minister, you knew all this information.  Donald Gass says you 

did.  Your own commission said you did.  And you ignored 

that and you got elected under false pretences, Mr. Minister. 

 

So we are very glad that the commission has made its 

recommendations. 

 

You say that it's going to be non-controversial.  Well I 

think it will be up to this side of the House to determine 

whether or not your steps are going to be controversial or 

whether they are not going to be controversial. 

 

Our only objection primarily with the Gass Commission was 

initially the fact that you were rolling in -- and we had a great 

fear of this -- that you were going to roll in the Provincial 

Auditor, the Provincial Auditor into this to create some kind of 

credibility to your move which essentially -- and I will repeat 

this -- which essentially was motivated by political aspirations 

on your part as is evidenced, I believe, in the simple 

composition of the members of that Gass Commission.  

Certainly Donald Gass, a very respected accountant in the 

province.  But the other three fellows and gals that were on that 

were blatant, political, patronage appointments.  And I will 

repeat that:  they were blatant, political, patronage 

appointments. 

 

Now what further evidence do I have to support what I just 

said, that these were blatant, political, patronage appointments, 

something which your Minister of Justice has gone on record 

of saying that you will never do and that you have never done?  

That's what he said in this House.  Yet what do we find out?  

Where is this one gal that was appointed by you to the 

commission?  What appointment did she get?  What 

appointment did she get, along with the former premier, the 

Hon. Allan Blakeney?  Crass, political, patronage 

appointments, Mr. Minister.  And I want to bring that out. 

 

Those are the two points that we were most concerned about 

during the time when you appointed this Gass Commission.  

And I have to say again, we're very pleased with the results of 

it.  And we're very pleased with the fact that you did it now in 

retrospect, and seeing what type of a report Mr. Donald Gass 

has come up with. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, these are, I must admit, off-the-cuff remarks 

on my part on behalf of my colleague from Thunder Creek who 

has a lot, lot more to say on this issue.  And to make sure that 

this debate will continue on on another day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I now move the debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to repeal The Heritage Fund 

(Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the Winding-up of the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and the Farm Purchase 

Program Fund and to enact Consequential Amendments to 

Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from the repeal of 

that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make a few comments on 

this as well, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill touches upon the same 

subject as the previous legislation did.  If one were allowed 

more poetic licence in the naming of Bills, one might call this 

opportunity lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 1970s the province was favoured with 

very high commodity prices.  It was an era of very high 

inflation accompanied by, and indeed fed by, very high 

commodity prices.  I think it's accurate to say that if 



June 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

oil were to double in value today, it still wouldn't be as high as 

it was in 1975. 

 

I do hope the members of this Assembly have the benefit of the 

comments from the member from Wilkie on his feet.  I do hope 

he gets to his feet and drops these pearls of wisdom so that we 

may scramble for them.  I cannot quite hear them and I think 

the world will be much poorer if they are simply lost to 

posterity.  I do hope he gets to his feet in due course.  I would 

also wish that he would be a little less boisterous from his seat.  

It's making the progress of this discussion difficult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were favoured with very high commodity 

prices in the '70s.  I was saying that oil could double in value 

and it still wouldn't be as high in real terms as it was in 1975.  

That's also true of potash.  Potash could double in value today 

and it still wouldn't be as much in constant dollars as it was in 

1975.  Grain could quadruple in value and wouldn't be worth as 

much as it was in 1975.  The '70s were a period of extremely 

high commodity prices. 

 

In Saskatchewan we imposed what were admittedly very heavy 

taxes on the production of those commodity prices.  There's no 

question but what our tax on oil, our tax on potash were by far 

the highest in Canada, bar none. 

 

That money, Mr. Speaker . . . and here I'm coming to answer 

the question that was concerning the earnest member from 

Wilkie.  Mr. Speaker, the member from Wilkie wanted to know 

what we did with the money.  What we did with the money was 

put it into the Heritage Fund.  The Heritage Fund, Mr. Speaker, 

was designed to preserve for posterity some of that wealth 

which we recognized at the time would not continue.  That 

very high level of commodity prices was clearly an aberration 

and we sought to put some of that aside. 

 

Now the member from Wilkie is so concerned about how it 

was that it was squandered.  Frankly, Mr. Speaker, the Heritage 

Fund was squandered during the 1980s.  The Heritage Fund 

was there in 1982.  It was not quite in the form that they 

thought it was in.  They thought it was a bank account.  It was 

not in fact in the form of a bank account; it was invested.  And 

in 1982, Mr. Speaker, the Heritage Fund had a surplus of 

between 1 and $2 billion. 

 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, during the 1980s was that a new 

administration took office.  And they embarked upon a 

different agenda.  Rather than preserve some of this wealth for 

future generations, they sought instant gratification.  And that 

occurred in a number of ways.  One of them was privatization. 

 

The system for privatization as developed in England and as 

copied in this province was that assets were sold for 

considerably less than what they were worth.  The theory was 

the shares would then rise on the market and the people who 

had bought them would become dedicated capitalists.  Such 

was their system for selling their philosophy.  It was done at 

taxpayers' expense. 

 

It might have seemed innocuous at the time to be doing that, 

and perhaps to the general public it did seem innocuous.  It 

certainly doesn't seem innocuous now.  Mr. 

 Speaker, let me put that nonsense in its context.  As a result of 

that kind of nonsense the taxpayer is now subsidizing the 

Crown corporations to the tune of $131 million.  Let me 

translate that into terms that even the members opposite could 

understand.  It takes 2 cents on the sales tax to make up $131 

million. 

 

So if the members opposite want to know what their 

privatization games and the losses which they incurred on the 

Crown corporations during the 1980s cost the taxpayers, it's a 

couple of cents on the sales tax.  That's the extent of it. 

 

It wasn't just privatization, Mr. Speaker, it was also the belief 

that it was somehow or other immoral for Crown corporations 

to operate in competition with the private sector.  The Potash 

Corporation was thereby kept on a very tight rein.  And of 

course market share dropped.  And as market share dropped, 

profits plummeted and the Potash Corporation, having enjoyed 

enormous profits in the '70s, largely as a result of the 

management style of the members opposite began to incur very 

heavy losses.  That came out of the Heritage Fund, as did the 

losses on privatization. 

 

When PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) was 

privatized in 1989 it was a loss of $361 million.  In addition, 

Mr. Speaker, there were debts incurred in funding one 

hare-brained scheme after another.  No hare-brained scheme 

could come within shooting distance of this province but what 

these people didn't have to give it some money. 

 

The most infamous example is GigaText, but it was by no 

means the largest, by no means the last, nor by any means the 

first.  One dumb idea after another attracted huge gobs of 

money like a magnet being dragged through a pile of iron 

filings. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Let's make a deal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let's make a deal, was their theory.  

And nothing has changed.  Nothing has changed, Mr. Speaker.  

Let me just say that the folks across the way have not changed 

one iota. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we evaluated the Piper deal.  We decided what 

we thought it was worth.  What's the approach of members 

opposite?  The approach of members opposite is to pay 

whatever you have to to get it.  That is not the approach of this 

government.  We decide what something's worth and we don't 

pay any more.  If we get it at a fair price, we get it; and if we 

don't, we let somebody else pay too much, but we're not going 

to.  These people opposite, Mr. Speaker, haven't changed one 

iota. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has examined all the aspects of 

the Heritage Fund.  We decided to maintain two important 

Heritage Fund reserves in the Consolidated Fund for their 

intended purposes.  These are the energy security reserve 

created to fund the development of energy resources, and the 

environmental protection reserve created to provide 

contingency funding to mitigate unforeseen environmental 

problems related to uranium mining.  So that there will be 

those two reserves. 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1992 

Although there's not . . . I may say there has not yet been a 

need to utilize the second reserve since its creation, it's 

certainly prudent to maintain it.  Short-term reserves totalling 

$82.8 million will continue to be set aside for the purpose of 

this reserve. 

 

The Bill also proposes to wind up the farm purchase program.  

This fund collects lease revenue on agricultural land and 

receives appropriations from the Heritage Fund.  I won't get 

into it in detail.  Suffice it to say that its purpose has 

disappeared into history.  All of its revenue will be paid to the 

Consolidated Fund.  With the Heritage Fund wind up, it's more 

efficient for the Consolidated Fund to collect the lease revenue 

directly.  The government proposes therefore that the Heritage 

Fund be wound up as indicated.  The Estimates for 1992-93 

have been prepared on this basis. 

 

In closing therefore I say, Mr. Speaker, that the government in 

the '70s set up the Heritage Fund to preserve for future 

generations the excess revenue from very high commodity 

prices.  The government opposite squandered it in the '80s.  It's 

like a father who, having gone through hard times, is thrifty, 

some would call parsimonious, develops a good estate.  Dies 

and leaves it to his children; never having seen the difficulties 

that the father went through to amass the estate, simply 

squander it without any thought for tomorrow.  That is what 

has happened. 

 

In a sense, Mr. Speaker, this government represents the third 

generation.  The generation having lost the patrimony of the 

grandparents must now deal with the spendthrift habits of their 

parents.  This Bill, as I said, Mr. Speaker, could well be called 

opportunity lost.  It isn't.  I will therefore, Mr. Speaker, without 

further ado move second reading of an Act to repeal The 

Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been 

listening with interest to the debate and the comments that have 

been made by the Associate Minister of Finance in the House 

regarding Bill 51, The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Repeal 

Act.  I would make a few comments and suggest that we will 

be looking a little more diligently into the Bill, the implications 

of the Bill, and therefore will be moving adjournment in a few 

seconds. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've been listening to the minister 

and the minister has gone through a long liturgy of what the 

original reasoning behind the Heritage Fund and why it was put 

together.  And on this side of the House and many members, I 

believe, will agree that there is nothing wrong in planning for a 

rainy day and certainly putting aside funds for a rainy day and 

planning for your future. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem that we face in 

addressing the Bill today is the fact that prior to 1982, yes, 

there were . . . the government of the day led the people of 

Saskatchewan to believe that there was something like a 

million dollars-plus in the Heritage Fund -- a million 

dollars available in cash, that was available to the province of 

Saskatchewan -- led Saskatchewan electorate to think that there 

was this nice little pot, nest-egg, that was being set aside.  And 

yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once the election of 1982 was over 

and the former government of Mr. Blakeney was turfed and the 

new government had taken office, they found out that there 

wasn't this cash in the Heritage Fund. 

 

And as much as the Associate Minister of Finance would lead 

us to believe that they had a lot of money set aside for a rainy 

day, when you begin to look at where the Heritage Fund was in 

1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where was it sitting?  It was sitting 

in resources. As the minister indicated, oil definitely was high 

and potash and our resources were bringing in a pretty good 

revenue in the 1970s.  And certainly that was a time period in 

which money should have been set aside for a time when the 

economy would be facing more difficult times. 

 

But what did the government of the day do, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  The government went and invested in potash mines.  

If the government wanted to invest in potash, why didn't the 

government form a corporation and sink their own shaft rather 

than taking over from companies that were already paying 

royalties to the province and had employees? 

 

And when the government bought up these potash mines, what 

did they use to purchase the mines?  They used the money of 

our children.  They used the so-called heritage funds, this 

money, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When you're investing in 

property, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any time you invest in property 

you know that it can either go up or it can go down. 

 

And what happened over the past number of years?  We've 

seen that all this money was put in assets, assets which have 

been losing value continuously.  So it's no wonder that the 

Heritage Fund, Mr. Speaker, hasn't got anything in it.  And we 

have to question the reasoning and the rationale that the former 

government took when they set up the Heritage Fund. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the former government would have let 

the potash companies of the province of Saskatchewan 

continue to pay royalties and taken that funds and indeed built 

a fund up instead of just buying out companies, certainly the 

Heritage Fund probably would have done something for this 

province. 

 

Not only did they invest in potash mines, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

They invested in land.  They went and bought land from 

farmers.  And then farmers became tenants in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And what has happened to the farm land?  In 

fact, that money was used to drive up land -- drive up land 

prices, land prices which reached values which was probably 

four and five and six times the productive value of that land. 

 

And there's no doubt.  And we all know what has happened in 

the farming sector since then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

fact that, yes, a lot of farmers have been facing difficulty -- 

difficulty created because the government didn't care back in 

1981, 1982, in the late '70s when they allowed interest rates to 

rise into that 18, 



June 11  29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

19, and 22 per cent.  and when they took money and they 

invested in good projects that were already being utilized by 

companies . . . and companies that were indeed paying their 

taxes to the province of Saskatchewan, taxes which could have 

been used to pay for the education and the health care and the 

well-being of our province. 

 

(1500) 

 

And the associate minister also talked about the former 

government and investing in computer companies.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what about the investment made by the former 

government of Mr. Blakeney prior to 1981 in the corporation 

called Nabu?  Is that another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

I guess as we get into further debate on this Bill we will find, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are many other examples that 

we will be able to bring forward to show that first, when the 

Heritage Fund was originally set up, it was probably a good 

idea at the time.  It's unfortunate it didn't have better managers 

in laying out the guidelines and plan with which they could set 

aside the appropriate funds and finances and, as the province of 

Alberta did, invest them properly in the investment community 

so that they could build for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do have a number of other 

comments we would like to make on the Bill, and therefore at 

this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask for leave to 

revert to introduction of Bills. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave -- I guess I 

don't need leave -- I would move to amend Certain Farm 

Income Insurance Legislation Act. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:02 p.m. until 5 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Having received no indication that the 

House is prepared to vote prior to today's adjournment hour, in 

accordance with precedent I have ordered the bells to be shut 

off at the ordinary hour of daily adjournment.  The bells will be 

suspended and the Chamber closed until the next normal sitting 

hours of the Assembly, as outlined in rule 3 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

Notwithstanding this action, I am prepared to resume at once 

the ringing of the bells outside the normal hours if the Chair is 

given at least two hours notice by the whips of a specific time 

when the vote shall take place. 

 

The Chamber sittings are thus suspended. 

 

The division bells rang Friday, June 12, 1992. 

The Deputy Speaker: -- It now being 1 o'clock p.m., this 

sitting is suspended until Monday at 1:30 o'clock p.m. unless 

recalled earlier, pursuant to the Speaker's statement from 

yesterday. 

 

The division bells rang Monday, June 15, 1992. 

 

The division bells rang Tuesday, June 16, 1992. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Since it does not appear that the 

Assembly is prepared to vote today, I have decided to suspend 

the sitting at 5 o'clock p.m. in keeping with our current practice 

regarding Tuesday night sittings. 

 

However, should the members agree that a vote will take place 

this evening and give me two hours notice of such agreement, I 

will take the necessary measures to resume the sitting. 

 

The division bells rang Wednesday, June 17 until Monday, 

June 22, 1992. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  As it appears that the House is not 

disposed to proceed to the vote today, I have decided to shut 

down the Chamber at 5 o'clock p.m.  There is no point in 

keeping some members at their desks this evening. 

 

Proceedings will resume tomorrow at 1:30 p.m.; however, 

should both sides indicate that a vote will be taken prior to 

tomorrow's resumption, I will make all the necessary 

arrangements to resume the sitting within two hours of receipt 

of such notice. 

 

The division bells then continued to ring until 2 p.m., Monday, 

June 29, 1992. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  All members were informed last 

Friday through their respective House leaders of my intention 

to make a statement today at 2 p.m., which now I will make to 

the House. 

 

On June 11, 1992, the Government House Leader obtained 

unanimous consent of the Assembly to revert to introduction of 

Bills for the purpose of moving first reading of a Bill 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation.  When the motion for first reading of the Bill was 

put to a voice vote the Chair determined that a majority of the 

members present had voted in its favour.  At this stage several 

members rose to request a recorded division.  Accordingly, the 

bells were ordered to ring to summon the members to the vote.  

That was 18 days ago. 

 

In the days that followed, negotiations were held between the 

contending parties to reach some kind of mutually satisfactory 

solution.  During that same time the work of the legislature 

came to a complete halt.  There was no opportunity for debate 

and consideration of the many other important issues 

confronting this province.  This cannot continue indefinitely. 

 

The Assembly is Saskatchewan's foremost political arena.  

Here we, as elected members, contend over any and all public 

issues that seek attention and demand  decisions. 



 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 1076 

The current paralysis of the legislative process prevents 

members from fulfilling their important parliamentary 

responsibilities.  All members share some blame for this 

situation. 

 

Practices have developed in this Assembly in the past few 

years which have jeopardized the ability of this House to work.  

We have allowed partisan differences to subvert the legislative 

process and to cripple the work of this Assembly. 

 

While heated political exchanges are certainly a common 

feature of our parliamentary system, it exceeds all tolerable 

limits when the Assembly itself becomes a casualty of the 

political strife between the parties.  The very credibility of this 

institution in the public mind has been seriously undermined. 

 

As a procedural tactic, prolonged bell-ringing lacks 

parliamentary legitimacy.  Prolonged bells destroy the 

operating principles that are at the core of this institution.  

Prolonged bells have prevented any debate.  The right of the 

majority to secure its business and that of the minority to be 

heard have been suppressed.  The right of all citizens to have 

their views represented in this Assembly by their 

democratically elected members has been denied. 

 

Opportunities to correct this unacceptable abuse have been put 

off or simply ignored.  The Rules Committee has refused to 

come to grips with the critical problem.  In no other jurisdiction 

in this country or throughout the whole Commonwealth does 

such an ill-designed practice continue.  Indeed it is only in this 

country that the problem has ever existed at all, and only in 

Saskatchewan does the problem persist.  Everywhere else in 

Canada the duration of bell-ringing has been limited.  It can 

vary from a minimum of five minutes to a maximum of one 

hour depending on the province and the circumstances 

associated with the vote.  What we have here in this Assembly 

is an extraordinary and unacceptable state of affairs. 

 

As the member you elected to be your Speaker, I believe that 

the Chair has a special responsibility to find a means to commit 

the legislature to resume functioning.  At this juncture there 

appears to be no alternative.  Events taking place outside of this 

Assembly were cited during this present episode as the possible 

means by which it might be resolved.  To date this has come to 

nothing and there is no real prospect that this will change.  

Therefore I have decided to intervene. 

 

Before continuing, however, I want members from both sides 

of the Assembly to understand that I have come to this decision 

after much careful consideration of our precedents and the 

present situation.  Of course my preference would have been 

for the members to have arrived at some sort of settlement.  It 

was explained in the ruling dated June 12, 1991 that the 

primary responsibility for resolving differences and difficulties 

should lay with members.  Under the present circumstances, 

however, much to my disappointment, this does not seem 

possible.  In effect, the decision to intervene has been imposed 

upon me. 

 

Let me say to those members with doubts as to whether  

the Speaker has authority to intervene, that in recent times as 

well as throughout parliamentary history, Speakers have taken 

discretionary action in the best interest of the House.  In the 

ruling of June 12, 1991, Speaker Tusa demonstrated that under 

certain conditions the Chair has authority to exercise discretion 

to intervene.  I do not intend to repeat all what the 

parliamentary authorities and other Speakers have said on the 

subject but I do want to re-emphasize a number of points. 

 

First of all, members should realize that as Speaker it is my 

responsibility to protect the majority against obstruction as 

much as it is to protect the minority against oppression.  In 

dealing with both sides of the House, the Speaker must be for 

ever mindful of what is the best interest of the House as a 

parliamentary institution.  Accordingly, the Speaker's primary 

interest is the parliamentary process and not the product of that 

process. 

 

When rules and practices become the focus of political warfare, 

then the Speaker must become even more vigilant.  On this 

subject I want to quote Josef Redlich's Procedure of the House 

of Commons, which is a standard parliamentary authority in 

Great Britain, and I quote: 

 

 (Parties and politicians) are giving the rules of procedure a 

fictitious importance, treating them as if they were political 

ends, instead of means only; they must take into account that 

thus they may be injuring, destroying, annihilating, those 

elements of the order of business which do exist for their 

own sake . . . 

 

In Saskatchewan, Speakers have sometimes felt obliged sooner 

or later to intervene to prevent the rules and practices from 

being used purely for political ends.  On March 21, 1986 

Speaker Swan intervened to prevent the rules for the giving of 

oral notices of motions from being used for obstructionist 

purposes.  Despite precedent, Speaker Tusa acted to end the 

use of presentation of petitions to be used for obstructionist 

purposes.  Indeed, Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, paragraph 11 

indicates that Speakers have used their authority to develop 

procedure, and I quote: ". . . regardless of conflicting 

precedents in the past." 

 

Before going on, I want to add these comments made by 

Speaker Fraser in a ruling which ended a deadlock in the House 

of Commons in Ottawa April 14, 1987.  He stated, and I quote: 

 

 Our rules were certainly never designed to permit the total 

frustration of one side or the other, the total stagnation of 

debate, or the total paralysis of the system . . . However, 

when negotiations fail there comes a time when the Chair is 

obliged to consider what its own responsibilities are.  One of 

the functions of the Speaker is to ensure that the House is 

able to transact its business. 

 

Speaker Fraser went on to explain that when the House is faced 

with an impasse it is unable to resolve for itself, the Chair has 

to face its responsibilities. 

 

And he quotes, and I quote: 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

(when) the rules . . . provide no solution, the Chair must fall 

back on its discretion in the interests of the House and all its 

Members. 

 

This might even require, as Speaker Fraser noted, that, and I 

quote, "the Chair modify or vary an earlier decision." 

 

There is no doubt that the total paralysis of this Assembly for 

an indefinite period is an extraordinary situation.  Certainly 

there is a difference between hindering a single measure and 

bringing the whole function of parliament to a standstill.  I 

have not been informed of an imminent resolution to the 

impasse. 

 

In light of the prevailing extraordinary circumstances, I feel 

that at this juncture the Speaker has no option but to use his 

discretion to intervene.  Accordingly, all members have been 

informed that at 2 p.m. today I am reconvening the sitting and 

have ordered the bells to be turned off. 

 

The recorded division on the Bill respecting amendments to 

Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation is hereby 

suspended for the time being.  The Bill will remain on the order 

paper with the notation that the vote on first reading is under 

suspension.  This action will set aside for a time being the 

decision on the Bill under contention and will allow for a 

cooling-off period for all concerned to consider their options. 

 

The vote on the GRIP Bill is thus suspended until I am 

informed that both the government and the opposition, the 

official opposition, are ready to proceed with the Bill or until 

the House itself makes a decision on the disposition of the Bill. 

 

The most important result of this decision is that the Assembly 

will be able to continue with other business while settling 

matters respecting the GRIP Bill.  Members will note that my 

ruling does not determine the question of the length of the 

bells, thus I have not exercised the full extent of the Chair's 

authority at this time.  What this ruling does is give the House 

itself the opportunity to resolve both the procedural and the 

public policy issues involved in this case.  At the same time it 

allows the Assembly to continue with other business. 

 

As one of the first items of business, I urge the House to deal 

with establishing a solution to, in my view, the unacceptable 

practice of paralysing the House through bell-ringing.  Press 

reports of recent days have indicated that representatives from 

all three parties have recognized that there is a need for a rule 

to be adopted to establish the maximum length the division 

bells may ring. 

 

As chair of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, I 

will call a meeting of the committee at the earliest opportunity 

to enable the committee to consider the question of establishing 

time limits on division bells.  I believe it is the duty of the 

Speaker to act in the best interest of the House and I make a 

commitment to continue to do so as the current problems are 

being resolved. 

 

(1415) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I've been approached by members who 

have asked for leave to introduce guests.  Is it agreed that we 

now do that? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to introduce 

to the Legislative Assembly today -- the members of the 

Legislative Assembly -- 29 grade 7 and 12 students from the 

Govan School, along with their teacher, Ian Kelln, and their 

other guardians that are with them today.  I want to welcome 

them here today, and I'd ask the members to make them feel 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, before I move the 

required motion, I would like to first of all introduce the 

officials who are with me.  And as members will know because 

we've been here before, John Wright, who is the deputy 

minister of Finance, is sitting on my right.  Mr. Craig Dotson, 

the associate deputy minister of Finance, budget analysis 

division, is immediately behind Mr. Wright.  And behind me is 

John Law, executive director, treasury board branch. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as you know and as the House knows, that 

interim supply is a requirement or a request by the government 

when the House is in session for interim funding until the 

budget is passed by the Assembly.  And the procedure is to ask 

either one-twelfth or two-twelfths supply for the following 

month.  In this case it'll be for the month of July. 

 

I am coming forward, as the Minister of Finance, to request one 

month's supply or one-twelfth.  And in keeping with that, I 

move the following motion: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $365.428 million be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the twelve months 

ending March 31, 1993. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce one of Saskatchewan and Canada's renowned farm 

leaders, presently a member of the Canadian Wheat Board 

advisory committee, Roy Atkinson, in the gallery opposite.  

Welcome on behalf of 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

all of us in the House, Roy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last time when 

the House dealt with interim supply, the minister forwarded a 

list over of the various departments because there were some 

areas that were more than one-twelfth. And I would like if the 

minister would send such a document across to us, if that 

would be possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

thank the member from Thunder Creek for the question.  I 

actually was going to do this earlier but I thought we had to go 

through the formalities.  I do have, for the benefit of the 

opposition, a copy of all of the information dealing with each 

department's request, department by department.  I have also 

provided -- because I remember the debate we had the last time 

we were here -- detailed information about all of those cases 

wherein there is a request for more than one-twelfth and the 

reasons for it, so that the members opposite can have, and I . . . 

we should really get a copy of this because I think the Liberal 

member should get a copy of this as well.  So if the pages don't 

mind making us a copy so I can have one for each.  And I'm 

sorry we don't have two copies, we should have . . . I should 

have known that the staff would have two copies, here we are. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the 

minister providing this.  It should save some time in committee 

having this information up front. 

 

Mr. Minister, since we last met on interim supply you have had 

the opportunity, and I'm not sure it was exactly a privilege, of 

visiting with some of the people that lend Saskatchewan 

money.  We've had a further downgrading by some of the 

financial institutions in regard to our bond rating, that we 

certainly are in a different light than when we last met on this 

particular issue. 

 

And I wonder if the minister could just inform the House as to 

some of those visitations and some of the economic forecast 

that he made to the people in the various rating agencies as to 

what he foresees into the next few months.  Because it will 

have a direct impact on how we finance this interim supply Bill 

and how we may have to finance the next one if this House 

hasn't passed the budget by that time.  And I wonder if the 

minister could just inform the House as to some of those 

deliberations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to 

respond to the member for Thunder Creek.  Yes, both the 

Premier and I spent some time in Toronto and Montreal and 

New York, meeting with credit rating agencies as well as 

meeting with investors -- both investors who invest by the way 

of purchasing the bonds which the province issues which is a 

way we borrow money, go out to the market, and also people 

who are interested in Saskatchewan as a province to make 

direct investments for business purposes. 

The meetings we had were very positive.  I was impressed by 

the -- and I want to report this to the House -- by the high level 

of interest and confidence that people we met with have in the 

future of the province of Saskatchewan.  There obviously has 

been and continues to be an expression of concern about the 

high level of the debt which this province carries on a per 

capita basis and the ability of the province over the period of 

time to be able to finance that debt. 

 

Our role and our purpose was to meet with the people we met 

with to explain to them the measures we have taken in this 

budget to begin to address the financial situation that we face.  

We explained to them how we have brought the deficit down to 

the level that it's there.  We were able to, I believe, have some 

impact in that explanation on one of the major bond rating 

agencies, Moody's, bond rating agencies in New York which 

upheld our credit rating. 

 

As the member from Thunder Creek will know, two others had 

reduced our credit rating before that.  And Canadian bond 

rating agencies, although they reduced us, have kept us -- 

which is another group we met with on our trip -- kept us in the 

A category.  They're doing that on the basis of . . . And I 

believe it is an expression of confidence that they feel that the 

government has a firm grip on the financial wheel of the 

province. 

 

We have taken the initial correct steps.  There's more that's 

going to have to be done.  There's going to have to be a 

continuing decline of this deficit which is what we have said on 

the day we presented the budget.  And in our meetings with the 

financial community in Toronto and New York in particular, 

we did the same thing.  We were quite up front.  We explained 

what the situation was and what our budget was doing. 

 

The thing that's important for Saskatchewan people and 

members of the House to know, because we're all interested in 

the future of this province, was that although they recognized 

the financial difficulty we face and the high debt that we carry, 

and that is of concern, they are quite ready to listen to a 

discussion which we brought to them about the strong potential 

of this province in its resource base, in its agricultural potential. 

 

And on those strengths we indicated that Saskatchewan is a 

good place to invest.  I think we were able to carry the message 

on behalf of the province.  There is that kind of interest.  The 

recent move by a company, head office from Calgary to 

Saskatoon, which happened last week, I think is an example of 

the kind of confidence that investors are showing in this 

province and I think are showing in the institutions of 

government, and I include all of the legislature in that, in 

dealing with the situation that we face. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, well I thank the minister for 

that overview because I think that some of his observations are 

right on the money, that Saskatchewan indeed has a lot of 

potential.  It's the question of whether this government will let 

that potential blossom and flourish that I suppose divides the 

members of this House. 

 

And I would have loved to have been the fly on the wall in that 

meeting room, Mr. Chairman, to listen to how the 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

Finance minister and the Premier presented these opportunities 

to people that obviously, in my view, might not have the same 

philosophical bent as some of the Finance minister's colleagues 

when we pertain to certain issues in the province as far as 

investment. 

 

And I, like the Minister of Finance, welcome the move of 

people like Minatco to our province because the uranium 

business is important to us.  Another 2 or 300 hundred jobs in 

northern Saskatchewan is not something to sneeze at, and 

certainly the taxes and the royalties from a new uranium mine 

are something that this province does indeed need.  And I'm 

sure that the people in New York and Toronto and Montreal 

would take some degree in confidence that those moves do 

bode well for the future. 

 

By the same token, we've obviously had other problems 

associated with business leaving this province, with 

opportunities being missed.  And I would just ask the minister, 

when you're visiting with those people, do they raise the 

question of nuclear development, AECL?  Do they raise the 

questions associated with other value added industries that 

have obviously run into some difficulty because of the 

philosophical bent of your government? 

 

Are they worried about the feeding industry of Saskatchewan?  

It's an industry that turns between 2 and $300 million a year to 

our provincial treasury.  Obviously a feeding industry that 

would lose that amount of potential because of recent budget 

moves . . . are they concerned that those things are happening 

and that there is nothing new coming to replace them?  

Obviously we're having problems with aircraft plants.  We're 

having problems attracting other viable enterprises that could 

pick up the slack.  Do they ask those sorts of questions and 

what your future plans are in some of these very large and 

significant areas to the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the one thing that 

one gets impressed with very quickly in this kind of important 

series of meetings is that good business and good investment 

doesn't look at the political stripe of a government in North 

America or the province of Saskatchewan.  They look at the 

good business investment opportunity, and Saskatchewan is a 

good business investment opportunity. 

 

There was no doubt about that message that was brought to us 

in our discussions that we had with the various people we 

spoke to. 

 

What they're asking predominantly is the question of what is 

the financial state of the province.  And that's a fair question.  

The reason they ask that question is because they know that 

continuing deficits and continuing accumulation of debt is not 

in the interest of the province, and it's not in the interest of 

those who might invest in the province because at some point 

in time this continuous accumulation of debt becomes a cost, as 

it is well known to members opposite, this year with a cost of 

$760 million worth of interest charges which the taxpayers 

have to pay. 

 

That was the main question which was asked of us -- about 

where we are going with that -- and we simply presented the 

budget to show where that was the case. 

There were no specific questions of the kind that the member 

from Thunder Creek raises on specific projects. 

 

Those were not addressed by the people we spoke to; they were 

mainly interested in one, what is the policy of the government 

with regard to financial management.  And we explained what 

the policy was.  And by and large, I believe they were quite 

satisfied with the direction that was being taken. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate your comments on 

the diligence that the government is presenting to these folks as 

far as your deficit reduction figures and I would suspect that 

they did notice that we did have the second-highest deficit in 

our history in this latest budget. 

 

But my experience . . .  and I have had the opportunity to deal 

with these folks on a maybe not quite the same level as the 

minister but obviously in a roundabout way through various 

share offerings and privatizations and that type of thing that the 

former government was involved in, and that they were always 

interested in the . . . sort of the long-term view of our province. 

 

Because something like the uranium industry doesn't stop and 

start on a daily basis.  That many of the companies involved -- 

Minatco, I'm sure, amongst them; Cameco -- will make 10-year 

agreements with utilities.  They will say, we are committed to 

X amount of pounds of uranium oxide over a given amount of 

time and that we want to have some confidence that we can 

fulfil those contracts down the road. 

 

These people are very interested because we're talking about 

tens and hundreds of millions of dollars on a very, sort of, 

regular basis.  And I would think that they would want some 

confidence from you in your long-term projections as you 

manage the deficit, as you make those long-term projections on 

how we're going to pay back our debts, that they would have 

some sense of security that these industries wouldn't simply up 

and leave for various reasons. 

 

You're right.  They probably take a long-term view at politics 

because politicians come and go -- you and I come and go from 

cabinet portfolios.  But there are some long-term philosophical 

directions in this province and I would think that they would 

want to know those things, Minister, about your view and your 

government's view of industries that obviously themselves have 

to borrow large amounts of money in the market-place from the 

very same investors.  The same companies would be 

forwarding money either through share offerings or through 

borrowed capital to some very large concerns in our province 

who have to make long-term projections in order for them to 

pay their debts. 

 

And I would have thought that they would have asked you 

those questions and I suspect that they did.  I think everyone in 

this House, Minister, would expect that they did ask those 

questions.  And I wonder if you just couldn't enlighten us a 

little bit further on some of those directions that I'm sure were 

discussed. 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me just . . . first 

of all, just so that the record of the House is clear that this is 

not the highest deficit or the second-highest deficit: the 

1991-92 deficit was well in excess of $800 million, the 1987 

deficit was $1.2 billion, and the 1988 deficit was $542 million.  

I just wanted to make sure that that was on the record. 

 

Mr. Chairman, further to . . . in response to the member from 

Thunder Creek, in our explanation of the budget and the 

financial direction which the province has taken under this 

government, two of the things that were important that we 

introduced from the point of view of providing some incentive 

and making our businesses more competitive, which we 

explained, which was welcomed by the people we spoke to, 

was the matter of the reduction of 1 per cent in the small 

business corporate income tax rate.  And also the three-year 

phasing out of the education and health tax on agents used in 

processing and manufacturing processes. 

 

This is a very positive step that will help to not only maintain 

the jobs that are existing now in the small-business sector and 

in the manufacturing and processing area and also help the 

small-business sector be more profitable, which will then will 

create new jobs, but also it will in this, Mr. Chairman, have an 

interest to those who may want to expand their businesses 

because as a sign of, an indication of, confidence in what 

they're doing.  And this has indeed been the very welcome 

move that was introduced in the budget. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, one 

of the areas that we were very curious about the last time that 

we were before the Assembly with interim supply -- and at that 

time it was very soon after the budget was presented -- was the 

whole area of taxation change.  Obviously the projections that 

you're making here today as to your spending needs in the 

month of July and your projections for the year are predicated 

upon certain things happening.  At that time we asked you, and 

maybe it was unreasonable at the time, to inform the House 

what your department has determined about the increases that 

have occurred with personal income tax, with raising of sales 

tax, with raising of gasoline taxes, with the raising of utility 

rates across the board, what impacts these have had on the 

various sectors of our society in enabling to meet your 

projections. 

 

Obviously now after a month's time since the last interim 

supply Bill you must have some read as to those projections 

and how various parts of the economy are reacting.  And I 

think it might be appropriate now, after this time period has 

gone by, for you to inform the Assembly about some of the 

analysis that was done in making those projections so that 

taxpayers in Saskatchewan can see if that analysis was indeed 

correct, and if we're on track as to the projections that you 

made in the past. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

Although it is yet not possible to give a complete and totally 

accurate analysis of where we are going and whether it is on 

track, I think there is reason to be quite confident that we are 

because of the lag time that is 

involved.  We only have the full numbers for the month of 

April which indicates that all of the projections that were made 

with regard to E&H (education and health) tax, fuel tax, and 

other revenues that are coming in are on track.  So there are no 

unusual circumstances there.  There has been no impact 

because of the tax measures, which some people may have 

thought there would be, which would have reduced the activity 

to such an extent it would have a negative impact on the 

revenues coming in.  It has not happened and in fact they are 

holding their own and they're on track. 

 

We will have very soon the final results from the month of 

May and we'll be able to give you and the House a better 

picture of where we're at.  But I have reason to feel, on the 

basis of what we know, quite confident that everything is going 

okay, unless there are some unforeseen surprises that are going 

to happen in the future, which I don't know of any. 

 

The projections that have been made by the Conference Board 

is much what the . . . and our own analysis showed.  It showed 

that the value of GDP (gross domestic product) and the growth 

would this year be about stable.  There is no great growth that 

we're expecting, but we expect it to be stable and everybody, 

including our projections, but all of the independent analysts, 

Conference Board and others, are projecting next year 

significant growth in the area of three to three and a half per 

cent.  I don't want to be held to that because this is June of 

1992 and things, a lot of things, might happen before 1993, but 

those are the projections now -- partly because of some of the 

decisions that we made this year. 

 

There is an indication, and we expected, that there would be a 

growth in employment this year -- am I correct there? -- there 

would be some modest growth in employment this year and 

there are some signs that that is in fact happening.  So I think 

there is reason for the member from Thunder Creek and 

members of the House to be optimistic that we are doing well 

in Saskatchewan.  We are doing better than some other 

provinces are.  Mind you, places like British Columbia will do 

better because their economy is different.  But we are in pretty 

good shape. 

 

The moisture levels are reasonably good.  Even in the 

south-west there has now been sufficient rain.  There's some 

concern about some dryness as you get further north, but it's 

early in the year.  So the bottom line is that we're on track. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm glad to hear that the 

optimism level is there.  I've had an inch and eight-tenths of 

rain on my farm altogether this year.  I can tell you that there is 

some need of rainfall in a lot of areas of this province before 

we're all said and done, but we will stay optimistic. 

 

You mention the fact that your projections on employment are 

they're going to go up.  I wonder if you would share with the 

House that analysis and what those sectors would be where you 

foresee a growth in the employment area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

The other things that the member from the part of the province 

he's close to will know is that the other promising things that 

have happened is that oil prices have firmed up.  In fact, oil 

prices right now are higher than what we had projected they 

would be.  That's a nice place for a Minister of Finance to find 

himself in.  It's not usually . . . it often doesn't happen that way. 

 

And uranium, based on sales volume -- prices, oh yes we well 

know are soft -- but based on sales volume, there seem to be 

indicators of an improvement in that market. 

 

The employment, net increase in employment, we projected 

would be about 2,000.  Now quite free to admit that had it not 

been for some of the measures in the budget that had to be 

taken to get the finances under control, that number might 

have, would probably no doubt have been higher than 2,000.  

But because of some of the measures that have been taken, it is 

less than it might have been.  It's hard to predict what it would 

have been.  One never knows for sure.  But we still are going to 

have, according to the indicators that are there and our analysis 

and the independent analyses that have been done, a net 

increase of employment of a minimal of 2,000 Saskatchewan . . 

. and considering the kind of troubled times that the economy 

of this province has been in, that's not a bad achievement. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the 2,000 

jobs is pretty well predicated in the resource industry, that it'll 

be driven by uranium development and increased activity in the 

oil patch, natural gas areas?  Is that sort of the area that this is 

going to happen in, or do you have other areas where you 

foresee modest increases?  Obviously 2,000 jobs spread across 

the province isn't a great deal.  It's better than nothing.  Can 

you give us more of an idea of where those jobs are going to 

occur? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Actually the one very positive thing 

about all of this is that it's broadly based and general across the 

piece, the service sector particularly.  Members will have seen 

reports in the press about the fairly significant increase in 

housing starts in Saskatchewan.  That drives a lot of the 

important factors and has spin-off effects in the retail side as 

well as the construction industry.  So the service sector is 

playing a big role in this. 

 

But there is no one particular place in which you can point and 

say, here is where the single element of the growth is in the big 

way.  It's generally spread across the various sectors of the 

economy.  It may be probably a little heavier on the service 

sector.  I think that's a fair statement.  But because it does have 

impact in other sectors that is a good sign. 

 

There has, I think, been some increase in the optimism on the 

agriculture side because of the slow, much too slow, increase in 

the price of grain.  Because of that and because of funding 

that's going to come in under the various safety net programs, it 

is anticipated by Canada that the net income, farm income in 

Saskatchewan this year, will be double what it was last year.  

Still far too low what it needs to be, but that's certainly some 

more cash flow that's around to be able to circulate in the 

economy and add to it in a positive way. 

Mr. Swenson: -- One of the things, Mr. Minister, that I would 

be interested in, given that we are a province that borrows quite 

heavily, is what your projections are for the average on the 

Bank of Canada rate will be say over the next six months of 

your borrowing.  Sort of what figure that you are anticipating 

the Bank of Canada borrowing rate to be and what the inflation 

rate in Saskatchewan will be over this next short while. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The projections that we made in the 

budget were short-term interest rates at 8 per cent.  They're 

lower than that now.  We projected on the long-term rates at 10 

per cent.  They're lower than that now.  The prime rate is at 7 

per cent and that the Canada bank rate, the bank rate is below 6 

per cent at the present time.  All of those are below what our 

projections were. 

 

I'm not sure that the Governor of the Bank of Canada would 

want to stand up before this committee and say that the interest 

rate will be X six months from now.  And I'm certainly not 

going to be bolder than the Governor of the Bank of Canada 

who in fact goes and sets those rates.  But all of the 

independent analysts who make reports . . . And if I have to 

rely on what the federal Minister of Finance tells me at the 

recent Finance ministers' meeting, there are indications that 

there will be a continuing but small reduction in the interest 

rate.  I hope that's true. 

 

But we are below what we were projecting the interest rates 

that they would be.  There was no way to know that they were 

going to drop to the extent that they have dropped.  The fact 

that they have dropped is having an impact on the finances of 

the province.  There's a reduction in the borrowing that we do.  

There is cost saving on things like the home program and other 

programs for which we have money that has been borrowed 

which we have to pay interest on. 

 

I am hopeful that this trend will continue throughout the year 

and that it will at least stabilize because it does add to the 

confidence of people who want to invest and confidence to 

small-business people and, maybe even more importantly or at 

least as importantly, to the confidence of the consumers who 

over a long period of time I think are beginning to feel that yes, 

this is the time to spend some money and maybe make a loan to 

buy something that they put off for some time.  And that this 

once again is having a positive impact on the economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It would seem, Mr. Minister, that you're fairly 

well in agreement with the steps that the Governor of the Bank 

of Canada has been taking in direction here, and I must say 

that's slightly different than some of the rhetoric that I heard 

from the previous opposition at the time.  But I know that when 

the shoe is on the other foot that things change, so I won't 

belabour the point. 

 

But I do agree with you that the financial and fiscal policy of 

the federal government is obviously making some difference to 

the province of Saskatchewan, as they do at any time when 

they affect how we borrow money and how we do things in a 

fairly significant way.  I don't 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

suppose that it will make up for the off-loading that has 

occurred in certain areas.  It would have to be considerable to 

make up for that. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, given that these rates have shown 

some general trends, given the numbers that you projected in 

the budget . . . let's say you take a 1 per cent decrease across 

the board in those projections, what kind of money that would 

make as far as the province of Saskatchewan goes over your 

fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- At the risk of being labelled as 

totally agreeing with the Governor of the Bank of Canada, let 

me make a point of clarification. 

 

Although we're supportive and welcome some of the changes 

that have taken place, there is still a very serious problem, and 

that is that the real interest rate -- and that is the difference 

between the rate, the Canada bank rate and inflation -- is still 

too high.  And there have been urgings by ministers of Finance 

of the provinces and by others in the investment and business 

community that that has to change.  The real . . . the rate in the 

United States is far below what it is in Canada because of that 

spread between inflation and the bank rate. 

 

So the real interest rate is still too high.  It is lower than it was, 

and that has had a positive contribution, but that has to also 

have a significant reduction.  And I have no way . . . and I 

would not want to guess because one shouldn't guess at these 

things, what's going to happen to that, but I'm hopeful that 

some of that will change as well. 

 

Members will remember that in the budget I indicated that the 

province is going to have to borrow $1.7 billion.  Some of that 

is refinancing of old debt.  Some of that is to pay for the deficit 

and for the purposes of Crown corporations in the capital 

works that they do.  So if we borrow $1.7 billion, a 1 per cent 

reduction would be a net gain of $17 million.  That's the kind 

of numbers you're looking at. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That obviously 

doesn't solve all of the debt problems of the province but it's 

not penny ante change that we're talking about either, that there 

is the opportunity for the Government of Saskatchewan it 

seems in the current environment to reap some dividends. 

 

It was interesting to read Mr. Crow's comments the other day in 

the newspaper as to what he foresaw in the future, that rates 

indeed probably would keep falling, that it appeared that the 

inflationary spiral would decrease even further, and in fact that 

Saskatchewan was probably the best off in Canada vis-a-vis the 

rate of inflation, that we were probably very close to zero, if 

not in a deflationary area in some regards.  That bodes well for 

some of the things that I think people would like to do here. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, given that this is the sort of the 

regime that we face, if the government is intending on 

reversing some of the decisions made at budget time, very 

small amounts of money that in regard to, say a saving of 1 per 

cent on our borrowing rate.  For instance, the FeedGAP (feed 

grain adjustment program) which I've mentioned earlier -- a net 

return to the province 

according to the independent analysis done by it of over $200 

million a year -- that perhaps if we have some running room on 

some of our other things, that we don't need to put that sector in 

jeopardy perhaps as we have done, that the 5 to $6 million that 

seems to stabilize several hundreds of jobs and a couple 

hundred million dollars worth of economic activity, doesn't 

deserve a second look because of some of the gains that we 

probably are going to make in the future.  And that if Mr. 

Crow's projections stay on, if yours stay on, then certainly we 

can't leave the expectation with Saskatchewan people that we 

can't be there for them when they are in a difficult situation. 

 

The reality of feeding cattle and hogs in our province this 

winter is going to be fairly grim, that for modest amounts of 

money we can maybe maintain those jobs.  I would think that 

some of the dire projections that I've seen on the livestock side, 

both through direct and indirect employment, would pretty well 

blow your 2,000 jobs away pretty fast, if they come to pass.  

And if, maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, maybe but two 

months from now if these general trends continue, that you 

wouldn't be willing to revisit some of those decisions, 

particularly where we have very large segments of our society 

in some jeopardy. 

 

Certainly the prospect of Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon 

having to lay off its people, or the two packing plants in Moose 

Jaw having to lay their people off or having feed lots like 

Poundmaker and Clavelle and others not fill their lots up with 

cattle this fall, is something that I don't think anyone wants to 

contemplate.  And if these rates continue to drop, perhaps you 

do have a little bit of room in order to make sure that doesn't 

happen in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well although we've been talking in 

some pretty positive terms here about what the prospects are, 

and I think they're correct, I think there's one thing we have to 

remember is that this is very, very early in this fiscal year and 

the projections that we have at the present time, and I made that 

point very clear in my first response to the first question, could 

change very quickly.  And we have to watch that and monitor 

it. 

 

I'm sure all members of the House would want the deficit not to 

be any higher than at least where it is projected.  If only it were 

the case where we didn't have the deficit that we have, we'd 

have a considerable amount, the province would have a 

considerable amount, of flexibility in doing the kinds of things 

that the member opposite talks about or some other innovative 

initiatives that we might take. 

 

The problem that we face, which we've discussed here at some 

length, is we are financially strapped by the huge debt and by, 

quite frankly, a deficit which is still too high, although we've 

made some significant gains on that deficit. 

 

So it's far too early to be able to say that we're actually going to 

realize some of the gains because of lower interest rate that we 

spoke about, the lower inflation and so on.  Actually the fact of 

the matter is that a lower interest rate does actually lose us 

some money because we do make some investments and the 

lower interest rate brings 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

us a lower return on those investments.  So it's not all a net 

gain. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek will remember that I 

indicated in the budget on May 7 that we will in November 

have a financial statement, a mid-term report, which is 

something we're bringing in as a new way of being accountable 

and a new way of making sure that we know as a government 

and the legislature knows and the public knows whether we are 

on target with the budget.  When we are at that point, we'll be 

able to know more accurately where we sit as a province 

financially and then begin to look at the various expenditures 

that the government makes. 

 

Does the government . . . will the government review various 

programs?  We are continuously reviewing all of the programs 

of government.  Frankly, I'm trying to very much change the 

process which was one of make some decisions, announce a 

budget, and then wait until the next budget.  We have to 

continuously -- particularly because of financial circumstances 

we face -- monitor it very, very closely to make sure we stay on 

target.  And so the reviews that the members opposite . . . are 

ongoing. 

 

Can we make any decisions on those reviews?  No we can't at 

this point of time because it's too early and we don't yet have a 

full grasp on where things are going.  The forest fire season 

isn't over yet.  We've been fortunate until now.  But we may get 

-- I hope not -- a fairly significant, as sometimes happens in the 

early summer, rash of forest fires which will consume many, 

many millions of dollars. 

 

It's not yet clear what the agricultural scene is out there.  If we 

get some timely rains, we may get an exceptionally good crop.  

If it stops raining between now and September, we won't get 

much of a crop.  So we have to be on top of those things on a 

continuous basis in order that mid-term we can make some of 

the decisions that we're going to have to make. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I appreciate your comments, Mr. Minister, 

because certainly those are very true facts in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We are very dependent on certain areas.  And if 

those areas change, you can have your financial situation turn 

on you very rapidly, so they are considerations that I am glad 

that you take into consideration. 

 

I guess one of the problems that we have in the opposition -- 

and I'm sure some of the public do -- in ascertaining the 

process is that we are into our second interim supply Bill, that 

we had special warrants before that.  So we're still a ways away 

from our budget being passed, and indeed we may have to do 

this again before it is all said and done. 

 

It gets very difficult as time goes on to totally sort of balance 

things off because we see it in small windows at a time rather 

than in a bigger picture.  And I'm sure that my colleagues will 

be asking you about some more specific areas in how the 

numbers have changed from month to month. 

 

(1500) 

One area that I would like to ask you about that has struck sort 

of . . . Looking at your numbers here, why the appropriation in 

the health care area -- going into the traditional, sort of, 

summer slow season, the time of lay-offs and that type of thing 

. . . when you're asking for one-twelfth in July, I see that from 

June the total appropriation has gone up.  Why, when we're 

going into a sort of a down time -- Education is down 

significantly from June -- why the Health budget would have a 

rise in it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's because many of the 

programs that are in the budget of the Department of Health 

don't have the kind of swings that the member speaks of -- the 

drug plan doesn't have those kinds of swings; payments to 

physicians don't have those kinds of swings.  So all of that is 

taken into account here in order to make sure that for the month 

of July there is sufficient money to pay for those costs which 

are incurred because of utilization to various programs and 

payments which have to be made. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Is the minister saying that if we went through 

this process every month -- heaven forbid -- for the next eight 

or nine, that we would see a continually increase in the level of 

the health care budget if we went through interim supply on a 

monthly basis?  What is it that makes say July more significant 

than June or May or some other month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All we're trying to do is make sure 

that there is a sufficient amount of funding that's available.  

We're not trying to ask for any more than is required for the 

one-twelfth. 

 

And I should have checked this earlier when I gave the 

member, Mr. Chairman, the answer earlier.  But in the 

Department of Health it is actually a request for the 

one-twelfth.  There's no . . . I know the member might have 

been looking at the one before that which is Highways and 

Transportation.  But Health is the one-twelfth request.  So it's 

simply a normal operation that is being requested for funding 

for it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I guess I was just looking, Minister, at the 

total amount to be voted.  Maybe I'm reading things wrong, but 

it did look like there was an increase.  So that what you're . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, please do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If we're looking at the four 

columns, there is the first column, which is total to be voted -- 

that's the full budget for the Department of Health, for the 

whole year. 

 

And then the second column, which is what one-twelfth is, 

which is $128,469,000.  And that is what the request is in this 

interim supply -- the full one-twelfth of the total amount that 

would be voted by the time the budget is all passed through this 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So that figure is just a slight increase then 

from what the total you had projected in the previous month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- . . . in the first interim supply I 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

believe, which was a month ago, I believe the amount was 149 

million, in fact 149,847,000.  Part of that was needed because 

of . . . I think there was some capital that was being expended 

at that time.  This interim supply . . . And so the last time it was 

more than one-twelfth.  This interim supply, it's precisely the 

one-twelfth, so it's actually less than what was requested in the 

interim supply that we passed in May. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, you may be right, Minister.  I was . . . 

(inaudible) . . . but that may be my error.  So as far as you're 

concerned and your department's concerned, the Health budget 

for the year is right on track.  That our projections into the 

future would be, if we'd stayed on this track, would be about 

128 million-some-odd-thousand through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As far as . . . the best information I 

have until now is that the budget in the Department of Health is 

on track.  Once again when we get the full one-quarter in and 

have had a time to take a look at that we'll have a better picture.  

But I'm advised by officials that as of now the budget is on 

track. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, I had a few questions with respect 

to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Minister.  When you 

made the entire cut in the Pension Plan in the May budget there 

were provisions for the pay out of the money accumulated in 

the plan to the plan members.  Can you explain now what the 

reinstatement of the plan will do with respect to the interim 

supply Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just while we're looking up for any 

particular information, the announcement that was made -- was 

it a week ago? -- makes no changes on that whatsoever.  The 

circumstances remain the same financially. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, initially though you said that 

the pay out would be made to the plan members.  And the pay 

out was going to be made, I believe, in July or August, was it 

not?  And therefore money must have been allocated at that 

point for that.  How does that affect the interim supply now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It doesn't affect the budget 

whatsoever because the pay out would have been investments 

that were made by the members in the plan -- the participants 

in the plan plus the government . . . or the public taxpayers' 

contributions into those investments.  All that money is with 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan organization invested through, 

I think, the Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

It has no impact on the budget whatsoever because the pay out 

simply would have been their money, the matching 

contributions which were already there, plus any interest that 

would have been accrued, would have not impacted on the 

budget whatsoever, and the changes that we announce continue 

not to have any impact on the budget at all.  And so therefore 

there is no allocation necessary. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you mean to say that there was no 

wind-down costs at all to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan?  

Could you elaborate on that and tell us what kind of 

wind-down costs there were and how it affects this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry, that's different than the pay 

out, I guess, and maybe I misunderstood the question.  But we 

had in the budget, wind-down costs.  You can find that on page 

43 in the Estimates.  But we had in the budget wind-down costs 

of $930,000 because of the change in the approach.  Obviously 

some of that money will not be necessary because there won't 

be a wind-down.  The pension will continue to exist although 

there will be no government contributions made to it.  We 

won't utilize a portion of that wind-down money, and therefore 

it will be available for other purposes.  Or in case there are 

overexpenditures somewhere else, it will be available to help 

make sure the deficit stays on track. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us what 

those wind-down costs were, and what amount of that 

wind-down cost will be allocated back into this one-twelfth of 

the interim supply Bill, if you could give us that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The information you have which I 

passed over, on the amount for each department, you will see 

that the Department of Finance is requesting one-twelfth of its 

requested appropriation for the full fiscal year.  I don't think 

there's . . . it's beyond the one-twelfth.  So it's a straight 

one-twelfth that we're asking for.  Just as you see -- yes, here it 

is -- a full total to be voted for the Department of Finance for a 

full year would be $54.359 million.  One-twelfth of that is 

$4.530 million, and in this interim supply we're asking for 

$4.530 million -- a full one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I was asking for the dollar figure of 

what the wind-down costs were, and the dollar figure for the 

amount that goes back into the one-twelfth allocation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, sorry, I should be more 

specific with my answer.  We're asking in this interim supply 

Bill for one-twelfth of the amount that had been requested 

under the Saskatchewan Pension Plan for the wind-down costs 

because there are some costs that will be incurred in the event 

there's correspondence that's got to be dealt with.  But we're 

simply asking for one-twelfth there as we are for everything 

else in the department. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- One-twelfth of the wind-down costs you're 

asking for here, and yet we're not going to incur wind-down 

costs because the Pension plan is being reinstated.  So why do 

you need one-twelfth of the wind-down costs when you're not 

winding down the Pension Plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed . . . And this would be 

better discussed when we do the Estimates of the department 

when we have the appropriate people here, but we're asking in 

this interim supply Bill for the one-twelfth of what was 

originally in the budget because there are some costs that will 

be incurred such as notification to members and explanation to 

participants in the plan about the government's policy decision 

and how it will be impact. 

 

There will be some software, software that is going to 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

have to be provided to deal with all of this; the usual, ongoing 

expenditures that are going to be necessary in order to make 

sure that the new final policy that is being implemented can be 

implemented expeditiously and well and efficiently. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the whole basis for the argument 

opposed to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan put forward by 

yourself was with respect to the unfunded liability.  Now the 

unfunded liability is still there of course and the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, as you announced, is reinstated.  So how does 

this unfunded liability now impact upon this interim supply 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In fact, as I indicated in my 

announcement, that all of the savings that we were able to incur 

for the taxpayer originally will still be intact.  The unfunded 

liability was being created by something called a guaranteed 

minimum pension.  Because we are not continuing with the 

guaranteed minimum pension, we have essentially eliminated 

the unfunded liability which is a very serious financial thing 

that would be growing and would be in the area of $80 million 

in another three years.  So there is no longer going to be an 

unfunded liability. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, are the people who are now 

receiving the guaranteed minimum pension, will they continue 

to receive the guaranteed minimum pension? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Their last payment on the 

guaranteed minimum will be July 1.  It will be terminated on 

August 1 as I indicated.  In reviewing this, one of the things 

that we made very clear and we continue to make very clear, 

any changes that we make have to have no impact on the 

bottom line of the budget. 

 

One of the things that the financial people and the bond rating 

agencies that we met with made very clear is there needs to be 

a re-establishment of confidence by the financial community 

and the business community and investment community that 

the Government of Saskatchewan -- something which was 

missing in the last 10 years -- is able to put together a financial 

direction in one budget and stick to it.  We said this year's 

deficit is $517 million.  We have got to make sure that it stays 

at $517 million or less.  Therefore we can't make changes that 

will change that. 

 

If members of the House or anybody else has some suggestions 

on how we can save money in some other areas in order to put 

it somewhere else, I'm quite happy to consider any of those 

suggestions.  But the bottom line has to remain intact.  And in 

the Pension Plan the bottom line is being kept intact. 

 

We said we could not afford the $300 matching.  We said we 

could not afford the guaranteed minimum pension because it 

was growing into an unmanageable, unfunded liability.  We 

listened to what people said, including the member from 

Kindersley in his speech in the House some time ago, indicated 

that it would be quite appropriate to look at reinstituting the 

plan but eliminating certain things like the matching grant -- 

not a bad piece of advice considering the financial situation the 

province faces.  And we . . . 

(1515) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Didn't say eliminate it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I have your comments right 

here in Hansard, if you want me to read them.  I don't intend to 

do that.  But we're trying to be fair.  We recognize that the 

people said to us something which surprised me, quite frankly; 

I didn't think they would. 

 

People who are in the Pension Plan said, look, we know you 

can't afford . . . the province, the taxpayers can't afford putting 

more money into the thing.  There's some people who argue the 

plan is poorly targeted.  I happen to be of that view.  There has 

to be some different ways to provide security to people that 

addresses those with greatest need.  And they said, do away 

with the guaranteed minimum, do away with the $300 

matching, but leave the plan there and we will . . . we like what 

we've got there.  We did that, and that's what the announcement 

of a week and some days ago said. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you've 

asked for suggestions on how people might be able to put 

forward ideas to help with the financial situation of the 

province.  Well I can put forward one, and one that might be, I 

think, of interest to yourself, particularly yourself personally.  

And that might be with respect to your own pension. 

 

You have unilaterally done away with pension plans for 54,000 

people in this province.  After tremendous pressure by the 

people of this province and the opposition, we finally got you 

to back off on that and present . . . and reinstate the program.  

The basis of your whole argument was the unfunded pension 

liability in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  If you're asking 

those folks in Saskatchewan to back off on their pensions, 

should you not yourself consider backing off on your own 

pension? 

 

I think that's a very valid question, Mr. Minister, that people 

are wondering in this province today.  When you are sitting on 

an unfunded pension yourself to the tune of over a million 

dollars, do you think that the people of Saskatchewan should be 

willing to take any less when you're not willing to take any 

less? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let's make something very clear.  

The pension plan stays.  The government prior to 1982, which 

was this government -- not this government but this party who 

was the government -- dealt with the unfunded liability and the 

growing unfunded liability in the MLAs and public service 

pension plans in 1978.  That's when the fix on that one was 

done, quite appropriately.  And at that time the unfunded 

liability there was ended.  The growth in the unfunded liability 

was ended, because we brought in the money purchase plan, 

and that is the kind of system we operate now. 

 

Now there needs to be another look at the whole broad field of 

pensions and unfunded liabilities of pensions and the 

governance of pensions and all the things that come with that.  

And I did announce in the budget and we're working at putting 

it together, a pension review, unfunded liability aspect and 

other related items 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

commission which we will be announcing in due course 

sometime this year, because clearly as the member opposite 

says, all of this needs to be given a serious look.  There's some 

other provinces have had to deal with it.  We've looked at what 

they've done, Alberta for example.  We think there's a better 

way to do that. 

 

And let me assure the member opposite that when it comes to 

the unfunded liability question in the public service and the 

teachers' pension plan and others, there will be a review, and 

there will be a report on measures that have to be taken to 

correct that.  And they will be made public, and they will be 

discussed in this legislature because it's important we get on 

with it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Will you give us then the commitment that the 

MLA unfunded pension will be part of those discussions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All of the unfunded liability, the 

unfunded liability question of pensions will be reviewed. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, just 

coming back to Community Services for a minute. 

 

I'm just perusing the information that you sent across this 

afternoon, sir, and also looking at the budget address as of May 

that you presented to this House.  And in the area of 

Community Services I noticed that you estimated expenditure 

in your budget was 147.190 million, where the piece of paper 

you sent us today has a total to be voted of 137.941 million.  

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what the difference would 

be there.  And the fact that you're taking a one-twelfth of this, I 

perceive it's of 137 million rather than the 147.  Or is your 

one-twelfth based on the original 147? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, if you look at . . . if 

the member will look at the piece of paper that we sent over, 

we say that 137.941 million is to be voted.  There are other 

items in the Department of Community Services budget which 

are not voted because they're statutory, and therefore they don't 

show up here. 

 

And if the member turns to page 23 of the Estimates, you will 

find things like grant to Meewasin Authority, grant to 

Wakamow Valley, grant to Wascana Centre.  All of these are 

all statutory and therefore will not show up here because they 

are under specific legislation, some of which the House 

actually has passed in the last month or so, so they don't show 

up here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I take it then again, just 

going down a little further on the page for Seniors' Secretariat, 

I take it that's the same format that would happen there.  There 

are a number of issues that are not to be voted.  So you're 

voting on 14 million, whereas you're showing an expenditure 

of 37.6 million.  Is that the same format? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, I think on this one, it is 

one-twelfth.  What's to be voted is 14.378 million, and we're 

requesting in this particular situation the one-twelfth. 

Mr. Toth: -- However, Mr. Minister, you do indicate a total 

expenditure of 37 million.  I take that's the same format has 

taken place here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, sorry.  No, that senior 

citizens' secretariat is statutory.  Therefore, it's not voted here.  

And I don't know whether there's legislation been introduced 

yet or not; but if it's not, it will be, to deal with that question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In view of that, Mr. Minister, I understand as 

well, Mr. Minister, that the amount of funding being forwarded 

to the seniors' heritage grants has been cut back.  Would this 

one-twelfth expenditure that you're bringing forward today, 

does that address any of that cut-back, or is that something 

that'll show up later on in the year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- On page 83 of the Estimates you 

will find where it is being provided -- $23.3 million statutory -- 

and that's where it'll show up in the Estimates. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Basically statutory votes are not involved with 

our one-twelfth expenditure that we're facing today.  Okay 

thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, a question regarding Justice. And I'm just 

wondering, Mr. Minister, we're all aware of the ongoing 

constitutional debate that is taking place in this country.  And 

certainly I think there are a number of people across not only 

the province of Saskatchewan, but across Canada, maybe in 

some ways are becoming a little annoyed at the process and 

wondering if we're ever going to see the end of the day, or the 

light at the end of the tunnel.  We're also aware, Mr. Minister, 

that over the past number of weeks -- indeed at least since the 

last interim supply -- the Minister of Justice and a number of 

his officials and as well the Premier have been out of the 

province. 

 

I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate to the 

House the type of expenditures that would be being incurred by 

the Minister of Justice and his officials and the Premier at this 

time, and if indeed part of the one-twelfth expenditure we're 

discussing today addresses that issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes.  The Department 

of Justice has been provided a certain amount of money -- I 

think it's 11 million -- no, $173.288 million.  The request here 

is for one-twelfth.  The department is expected to manage its 

finances and its expenditures within the one-twelfth.  It's been 

doing very well and there is no additional money being 

requested here because they're expected to live within the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're telling the Assembly and what 

you're saying to the people of Saskatchewan, that basically you 

have allotted to the Department of Justice $173.288 million.  

And so any added expenditures that the department may be 

facing such as the travel at this time and the ongoing 

constitutional debate -- and I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that 

it's probably something that is going to extend well into the 

year and no doubt the minister and his officials might find 

themselves probably being out of the province a little more 

than they had  



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

earlier anticipated -- what you're telling the Assembly that it is 

then going to be up to the department to live within the 

guidelines of the budget that you've laid down here, that you 

haven't made any provisions for added expenditures that may 

be incurred by the Department of Justice over, say, the next 

few months.  Is that true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We provide . . . one of the ways 

that it's important for governments to manage is to provide to 

departments a portfolio or envelope of budget, and the 

department is then expected to manage within that envelope.  

The Department of Justice, if it incurs some additional 

expenditures other than the normal expenditures which have 

been budgeted for and there is money for this kind of purpose 

in the department, then they'll have to manage within the 

budget as best they can. 

 

If there are some extremely unusual things happen -- I don't see 

that happening -- then we'll have to look at other options.  But 

right now I'm saying to the House and to the member opposite 

that the Department of Justice is managing within the budget 

which it's been proposed to be allocated in this budget, and we 

are anticipating that they will continue to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you are indicating is that there's a block 

amount of funding, the Department of Justice was asked to 

present a possible amount . . . total amount of expenditure for 

the year, that the department would also be asked to build in a 

little bit of a cushion, whatever they would need, and then as 

the year progresses any unforeseen added expenditures -- such 

as we're possibly seeing today -- do then become part of that 

request, original request, that the Department of Justice has 

made to the Department of Finance for expenditure.  And that 

indeed the one-twelfth that you've requested today is indeed 

falling within the guidelines or the expenditures the department 

has been facing or has faced or is facing at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The departments, in this case the 

Department of Justice, has provided some money for these 

kinds of activities: travel, cost related to travel, cost related to 

meetings.  There are no cushions.  We don't provide cushion 

for these kinds of things.  We expect the departments and the 

ministers of the different departments to say to the Treasury 

Board and therefore then the Treasury Board to the cabinet: 

here's what our budget request is for this fiscal year, and here 

are the reasons why. 

 

And the government may decide, well this expenditure, as we 

did in this budget in many cases, is one we can't afford -- no 

money.  The Department of Justice has obviously done that on 

their budget for travel and sustenance and expenses related to 

that.  And that is the amount of money under which they're 

operating, and they've been able to do that until now.  We have 

no indications received from them that anything has changed.  

They get one-twelfth and they are able to manage under the 

one-twelfth.  Where they may expend some additional money, 

they'll have to find it somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to move on to 

another area, a topic that I'm sure that is on a lot of people's 

minds, specifically the youth of this province.  Your 

government has come out and continued the program of, I 

believe you call it participation '92.  And if I may . . . correct 

me, I'm not exactly sure, but I believe there was some $1.6 

million allotted to student participation '92. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, would that amount of funding be 

part . . . how much of the one-twelfth you're asking for today is 

included in that funding for the student participation program?  

How many students applied?  And how many students would 

have received jobs under this program, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I'm at a disadvantage.  

That's Committee of Finance that the particular department will 

have to deal with.  I think that program is in the Public Service 

Commission, although I may be corrected.  As I look at the 

flow sheet here, the Public Service Commission is asking for 

one-twelfth of its budget so I assume that any expenditures the 

department is going to be making is one-twelfth of its budget 

because that's all we're asking for in this interim supply. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to acknowledge the 

fact that I believe that program over the past number of years is 

certain to be in a means that has given a number of young 

people -- university and I guess grade 12 and any university 

student that would be going back to further their education . . . 

giving them the opportunity to find a summer job and to build 

up for their university education.  That we all know, Mr. 

Minister, that the cost of education certainly is increasing 

regardless of the party in power and all the costs we all face. 

No doubt it becomes a significant burden to the young people 

of our day and certainly to the families and parents of our day 

as well. 

 

And I would encourage the . . . even though there was, I 

believe, 1.6 million expended this year on the program, 

certainly I believe that was one area, Mr. Minister, that could 

have been a very substantial help to the province in light of it 

giving many young people the opportunity to create the 

employment or find the employment necessary to create the 

dollars and cents that they would need to get back into 

university.  And I would encourage the government to take a 

serious look at . . . that's a program that I believe certainly is 

worthy of more funding in light of the fact that we want to 

create job opportunities for the youth of this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm just going to . . . I believe maybe your 

officials made a comment or mentioned some expenditures in 

that area, and if you want to respond you can respond in a 

minute. But maybe I'll allow you to respond first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I simply wanted to make a 

correction because the member opposite was right and I was 

wrong.  It is in the Department of Labour and not Public 

Service Commission that this program is funded out of.  And I 

don't disagree.  It's essentially in principle a good program.  

And as we get more of the deficit under control hopefully over 

the years we'll be able to put more 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

money into this kind of an effort. 

 

But the better way, quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, and I'm not 

saying that it's the only way, is for the economy to be able to 

create more job opportunities for these people, these students, 

so that they don't have to rely on jobs that are funded from year 

to year from a government basis.  That's the purpose and what 

this budget is all about -- get the finances under control, reduce 

the amount of the deficit, make sure that through that process 

there is more economic activity.  Therefore you have more jobs 

created and more opportunities for our students.  But as far and 

to the extent that the government or the taxpayer -- because 

after all it is the taxpayer -- is able to assist students to 

programs like this, we're most interested in doing that. 

 

Now on the specifics as to how much is being spent, where the 

jobs are allocated, this kind of thing, you're going to have to 

ask the Minister of Labour when his Estimates are here.  And 

hopefully this month, now that we're back in the House again, 

you'll be able to do that because he'll be able to provide you 

with the precise answers which I cannot because I don't have 

access to that kind of detailed information. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and certainly those 

are some of the questions that we will indeed get into with the 

Minister of Labour.  But I want to reiterate the point and agree 

whole-heartedly with you that the more we can involve people 

in small business and private business by creating jobs that 

certainly takes the load off the back of government.  And 

certainly the dollars and cents that government is dealing with 

are taxpayers' dollars, and I think in any way in which 

government gets more private individuals and businesses 

involved is excellent. 

 

And that again brings me to another statement regarding the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  I believe, Mr. Minister, that in 

looking at the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, I believe we should 

be looking at the long-term effect of the individuals that would 

be requiring the help and the aid of government down the road.  

And indeed encouraging people to build for their future is 

something that I believe that it's very beneficial for us to do. 

 

Mr. Minister, a question.  New Careers Corporation, I 

understand and I see from the information sent across, is asking 

for almost double the amount of the one-twelfth allocation.  I'm 

wondering if you could inform the House the reasons for this 

double increase in New Careers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The reason it is more, because to a 

large extent New Careers work is seasonal and we're sort of 

heading into the peak season where you get the maximum 

amount of people who are taking part in it.  And that's why the 

amount that's being requested is beyond the one-twelfth in 

order to accommodate that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And I take it then, Mr. Speaker, being seasonal do 

I . . . Does this involve student jobs within the Parks and 

Recreation or is this strictly the handicap or what areas of 

responsibility are we talking of here, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the member is still talking 

New Careers . . . I think you're still on New Careers -- it doesn't 

involve student employment, it involves people who are on 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan.  And I don't know that there 

would be students in there, but if they're SAP recipients then I 

guess they would qualify. 

 

But it's a program geared for people who are on Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan to give them an opportunity to get gainful 

employment, to get training, and hopefully through that process 

provide from there an opportunity to go on to ongoing 

employment, and therefore not leave them reliant on the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, which is I think the desire of 

most people who are able to work who unfortunately find 

themselves in those kinds of circumstances. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One more question with regards to that program, 

Mr. Minister.  We've discussed the fact that it is certainly the 

increased level of training takes place at this time, but for how 

long does the . . . how long a time period does the training take 

place?  Would you be able to answer that this time, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Should get the Minister of Social 

Services to explain that, but it's five weeks and beyond that, 

when you have a chance to address the minister, I'm sure you 

can get into more detailed questions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

just want to make a little comment here about a couple of 

things that you've alluded to.  You mentioned that you had 

heard that the south-west corner had received some rain and 

that this was going to alleviate some of the need to put up 

money for people in the so-called drought disaster area.  As the 

member from Shaunavon has previously mentioned in this 

Assembly, the fact that the area not only is in a disaster 

situation, but should be classified as such. 

 

I want to point out to you that we are very grateful in the 

south-west for the rainfall that we've gotten, but it 

unfortunately is not so great for your government just yet 

because the amounts that have fallen have come too late to 

assist with very much of a hay production, and also have come 

too late this year for any amount of growth in the native grass 

areas of that part of the province. 

 

There is some response to some tame hays, but very little.  

There will be a few bales around.  The cereal crops are doing a 

little better, but the reality of life is that farmers always seed a 

bumper crop but they harvest whatever they get.  And the 

potential of a bumper crop is certainly not there.  The potential 

for some kind of an average crop remains for some farmers, but 

unfortunately for most of them there will be much less than an 

average crop and there will be a great need for some kind of 

assistance from some place if many of those operations are 

going to remain in existence for even yet another year. 

 

Now we realize that some of the pending legislation of 

leasebacks and that sort of thing might assist some of those 

folks to stay on their property and to continue to try to eke out 

a living.  Unfortunately I think most people have an aspiration 

to be on farms to do more than just eke out a living.  They 

would like to maintain the ownership.  They 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

would like to be able to pay their bills.  In fact I think most 

farmers would rather pay all of their creditors than to ask for 

assistance. 

 

But it's not nearly as bright as you may have thought, in spite 

of the fact that we have had one good weekend of rain.  The 

fact of the matter is, sir, that we have another growing problem 

that your treasury might want to take into account, and that is 

with the hay situation. 

 

Many of our producers in the south part of the province have 

traditionally gone into Alberta to buy feed and hay supplies.  

Unfortunately right now the state of Montana, having been 

declared a disaster area, has already started, I'm told, to receive 

federal government assistance.  That means that the producers 

there have money to spend -- cash dollars -- to go out and 

negotiate for feed supplies.  They are therefore coming into the 

irrigated areas of southern Alberta and buying up the supplies. 

 

This has two effects, sir.  It starts off with diminishing the 

supply that our producers normally had available to them, and 

the second impact of course is the driving up of prices in the 

supply/demand cycle as it still works over in Alberta.  So our 

producers are now being faced with having to go in there to bid 

on hay supplies at a price, not of $45 a tonne as they might 

have done last year, but probably well in excess of 100 at this 

time . . . is the report that I'm getting. 

 

And so you see the kind of hardship and pressure that's going 

to be put on to our farm producers with livestock herds to go 

out and get those feed supplies for this coming winter.  That, I 

think, should stimulate your mind in the direction of starting to 

think of some way to put together some kind of contingency 

fund in order for people to be able to get the feed supplies that 

they're going to need. 

 

I wanted also, before I ask some very specific questions about 

this particular supply Bill, to let you know a little bit of the 

thought about the Pension Plan in my constituency because my 

colleagues have asked you some questions and you've very 

ably answered them.  The fact of the announcement having 

been made that the Pension Plan will not be totally done away 

with, that there will be a reorganized kind of a plan, has 

prompted me to discuss this matter with some of our 

constituents. 

 

And I want you to be aware that one lady in particular that I 

talked to feels that because you have downgraded the way that 

the plan is going to work, she, in her opinion, feels that the 

government is just trying to create a plan where they can keep 

the money that she's already put into it, but no longer go on 

with having the plan work in her favour so that she has a real, 

workable and guaranteed pension to look forward to. 

 

Now another lady that I talked to already was old enough that 

she was starting to get payments out of it.  And she's very 

distressed that her payments may have to fall or that she won't 

get as much.  And I hope that you will take into consideration 

answering those questions publicly so that those folks will 

know what's going on. 

 

The first lady I referred to has said quite bluntly that she simply 

won't participate in the plan any longer.  And I 

think that's a great tragedy because many of these farm wives 

and low income earners in our labour force certainly should be 

encouraged to try to help themselves in their retirement.  And it 

would be a great tragedy, in my opinion, if this government 

didn't take into account the need for people to at least have the 

feeling that they can do something for themselves. 

 

It gives you a feeling of pride in your life, of pride in what 

you've lived your life for if you can at least feel that you're not 

just totally standing around with your hand out begging for 

someone to help you in your old age.  You've done something 

to contribute to it.  Even if it falls short of what you really need 

when you get there, at least you feel that you've tried to do your 

best to provide for yourself and your family.  And so I hope 

you'll take that into account and answer those questions for 

those folks. 

 

I note in this document that we have before us that there are 

some overruns in a couple of the areas that I am supposed to 

keep a watchful eye out for.  The first one that I note is that you 

do have a $7.5 million overrun over the one-twelfth in the 

Department of Highways and Transportation.  And I wonder, 

sir, if you could give me a brief outline of just what that is. 

 

I note that there is reference to page 3.  And in that reference it 

says, for example, the headline as I'm sure you're aware, rural 

surface transportation capital . . . because the majority of the 

activities performed during the peak period of the summer, but 

I'm not sure what rural surface transportation really is, and I 

wonder if you could explain that to me and tell me how much 

of this funding is going for whatever that happens to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It had me confused for a while too 

because of the name.  But I'm told this is Highway's capital -- 

highway reconstruction, highway construction -- that's what 

that's for.  And because, as we all know, most highways get 

built at a greater rate during the months of July than they are in 

the middle of January, we need the money.  I'm not trying to be 

facetious here but that's Highway's capital. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you.  I guess the word "rural" is what 

threw me because one of my critic areas is Rural Development 

as well.  And when I saw rural surface transportation, and 

being a reeve of a municipality, I immediately started to 

wonder if somehow Highways was funding the resurfacing in 

municipalities on rural roads or something like that.  And so it 

was confusing, and I'm glad that I think in my mind I have it 

straight now that these simply refer to highways that are built 

out in the country and called rural highways. They're not to do 

with the municipal roads, so the two don't interconnect. 

 

Okay.  Then we have in that area . . . I noted when I was 

driving around the province in the little holiday that we've been 

having imposed on us, and having a few moments to drive 

around through the province on some of the highways, I noted 

that there are quite a lot of counters out on the highways.  Now 

this highway count, does that indicate that we are going to be 

spending money on some reconstruction in these areas?  Or is 

this 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

the count that is being taken to determine which highways will 

be put back to gravel, or what are these counters all out through 

the province for?  And perhaps you could tell me how much it 

costs to do those kind of surveys. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've lived in this province for 49 

years -- I shouldn't admit that -- all my life.  And every year 

that I can think of since I can remember things, there have been 

highway counters on highways and roads.  I don't think this is 

any different.  But that's a normal part of the operation of the 

Department of Highways.  Why they are there, why they are on 

specific roads -- I really cannot comment on that.  You'll have 

to ask the Minister of Highways when he has his officials here.  

Neither I nor my officials in the Department of Finance will 

know to that kind of detail the contents of what the Department 

of Highways does. 

 

But I'm sure this month, at some point in time, the Department 

of Highways will be in Committee of Finance.  And if you ask 

that question, knowing the Minister of Highways, as capable as 

he is, he'll be able to answer it for you in a flash. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- This may be the slowest flash we've ever 

seen, but I will certainly ask the question. 

 

I wonder, because I'm sure that somebody is going to ask me as 

well, what air transportation refers to. If you could explain that 

briefly for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I believe that is -- and once again I 

may not give you all the details here -- but that's airport 

maintenance, hangar maintenance, airstrip reconstruction, 

maintenance.  The capital works on airstrips around the 

province, that's what the money is for. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are many airports in the province owned, 

controlled, and financed by the provincial government?  I 

thought that most of them were operated by municipal 

jurisdictions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Some of the northern airstrips, we 

do provide some capital money in those operations, and I 

suspect that's what that's for.  Don't hold me completely to that, 

although to a large extent that will be accurate.  Make sure you 

ask the Minister of Highways when he is here and he will be 

able to tell you.  But in the North we actually do provide some 

of this funding for the airstrips up there. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm wondering how we get on the dole in this 

case.  We've got an airport out home and I'm kind of wondering 

how I can get you to pay for it.  Do I have to move my airport 

up North beyond a certain line or are there some . . . what kind 

of criteria do you have to meet in order to get the government 

to pay for my airport? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's a perfectly good question to 

ask the Minister of Highways when the Department of 

Highways is here.  We don't have that information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I think probably I can understand 

why the peak period would be now when it's warm, but I 

certainly have to wonder in my mind if it's fair that we fund 

airports in the North and don't do the same thing in the South.  

Now I know that the arguments going to be that we don't have 

good highways maybe in some places but the reality is that 

these days we have pretty good roads in a lot of those areas up 

there. 

 

I want to just finish this off under this Highway and 

Transportation thing, and you've got the maintenance of 

highways and transportations and you're saying that here again 

because the peak period is now you're obviously going to have 

to pay folks.  I'm wondering, in the area of weed cutting -- in 

the past we've done tendering with that -- is that process, do 

you know, going to be going on and will you be paying people 

to go out and contract again?  Or would the department be 

considering here the purchase perhaps of tractors and mowers 

so that people can be employed through the Department of 

Highways in order to do this job now?  Or will these things be 

tendered out?  Where is this money going to go to and who's 

going to get the jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, I know of no change to 

the policy, but the Minister of Highways will have to speak to 

that because that will be . . . It's pretty detailed stuff that's part 

of the operation of the highways.  I know of no change in that 

policy.  But once again, when the Minister of Highways is here 

in the committee, he will be able to give you the specifics. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, I want just to ask a few questions about 

Rural Development, because here again we've had some 

controversy this year as to the changes in the revenue sharing.  

How much of this one-twelfth now is going to revenue sharing 

out of the Rural Development amount of 59 million plus a few 

dollars here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told -- and I guess when I look 

at the numbers here -- that the amount that's being requested 

here is one-twelfth of the full request of the full budget, so it's a 

straight one-twelfth request in this case.  I know that in the last 

interim supply, there was a request that was a little bit more 

than one-twelfth, which was there because . . . I'm not sure 

whether it was to meet the quarterly requirement or other 

needs.  But in this particular case, we're just asking for the 

straight one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- In other words, you're saying that the 

revenue-sharing portion of expenditures won't be a factor in 

this period of time.  Okay so you're saying that you paid out 

more in the spring than you do in the summer, and I can accept 

that as probably true.  I guess we'll just have to wait and see 

how many bills you come up with.  I'm not sure how you'd 

really have a handle on that. 

 

I want to ask you about the new gravel program that has been 

initiated.  Now I'm not sure if that's something that had to be 

legislated or if it's an order in cabinet or how the process is 

legitimized.  But again going back to my municipality where I 

am reeve, we've received notice that the gravel program has 

been changed and that there is assistance for the regravelling of 

grid roads and farm access roads.  And that assistance has been 

changed from a maximum of half of one hundred yards per 

mile to a no 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

limit on the number of yards per mile, no limit on the number 

of miles, I understand.  And you can correct me if I got this 

formula wrong.  But the total amount that you were to receive 

in previous years has been reduced, and you now can only 

claim up to that maximum amount. 

 

I'm wondering if you can tell me if my reasoning in the way the 

formula works is correct, to begin with.  And if that is correct, 

then how many dollars is that going to cost through the 

Department of Rural Development to afford this program now 

as compared to last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can't, Mr. Chairman, tell the 

member whether he's correct or incorrect because that's 

something he'll have to ask the Minister of Rural Affairs. 

 

But in order to assist the member because it's a perfectly 

legitimate question, I will undertake . . . one of my officials 

will make a note to . . . we'll forward that question to the 

minister and to the department and we'll get an answer so that 

you can get the answer hopefully even before the Estimates of 

Rural Affairs are in the House.  But if they happen to get here 

before the answer is ready, then you'll be able to get it then. 

 

As the Minister of Finance, I don't have the details to various 

programs that various departments run.  Those officials have to 

be here because they are the administrators of those programs 

and the minister who is in charge is better capable of answering 

those questions.  I can't say you're right or you're wrong, and I 

won't say that except to try to assist in getting the answer as 

quickly as we can.  But be sure that when the minister is here 

with that department in committee, that you get the answer 

then. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I'm 

really happy that we're going to get that answer because as 

sometimes these questions seem rather irrelevant to people who 

aren't involved with municipal affairs, unfortunately there will 

be some who are directly involved with municipalities and they 

will insist that they find out the answers to these questions and 

they'll think that we were rather negligent in our duties if we 

don't ask. 

 

So I will appreciate getting that answer.  And I can assure you 

that some place along the line there will be some officials from 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) or 

some place that are going to be asking me what happened there 

and we will now be able to provide that, and I'm very happy 

about that. 

 

I want to ask you if in this one-twelfth allocation, because of 

some of the things that have been going on in our society and 

through the news media reported to be going on within the 

government structures, also noting the Bill that was introduced 

with regards to Rural Development changing some of the 

guidelines and rules -- in fact there's quite a lengthy document 

on changes that have been introduced to be passed later on in 

this Assembly -- and if those changes are invoked in the next 

little while, it would seem to me that there will be some 

expenditures required. 

 

And I'm wondering, sir, if there is any funding made available 

in this particular interim for the purpose of a 

study or perhaps for the purpose of actually going out and 

invoking a county system or the amalgamation of rural 

municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All that we're providing here is 

one-twelfth of the department.  I can't get into a discussion on 

the specific program areas because that's something that you 

have to discuss with the particular departments when they're in 

committee, and that minister.  So I really am unable to answer 

the specific questions as I indicated in the last interim supply. 

 

I'm trying to be as helpful as I can, as I was at the beginning by 

giving you the written paper which better outlines -- you learn 

every time you're here you see -- which better outlines the 

information than we did the first time around.  But when it 

comes to specific program areas of a department, the best place 

to ask that is when that department is here in committee, and 

hopefully that will be very soon. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that it 

would again seem that I'm trying to put you on the spot over 

something that to a lot of folks would seem trivial, but the 

reality is that we have before us the potential of legislation that 

could cause a tremendous difference in rural Saskatchewan if 

the rule, the strict rule of that new legislation were to be 

applied.  And if that strict rule of the wording in that legislation 

is applied, it's going to cost considerable amount of money. 

 

That's going to affect supply now perhaps if it's invoked soon, 

or it could affect supply of course down the road.  Obviously 

there are going to be some very big expenses. 

 

But more importantly for us in an opposition role is to try to 

find out from you through these various questions just how far 

this legislation is intended to be applied and how fast.  That's 

very important to us in order for us to do our job as an 

opposition because obviously there is a tremendous resistance 

to the county system in rural Saskatchewan.  That seems to be 

my impression from the discussions I've had with folks around 

the province.  And then it is incumbent upon us, if we find that 

monies are being allocated for a study or monies are being 

allocated for the actual transition of the boundary lines, then it 

is incumbent upon us to take a more vigorous stand against that 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

And so the answer to your question is very critical to the kind 

of resistance that we have to mount to a piece of legislation, or 

perhaps the lack of a need to put forward that kind of 

opposition to the Bill.  Perhaps if we can see that it is basically 

a housekeeping thing, as we've been told by members on your 

side that it is, and it turns out to be in fact just that, then we are 

safe in not mounting a vigorous attack against it. 

 

But we don't know exactly just at this point where the intention 

of the government is going.  So I'm trying to derive from you 

some indication of how much monies are going to be spent.  

That gives us an indication of how far this Bill is planning to 

take us in the next little while. 

 

(1600) 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

So that's why I was trying to determine from you exactly what 

kind of monies might be for that specific area.  And for me to 

wait for the next stage of this Assembly where we might in fact 

find the minister available to answer a question on this 

particular subject, that may take us well past the point when the 

legislation has already been passed, and by then the questions 

might be irrelevant, totally useless.  So we have to almost ask 

when we have the chance, even though we know that you're not 

the minister specifically in charge of that program. 

 

I wanted to know, in the Department of Rural Development, if 

there is an indication for the highway proposal to turn the 

hard-surfaced, and I think you're probably referring more to 

oil-surfaced roads, back into gravel structures?  Is there also 

some plan in here and some financing available in here to 

encourage the municipalities to change their oil-surfaced roads 

back to gravel roads in the municipal structure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I know of no such plans.  But once 

again, because this is interim supply I can only respond to 

amounts of money that are being provided to the departments.  

That's been made available to the member and other members, 

and I certainly again invite the member to remember his 

question so that when the Minister of Rural Affairs is here he 

can address it at that time and get the answers that he requires. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm going to 

turn this over to my colleagues now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have about three 

or four questions, Mr. Minister.  And I want to go back to the 

tack that I was taking when we had first interim supply and 

deal with the three aspects that I think that need to be identified 

for us in where the transfer of debts took place.  And we've had 

some subsequent discussion with the minister for Sask Property 

Management and also with Education.  And I haven't resolved 

completely in my own mind nor for information where these 

debts came from and how much they were from each of the 

departments. 

 

For example, in the Consolidated Fund I'd like to know if the 

list on page 4 is all of those items or whether there are any 

more that aren't on that list that you have identified there that 

there should be some more on there.  I'm not sure that that 

covers the item. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- To the best of my knowledge, as is 

stated here, this is the total amount of CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) non-recoverable debt -- because 

there's no way to recover it, so you have to deal with it -- that 

has been transferred to the Consolidated Fund.  Because it is a 

liability, it is a liability of the taxpayer, and therefore it should 

be booked appropriately, and that is as part of the overall 

deficit or the overall debt of the province.  So that's the 

transfer, and as far as I know that's the total amount. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay. Then the second item on the part, on 

page 44 of your budget address, deals with 184 million of Sask 

Water debt.  I'd like you to itemize those for me too if you 

wouldn't mind and where that came from.  I know that some of 

it came from the Rafferty-Alameda project.  I 

also know that there were funds given to Sask Water 

Corporation in lieu of some of the expenditures that were made 

on behalf of the agreement with the Americans.  I also know 

that some of that money was debt that was in irrigation projects 

along Diefenbaker Lake. And I'd like you to itemize those for 

me if you could. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We can get you more specific 

details, and I'll undertake to do that. 

 

But in the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, the Water 

Corporation borrowed from the Consolidated Fund to finance 

construction of a number of projects.  They borrowed to 

finance Rafferty and Alameda as well as the Riverhurst and the 

Lucky Lake irrigation projects.  We talked about that the last 

time we were here.  In both cases these loans cannot be repaid 

because there isn't enough revenue from any of these projects 

to be able to repay the loans.  So we have to service those loans 

through the Consolidated Fund. 

 

And that's why this transfer has been made because that is the 

more appropriate way in which to book the debt, so to speak, 

on this thing.  It doesn't change the total amount of the debt; it's 

still the same.  It's just a question of how you begin to account 

for it.  And according to all of the rules of the new accounting 

systems that are there, all other requirement of the Provincial 

Auditor, the requirement of the Gass Commission, this is the 

way that it should be accounted for, and that's why the transfer 

has been made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I understand 

the reason why the transfers were made; I want to know the 

volume of dollars from each of those that were transferred.  

And I'd also like to know from you if the Americans have paid 

in total all of the monies that they were committed to, and I'd 

like to have a list of the items just like you listed on page 4 for 

us the items under CIC non-recoverable debt.  I'd like to have 

those for the Sask Water Corporation on the $184 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I should have answered that 

question more fully than I did earlier.  Of the 184, 146 million 

is for the Rafferty-Alameda; the remainder is for the irrigation 

projects which I mentioned. 

 

As to whether the Americans have paid their share, I can be . . . 

I will qualify this, but to the best of my knowledge to this point 

in time they have not.  But that would have nothing to do with 

this portion of it.  That would be accounted for for other 

expenditures, so it doesn't change the write-off that has been 

done here. 

 

But as far as I know -- and I could stand to be corrected on this 

because we don't have all of the appropriate officials here 

because we're not here into the Estimates of the department -- 

but as far as I know that payment has yet to be made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You might be right that it has to be made to 

the Department of Finance and the Consolidated Fund, but I 

know that there was considerable amount had already been 

paid when I was the minister responsible for Sask Water.  

There had been a considerable amount of money paid to the 

Water Corporation in relation to the funds from the United 

States. 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

Now did the Sask Water Corporation transfer the debt without 

the assets that were established in funding from the United 

States or is that . . . Is that the net balance or is that the gross of 

the cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The transfer is exactly explained by 

the comments I made earlier.  The transfer of the debt is that 

portion of the debt for which there are no income-earning 

assets.  There's a dam, but it earns no income.  There are some 

irrigation projects, but they don't earn enough income to 

service the debt. 

 

So although those structures are there, there is no capability for 

those structures to earn enough income to repay the debt, and 

therefore the debt has been transferred to the Consolidated 

Fund because it has to be paid and the only way it can be paid 

is through the regular Consolidated Fund expenditures.  And 

therefore that's where it belongs, from an accounting point of 

view, from an accountability point of view, from a good 

management point of view. 

 

But it's got nothing to do with whether there's an asset or 

whether there is a debt.  In this case there is a debt, yes, but the 

so-called asset that's out there can't earn enough money to pay 

the debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, on the 148 that was transferred 

from Sask Water in relation to Rafferty and Alameda, was the 

payments, the $50 million from United States, a part of that?  

Or does Sask Water have that money in their possession? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the amount of 

money that's transferred here are the loans -- money which has 

been borrowed in order to do these projects.  That's all that's 

being transferred.  We've got to service the loans.  The amount 

that the United States is going to contribute, if it hasn't already, 

is not provided for in here because it doesn't impact on these 

loans.  We still have to pay the loans. 

 

The amount, as I understand it, and you'll have to ask once 

again in the Crown Corporations Committee and under 

Saskatchewan water supply board in here for more of the 

details, but the money that would come from the United States 

would be spent on something other than these loans.  It cannot 

be used for repayment of the loans.  The loans are still there, 

and these are the loans. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, I will ask those questions there.  That 

should be Sask Water, and from what I understand should have 

an asset of 54, or between 40 and $50 million -- 40 U.S. 

(United States), $50 million Canadian -- in relation to the 

volume.  They should have that on hand, because what you said 

is, this is the loan, this is the cost of the construction, and the 

money to repay it was . . . the money to repay the U.S. portion 

was paid to the Sask Water Corporation.  And if I'm wrong on 

that, correct me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, and I'm not trying 

to be difficult here, but I think it would be best if you ask the 

minister of Saskatchewan Water Corporation that's here, 

because he'll have all the documentation and the officials here, 

rather than my giving you half answers, 

which is probably what I'd do, and maybe even might make a 

error. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- At the best of times. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well not quite.  I think it's probably 

better if you ask him the question.  Now that we've got the 

House running again, I know things will go smoothly and 

quickly, and we'll get on to that pretty quickly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the Saskatchewan Property Management 

portion of the debt -- $715 million -- is there a breakdown 

somewhere that we could view which departments had the 

transfer of liabilities from the Sask Property Management into 

them? 

 

I noticed in the Estimates book that some places there is 

reference to that in Department of Health and in Department of 

Education.  There are statements that don't correlate with the 

statements made here.  And we've had some difficulty finding 

out from, for example, the Department of Education where 

some of these transfers were made. 

 

And we'd like to have a list of those transfers from the various 

departments from the Sask Property Management Corporation 

to the departments, and how that funding was transferred in a 

debt load to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All that was, was that under the 

previous administration -- for good or for bad, I'm not arguing 

there because I think it was a legitimate decision -- loans were 

transferred.  Money was transferred from the Consolidated 

Fund to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

in the form of loans which then lent money to different 

institutions or different boards.  The only way for those loans 

to be paid back is money to be appropriated in the Consolidated 

Fund which then would be channelled through the different 

school boards and so . . . not school boards, but municipalities 

and hospital boards which then would be repaid back in 

payment on a loan. 

 

The Provincial Auditor said that's bad bookkeeping.  He says 

you can't count that as an asset, he said.  It's his opinion.  And 

therefore you have to write off that debt.  We did that because 

it is a debt that has to be paid out of taxpayers' money. 

 

What we're doing now is we're expensing out projects.  Any 

future capital projects will be budgeted for in each year.  They 

will be paid for in that particular year according to the budget, 

and we won't get into the business of the loan process which is 

then being paid for by taxpayers and is just circuitous route 

which is very confusing.  And maybe that's why we're into this 

question period because it was very confusing.  And that's why 

the Provincial Auditor said you got to change it. 

 

We followed his advice, and we've changed it.  We've written 

off those loans because they are really not an asset; they are a 

liability.  There's no way in which the projects that were built 

are going to earn any income to pay it back other than the 

taxpayers through grants through the various departments 

which is going to come 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

back again.  That's all that is. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I understand all of that.  I understand all that.  

But I'd like to know what the breakdown of departments is and 

where those projects were.  Some of those building projects 

were amortized over 10 years.  I'd like to know which 

department received them and for -- what was it? -- K to 12.  

Was it for universities?  Was it for regional colleges?  Or was it 

nursing homes, hospitals?  That's what I'd like to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) is the department that's got 

to give you that information.  And you need to get it from 

there.  And each specific department can also give you their 

particular jurisdiction.  And I don't have that information at 

hand.  But we can check with the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation to encourage them to provide that 

information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That, Mr. Minister, is exactly what our 

problem is.  I asked the Minister of Education on giving me a 

list of items in K to 12, and she said there were none.  Now I 

clearly remember it because I asked her about it, and I got 

nothing for an answer.  And so I need to know from you.  If 

SPMC is supposed to answer the question then we'll get to the 

associate minister.  But if the Minister of Education and the 

Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice are supposed to 

answer those questions, then inform them of that because they 

are not providing us with a list of those items that qualify in 

this $715 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, I . . . the answer from 

the Minister of Education was the correct one because K to 12 

projects were not funded through Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation.  So there would be no information 

there that would be required. 

 

As the other projects -- health care, nursing homes, other 

capital -- each of those departments should be able to provide 

you that information or in a general way Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation should be able to provide 

you that information.  I see no reason why they wouldn't be 

able to do it. 

 

I shall undertake to speak to them and tell them to get the 

information together so that you can get the information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And, Mr. Minister, I'd like to have it add up to 

715 million which is in the Sask Property Management 

Corporation's assessment in your budget book. 

 

The last question I have deals with the $1.8 billion of debt 

effective March 31 that you assumed, and I haven't taken the 

time to add this up, but is that the CIC debt and Sask Water 

debt and Sask Property Management debt?  Is that the 1.8 

billion that you're talking about on page 45? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry, but I don't see.  Can you 

remind the House about whether it's page 45?  I don't see 1.8 

billion.  Can you just clarify? 

Mr. Martens: -- It's, Mr. Minister, it's on the second paragraph 

on the first column. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, thank you.  If you look at 

page both 44 and 45 effective March 31, 1992, there's an 

explanation of all of those under the three bullets, the black 

bullets that are there, which gives you the explanation for the 

1.8 billion.  And I won't bother going through it all but it's there 

clearly outlined. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson.  I 

have two questions that I'd like . . . two different areas of 

questions I'd like to ask the Minister of Finance. 

 

In the first area I want to begin congratulating the Government 

of Saskatchewan for making some changes to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan that allow citizens to continue to 

make payment into the plan.  And so citizens now in fact have 

a pension plan.  They can make contributions.  And I'm 

particularly thinking of home-makers and small-business 

people, farmers.  And I want to say thank you to the 

Government of Saskatchewan for listening to the citizens of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Now, Mr. Minister, given that the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan is located in the town of 

Kindersley, I would be interested in knowing what the 

administrative costs are for that pension plan.  Are they in the 

several hundreds of thousands of dollars?  And what would the 

implications be if that money was to be rolled into the public 

employees' benefits agency or some other administrative 

structure.  Would that be a cost saving to the holders of those 

pensions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Thank the member for 

her comments.  Once again in order to be able to answer the 

question accurately, we would need to have the officials of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan here, and when we get into 

Estimates of the Department of Finance, we'll do that.  I would 

not want to say that it would cost less if it was transferred, at 

least in the interim period of time, to some other function 

because it would be all the costs of moving.  There is ongoing 

costs such as the rent/lease arrangements which we've been 

locked into under previous arrangement and so on.  So 

although there may be a small amount of reduction in the cost 

-- and I suspect there would be -- in the short term it would not 

be significant. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  When 

we're in the Committee of the Whole, when we get to your 

Estimates, I'll be asking that question.  I would hope that you 

would be able to give us some information in finer detail 

because obviously the holders of those pension plans want to 

have the smallest possible administrative costs. 

 

The second issue that I'd like to raise, Mr. Minister, is an issue 

that my colleagues in the opposition have raised, and that's the 

issue of drought assistance.  And as you know, given the 

changes that our government has made to the gross revenue 

insurance plan or program, there are some concerns that are 

being expressed by farmers living 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

in drought-affected areas. 

 

And as you probably know, Mr. Minister, the drought seems to 

be moving north.  Farmers are very concerned that they too 

will be facing a similar situation to those farmers living in the 

south-western corner of Saskatchewan.  And I'm wondering 

whether our government has made any plans or has a 

contingency fund available for some sort of drought relief 

should this drought continue to move north and should this 

develop into a major crisis for not only the province of 

Saskatchewan, but for those farmers living all across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well in response to the member, I 

remind the House of the comments made by the member from 

Maple Creek, which I thought were good comments, when he 

talked about Montana and that the United States federal 

government was providing funding for disaster assistance in 

the state of Montana.  And that's quite appropriate.  The United 

States government nationally has recognized the importance of 

the agricultural industry.  We have heard the federal Minister 

of Agriculture, Mr. McKnight, talk about additional money that 

may be available at the federal level.  We have urged Mr. 

McKnight and the federal government that if indeed there is 

federal money that is available, that that should be set aside in 

the event of the need for a disaster assistance program.  I think 

that would be quite a legitimate and quite an appropriate way to 

use that money.  Use it where it is needed in circumstances 

where there are difficulties so that it is better targeted.  When 

you have limited amounts of money, you should be targeting 

the expenditure of taxpayers' money. 

 

We will continue to urge the federal minister and the federal 

government to carry out the obligations that the federal 

government has in the area of agriculture to meet its 

obligations as a national government for an industry that is not 

only important to Saskatchewan, it's a very significant and 

important part of the Canadian economy.  It has spin-offs that 

create jobs in almost every province of Canada, particularly in 

central Canada. 

 

We are in a situation where we are competing with the 

treasuries of the United States and the European Economic 

Community.  Under such circumstances no province, certainly 

not this province which is strapped with the kind of financial 

situation we face, can do what a national government has to do.  

The treasury of Saskatchewan cannot compete with the 

treasury of the United States.  I'm not sure that the treasury of 

Canada can but certainly they're better placed to be able to do 

what's needed in a targeted way, and we will continue to work 

with the federal government to provide the funding that may be 

required. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, obviously what you've 

just indicated to me is known by the citizens of Saskatchewan, 

that the Saskatchewan treasury can't possibly compete with the 

federal treasury of the United States of America. 

 

I'm interested in knowing what specific measures have been 

taken on the part of our government to ensure that there may be 

some drought relief assistance that is 

coming. 

 

Can you give us more details in terms of what kinds of 

conversations have gone on with Mr. McKnight, given that we 

are now into major constitutional discussions?  Is there any 

chance that Mr. Mulroney, who desperately requires a 

constitutional agreement, could be encouraged to come forward 

with some revenue for the province of Saskatchewan, given the 

kind of agricultural crisis that we're facing, not only on the 

revenue front but on the front of a very strong potential for a 

disaster in drought, not only in the south-west part of the 

province but in other parts of the province as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I can't speak for the 

negotiations and the discussions that have been taking place.  

Once again, when we get into Estimates of the Department of 

Agriculture, that's a better place where you'll get more specific 

answers to the questions.  What's happening at the 

constitutional discussions -- I'm not close enough to it, 

whatever may have been happening at the dinner today and the 

meeting of first ministers -- but I'm really not able to 

specifically speak on the details.  You're better to ask that 

question, as I have been indicating to the members opposite, 

when the appropriate minister -- in this case the Minister of 

Agriculture -- is here to be able to respond more specifically. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I have a couple of questions on the environment I'd 

like to ask you.  The Minister of the Environment is proposing 

a new committee to tour the province to . . . concerning her Bill 

48 that has been presented to the House.  I'm just wondering, 

do you have any allocations for money in your interim supply 

for that?  Or are they in some other department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well what we're providing in this 

interim supply Bill is one-twelfth of the total budget for the 

Department of Environment.  Precisely what that one-twelfth in 

program by program that is going to be spent, you're going to 

have to ask the minister when the Department of Environment 

is here.  We don't have that information.  But in the case of 

Environment it's just a straight one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In the 

legislation category in your details, would that environment 

committee perhaps be funded through that?  I see it has in 

excess over the one-twelfth of normal allocation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No I don't know what you're 

looking at, but as I see it here, Environment and Public Safety 

budget to be voted -- 10.763 million -- one-twelfth is 897,000.  

And that's all that's being asked; no additional money. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- My question, Mr. Minister, is under your 

department of legislation, which would be the House, it has a 

one-twelfth allocation of 440 and in excess of 288,000 as 

compared to an interim supply of 728.  Is part of that 

environment committee funded through that? 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that the additional 

amount of money beyond the one-twelfth in legislation is 

strictly for the operation of the House.  I don't think it, as far as 

I know, it has nothing to do with this committee.  It's just the 

operation of the House and the fact that the House is sitting. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have one final series of questions, Mr. 

Minister.  Every time that, in my memory, we've gone through 

interim supply, it's traditional for the Minister of Finance to 

stand up and warn about the dire consequences that are going 

to occur in this province if it doesn't happen, and that's been 

under various stripes of government. 

 

As early as two weeks ago I heard you say that certain people 

were going to run out of money.  And I think, Mr. Minister, 

maybe it's time that we get some more definitive lists from 

your department as to exactly what the exact dates are.  

Because I know in the past it was pointed out in the media that 

interim supply had gone as late as the 8th and 9th of the month, 

and that type of thing, and yet the doors stayed open and the 

bills got paid. 

 

And I wonder if you wouldn't provide to the House the exact 

dates upon which some of these organizations should be paid 

because obviously the doors weren't going to close on July 1 

and they haven't closed on the 8th or the 9th.  So maybe it 

would help the taxpaying public of this province to know 

maybe some of these dates.  And if you could provide a list to 

us, it would be a little more definitive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, let me assure the 

member that I will provide -- and I think he did ask this -- a full 

calendar of interim supplies over a period of years.  Now I'll 

just get that put together and provide it for the member 

opposite.  That's public knowledge, I'm sure. 

 

Let me explain something about this year, and I put it in the 

context of that each and every year isn't the same.  Depending 

on the timing of the budget, depending on the requests that are 

made in any interim supply the month before will determine 

the impact that a delay of an interim supply Bill will have. 

 

For example, in 1991-1992 there was a later interim supply 

Bill.  But the first interim supply Bill was passed on April 13, 

which was well into the month.  Because it followed closely 

after the end of the previous fiscal year, many of the payments 

that were necessary were paid off in the previous fiscal year 

and therefore there was less of a problem in the new fiscal year, 

which is April going into May.  So when the interim supply 

Bill in May of that year was passed on about May 8 or 9, it was 

not that great of a problem. 

 

This year, because of the lateness of the budget, there were two 

special warrants which had to be passed.  You lost the 

flexibility of paying something under the previous fiscal year.  

The special warrants that we passed, we were very careful 

because we don't particularly like the idea of passing special 

warrants unless it's an emergency situation.  That we provided 

the bare minimum amount of 

funds necessary in each of those months to cover the 

expenditures, reducing the impact, reducing the amount of 

flexibility into the following month. 

 

In the last interim supply Bill, which we passed last month, we 

did the same thing.  We provided the minimal amounts 

necessary to fund for the month of June, knowing we would be 

able to come back in late June to provide funding, as an interim 

measure, for the month of July. 

 

Very little flexibility there. And so had the House continued 

not to sit for any extended period of time, it would have created 

some very serious difficulties.  And some of the earlier ones 

would have been non-government organizations and areas like 

family and youth services where funds required . . . The 

Provincial Comptroller would have to know by June 25 in 

order to provide the funding which is due on June 30. 

 

So we are already going to be a little late.  So it'll create some 

pressure, but we're not so late now that it's not possible to 

overcome it.  But now that we're in this process, I think, 

although it will create some difficulty for some of those 

organizations, it won't be overwhelming.  Had we delayed 

much longer, it would have created some serious difficulty. 

 

Now there are others, and we'll provide you the calendar to 

assist you, that . . . Do we have it here now?  In fact I'm told we 

have it here.  I'll send it over with a page.  There are others that 

could have waited longer.  For example, urban municipalities, 

because they're paid on a quarterly basis, have been paid on the 

first quarter and therefore there was some room there. 

 

But when it comes to the NGOs (non-governmental 

organizations) and Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, very soon 

there would be a running out of money to be able to pay those 

bills. 

 

And the member asked about the calendar of interim supply 

Bills over the years.  We have it here with us and we'll send it 

over. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I appreciate your comments.  I think it's important we 

do talk about it because we may have to do this again, and you 

never know what the agenda of the House is and what will be 

before us.  And we may very well run up against this payment 

problem.  And I think it's important that we perhaps look at 

ways to maybe change this process. 

 

It's an interesting one, as I say, from all of my time in here I've 

heard Finance ministers continually warn the Saskatchewan 

public about this problem, and yet we can't seem to dispense 

with it.  We run up against it all the time. 

 

In your response you said that different agencies are paid at 

different times, therefore they have different time lines so 

municipalities are done on a quarterly basis.  Would it make 

any sense, Mr. Minister, that perhaps we changed more of the 

payment areas to that basis if it means less of a problem for the 

House to manage other business around. 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

Is there a mechanism where we can keep the accountability 

intact and yet do things?  And I know there's been some talk in 

the past about doing that.  Have you got anything that you 

could add to that debate that maybe would be a better system in 

the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I guess in principle I guess it comes 

down to, Mr. Chairman, whether we want to retain the right of 

the legislature to appropriate money.  And I think that that's a 

principle that's very important.  And I don't think the member 

disagrees; in fact, I know he agrees.  So we'd have to look at 

ways in which we made sure that that was done. 

 

Now there are some other options.  I'm quite happy to review 

other ways -- and if members opposite have suggestions I'll 

look at them -- in which we can expedite this process and make 

it smoother and not get into the kind of dilemma that we might 

have been in, and to some degree are, with this interim supply 

Bill. 

 

One of the answers, and it's been used before, is to bring in 

supply Bills of two-twelfths instead of one-twelfth.  It's been an 

accepted practice over time.  But because of the way this year 

has developed and because of the special warrants that were 

passed and because of the lateness of the budget, we decided 

that it was more appropriate to stick with the one-twelfth 

because we were well into the fiscal year.  So that each month 

I, as the Minister of Finance, would have to come in here and 

ask the legislature to appropriate some money. 

 

But I'm quite willing to explore any channels or any other 

methods, as long as the authority of the legislature is left intact, 

on how we can do better in getting through this process so we 

don't get into those kind of circumstances that the member 

refers to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I realize, Mr. Minister, that both of us 

probably would give up something in the process.  But I think 

some of the comments that I was picking up around in the last 

couple of weeks when . . . There are a lot of people that quite 

frankly don't watch this place a whole lot.  But they do catch 

the odd thing on the news or in the newspaper about maybe I'm 

not going to get my old age pension cheque type of thing, or 

I'm on some type of disability and I'm not going to get paid.  

And I think there's a certain amount of fear -- maybe 

sometimes legitimately, sometimes unlegitimately -- used by 

politicians in this process.  And you have indicated we're into a 

whole realm of changes in the way that we do accounting, that 

we do accountability, that we do things. 

 

And I think it would behove us maybe as a legislature to 

seriously look at some way that we don't do this to some of our 

citizens on a regular basis.  And it's happened enough times, I 

think, in the last half a dozen years that it may be worth 

looking at.  I guess you and I as politicians will have to add up 

the pluses and the minuses for ourselves politically, but I think 

it's incumbent upon us to add up the pluses and the minuses for 

folks too. 

 

I don't think anyone out there, because they happen to have a 

disability or they happen to work for a certain group or agency, 

should go in fear of their salary not being paid because you and 

I are having a fundamental, 

philosophical disagreement on something. 

 

And it's something that has arisen in this last couple of weeks 

that people have commented to me, and they quite frankly find 

it unacceptable from both of our parts.  And I know there's 

nothing you can do about it today, but I thought it was probably 

the appropriate time to raise it as we've gone through this again 

and give some commitment maybe that we can discuss it in the 

future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As I said, members of the House 

will know, and the public I think will agree, that many of the 

processes that we have in the legislature, including the whole 

question of calling the members to the vote and all this kind of 

thing, as the Speaker indicated today, is something that needs 

to be reviewed. 

 

I mean the more we can streamline the activities of this 

institution, which is the legislature, and yet assure good, sound 

accountability from the government and assure members to ask 

the questions that need to be asked and seek the answers -- as 

long as we can assure that -- I think you will find that members 

on this side of the House and on that side of the House would 

be more than happy to look at different alternatives that may 

help to make this institution function better.  I think the public 

is asking us to do that, and we'd be willing to explore any kind 

of alternatives. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I notice it's about 

15 minutes until 5, but I'll have a couple of questions for the 

minister. 

 

I was particularly interested in the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway, I believe, asking questions with respect to drought.  

And as I'm sure the minister knows there is increasing concern 

about drought across the province of Saskatchewan.  He was 

saying that he is a little optimistic oil prices were going to 

maybe be up, retail sales weren't doing all that bad, uranium 

sales volume was fairly good, the net increase in employment 

modest, but he didn't mention drought.  And we're now back in 

the legislature here talking about interim supply because of 

drought . . . or some of the differences of opinion with respect 

to how we manage drought. 

 

I wonder if the minister has any recent information from his 

colleagues in the Department of Agriculture or other places that 

would tell us what the Estimates are of the crop at this point in 

time because, as the minister . . . or as the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway said, the drought's moving north.  Now if 

that's the case, then it becomes increasingly serious.  Maybe the 

minister could tell us what the latest information is on that. 

 

And secondly, would he be prepared to tell us some of the 

implications of that in terms of federal and provincial money.  I 

noticed in terms of his response to the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway that he said, well yes the federal government should 

kick in some money if there's a drought. 

 

(1645) 

 

Could he perhaps describe the formula that is there across 

Canada between the provinces and the federal 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

government as to crop insurance and drought and revenue and 

the various kinds of GRIP.  And maybe then go on to outline 

how much money is kicked into gear from the federal 

government when the province participates and co-operates to 

some degree in crop insurance and in something like GRIP. 

 

In other words there's a formula that I believe the whole 

country uses.  Saskatchewan's part of that formula.  And if in 

fact there's a serious drought, then each province pays its fair 

share, and it kicks into gear money and a lot of federal money.  

And even the jurisdictions in other parts of Canada know that 

that's the case, and in fact substantial amounts of money are 

kicked into gear. 

 

Or put it another way, Mr. Minister, as you're writing this 

down.  Maybe you could tell us how much money doesn't come 

into Saskatchewan if we don't participate in this program.  In 

other words we decide to opt out.  How much money do we 

lose from the federal government if we don't participate and 

pay our fair share like other provinces do.  And I'm sure that 

we'd be interested in knowing that, particularly when we're 

looking at how you're going to allocate your money over the 

next twelve months. 

 

So if it's several hundred million dollars that we might not be 

able to have in the province of Saskatchewan from the federal 

government because we're not participating, I wonder if you 

could identify just what the consequences are of backing out of 

a national program when all of the provinces participate except 

Saskatchewan, when we have most of the farm land and we 

have the threat of drought. 

 

You see what I'm getting at, Mr. Minister.  We have a drought.  

Your own members are asking.  It's increasing.  What's the 

formula?  How much money do they pay?  If we opt out, how 

much money do we lose?  And I wonder if he could comment 

on some of the implications that might have for the province of 

Saskatchewan's farmers that are facing this serious situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated 

earlier, in our discussions earlier, the member from Maple 

Creek had some good thoughts on this and I refer to them 

because I thought that he had had a thoughtful intervention 

when he talked about the American situation as opposed to the 

Canadian situation. 

 

I can't comment in the Department of Agriculture jurisdiction 

in great, specific detail as the member opposite, the Leader of 

the Opposition, would like me to.  I think I'm going to leave 

that to the Minister of Agriculture because that's within his 

jurisdiction. 

 

The fact of the matter is, I want to add also, that in this budget 

we already are expending $15 million a year in repayment to 

the federal government for drought assistance provided by the 

federal government in, I believe, 1988.  So we already are 

committed that kind of an expenditure. 

 

If we were to allocate additional expenditure in this budget for 

funding of any other project, we'd have to find the money 

somewhere, or increase the level of the deficit. 

I don't think anybody will disagree that it would be unwise to 

increase the level of the deficit.  It's too high now. 

 

I'm not sure that there is room in the Department of Education 

or the Department of Health, the Department of Social Services 

to find additional funding.  We have budgeted a certain amount 

of money in the Department of Agriculture for agriculture 

purposes.  That's the amount that we can afford to budget for.  

If there is additional money in third line of defence as the 

federal government has indicated they have, we'd be interested 

to discussing with them on how it can be best allocated and 

distributed to provide the need where it is needed the most. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, with great respect, you can't 

really get off the hook that easy.  We're looking at a crisis in 

rural Saskatchewan, we're looking at an increasing threat of 

drought, bigger and bigger area.  And you said you want to 

adopt the U.S. model. 

 

Now on very few occasions, Mr. Minister, do you adopt the 

American free-enterprise model.  Once in a while you say, well 

I kind of like Americans and the way they do things.  The fact 

is you are not American, Mr. Minister, you're a Canadian.  And 

this is Canada, and this is Saskatchewan.  And we're dealing 

with the federal-provincial agreement that deals with not the 

Department of Agriculture, but with the Crop Insurance 

Corporation, an insurance company. 

 

The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance company deals with the 

federal government.  And that insurance company is in the 

business of insurance.  And sometimes it just collects money 

and sometimes it pays out money.  And you know that.  Now in 

the time of drought it's going to have to pay some out.  But it 

operates on a 10, 15, 20-year cycle as insurance company does 

-- SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) pays, other 

insurance companies does, the Co-operators do.  So we're 

looking at an insurance company. 

 

What we're trying to get a handle on is in the insurance 

business, and you have a fire or a hail or a drought, you pay 

out.  Now if Saskatchewan decides not to participate in that and 

not co-operate in that formula, it seems to me, and what bothers 

the farmers is, that they might be out a lot of money.  The 

federal money won't kick in to help.  And all we have to do . . . 

I'm asking, isn't there some number that you could give us on 

terms of what you think that our responsibility is through crop 

insurance in the agreements we've signed with the federal 

government?  Could you tell us . . . could you separate out even 

in the minds of the public and your MLAs, our MLAs here, the 

role of an insurance company, crop insurance, versus the 

general budget. 

 

Now crop insurance may have an increased liability next year 

if it pays out this year.  It may not depending on what the 

federal government does, the price of wheat does, and some 

other things.  We know that.  In fact it may be, Mr. Minister, 

and you might comment, it might not have any impact on this 

year's budget at all.  On your projections, your cash flow, crop 

insurance sits out there with a 20-year actuary.  It runs on a 

separate operation.  But what can happen, Mr. Minister, is if 

we're out several hundred 



June 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

million dollars that farmers don't have, it's like the Wheat Pool 

ads.  If the farmer has money, they spend it in town.  Retail 

sales are good.  The whole economy is better. 

 

Now we're starting to look at serious, serious blow in income 

coming from the federal government because of perhaps a 

refusal by Crop Insurance officials to say, I don't want to pay 

my fair share.  So see, we've got to find out the impact of 

drought on the province, of course, but on Crop Insurance 

because it's a separate corporation, and why that necessarily 

would impact on the cash flow in this province this year in 

your budget because it may not.  In fact it might have 

something to do perhaps with next year's or maybe five years 

down the road, but in the middle of a drought it could be quite 

serious. 

 

So again I ask you, have you an estimate of what this drought 

looks like?  Do you know what it might cost if you kicked into 

the national formula?  And do you know how you could 

separate out Crop Insurance liability, which is an insurance 

company completely different from your own budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're here in interim 

supply, and I want to refer the Leader of the Opposition to the 

information which we provided on paper to the members 

opposite earlier.  We have in the budget to be voted for this 

year for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, $108.647 million.  

We're asking in this interim supply for one-twelfth of that to 

cover the expenditures under the Crop Insurance budget, which 

is part of our agreement with the federal government.  As well 

as anybody else in this House, the member from Estevan -- not 

better, but just as well as anybody -- will know how that works.  

That's the money that we have provided under the existing crop 

insurance program.  We're not asking for any additional money 

in this interim supply other than what's there, which is 

one-twelfth of what is budgeted. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, could you just tell us, if 

there's a drought, what impact that has on the number here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, as I have said to 

other members of the House, I can't answer that question.  I 

don't have the Crop Insurance officials here.  And that's a 

question that the member from Estevan is better to address to 

the Minister of Agriculture . . . or actually it's not.  It's the 

Minister of Rural Affairs who's the minister in charge of the 

crop insurance program.  I can't answer specific questions on 

those programs because I'm not the minister in charge.  That 

minister will be here in question period.  Those ministers will 

be here in Committee of Finance.  That's a better time to ask 

those questions. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you, as the Minister of Finance, 

know the relationship -- or your deputy or somebody else 

would -- between agencies and your budget.  Now in the event 

that there's a drought and it's severe and it covers at least half 

the farm land in Saskatchewan, you must know that it might . . 

. you'd think it'd have an impact on Crop Insurance.  Now the 

specific Crop Insurance minister will give you all the details 

there. 

I want to know how you connect the Crop Insurance 

Corporation to your overall budget.  It runs on a 10, 15, 20-year 

actuary insurance company modus operandi. How can you . . . 

I don't think you can legitimately say that if we have to pay the 

farmers for a drought, we're going to have to tax people this 

year to pay for it.  I'm not buying that.   And I don't think an 

insurance company would buy that because they're set up to be 

actuarially sound in the long run. 

 

So what is the relationship, if you can, Mr. Minister, between 

Crop Insurance and a potential drought and your budget on the 

current account . . . fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, when it comes to Crop 

Insurance you'll have to ask the minister in charge of the Crop 

Insurance.  The relationship as far as the Finance department is 

concerned is that we have budgeted a certain amount of money 

for Crop Insurance, which we have to expend.  This is the 

amount of money we have to put in the budget because it's 

going to cost the government or the taxpayer this amount of 

money. 

 

As to other relationships and other operations of the crop 

insurance program which the member opposite talks about, 

that's something the Minister of Agriculture will have to 

explain, and you should ask him. 

 

I'm not an expert on crop insurance, and unless I become a 

minister of Agriculture, I don't likely going to be one.  I 

shouldn't be expected to know all of those kind of specific 

details.  The minister in charge is here; he'll be able to provide 

you those answers.  If the member from Estevan wishes to ask 

those questions in question period, that's a good time as well, 

although you can spend a lot more time in Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you opened this up with your 

comments earlier that you were optimistic that you were going 

to hit your targets this year.  And you said you had . . . oil 

prices were up and uranium sales volume are pretty good and 

you had employment up a little bit. 

 

And I'm just raising the question along with the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway that you forgot to mention something -- 

that there is a serious, one, farm crisis, and two, serious drought 

developing across Saskatchewan that will have an impact on 

your budget and you're not acknowledging it.  You say, well 

you can ask the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of Crop 

Insurance. 

 

Go ask any of your MLAs, Mr. Minister.  There's a serious 

financial concern in rural Saskatchewan which is going to show 

up in the cities, as the Wheat Pool ads will say, and you don't 

want to talk about it. 

 

Well it's out there.  We've had bell-ringing.  We've got 

problems associated with all kinds of concerns -- legitimate 

concerns -- about farm income and drought.  And you've said, 

so far your answer is, well if we had an American-style system, 

the feds would come in and take over.  I mean that's getting 

pretty thin. 
 

I want to know if Crop Insurance can afford and how it affords 

and how it pays for the same kinds of formulas 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 1992 

other provinces have that kick in literally hundreds of millions 

of dollars into Saskatchewan and how you are going to show 

that on your books and how you're going to try to convince the 

public that you have to raise taxes to pay for a drought. 

 

I want to know that and you must know that -- you've been 

saying it in the public; you've been saying it other places. 

 

You can't just pawn this off to the Minister of Agriculture.  

This is a financial question.  You're obviously afraid of it or 

you don't understand it.  And I don't think that's the case.  This 

is a separate insurance company set up to handle disasters.  It's 

all across Canada. 

 

What's going to be the number here if you don't co-operate in 

terms of the loss of federal money that could come into the 

province of Saskatchewan?  You're the Finance minister.  The 

Minister of Agriculture can't answer that and no other minister 

can answer it other than perhaps the Premier. 

 

So you are dealing with a financial crisis in Saskatchewan on 

the farm and your insurance company's in the middle of it and 

you have no estimate of what a drought might cost or how 

much money we would lose from the federal government if in 

fact you didn't kick that money into gear. 

 

I don't think that you . . . that that's accurate.  I think you do 

know and you've got to be accountable to this legislature 

because this is more than the price of uranium and the price of 

oil and interest rates and some other things.  This is about tens 

of thousands of farmers.  And your own members asking, what 

are we going to do in the event of a drought and how are we 

going to kick in more federal money and how should it all 

work and impact on our budget. 

 

I just make the point, Mr. Minister, this may not have anything 

to do with raising taxes this year, nothing at all because there's 

a separate insurance company -- not on this year's current 

account. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, just so that the 

member understands what we talked about when we began this 

interim supply debate.  I did indicate that the targets that were 

set at this point in time -- and it's too early to be accurate as to 

where it was going to go at the end of the fiscal year -- were on 

track.  I also made very careful point of pointing out that things 

may change.   And if they do, we'll have to see what they 

change. 

 

But the questions the member opposite asks are good 

questions, but they're asked in the wrong place.  He should be 

asking those questions of the minister in charge of the Crop 

Insurance who will speak for the Crop Insurance Corporation 

in some specific detail.  And I invite the member to be in the 

House when that corporation comes before this Committee of 

Finance so that you can ask those questions. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  It now being 5 o'clock the 

committee stands recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


