




















































Hansard: August 26, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3061 

 August 26, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Given the hour of the day, the Table 

may not have the agenda for the day.  We'll move into 

Committee of the Whole first thing. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Finance to please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd be 

pleased to introduce the officials.  To my left is Doug Mathies, 

the general manager of Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  To my 

right is Blair Swystun, who's a senior analyst, Department of 

Finance and also a member of the board of trustees; and behind 

me and to my right, Cathy Strutt, also manager of client 

services.  Both Mr. Mathies and Ms. Strutt are from Kindersley 

and have come some distance to be here, as the member from 

Kindersley does quite regularly.  And I want to welcome them 

and thank them for coming to help us through this Bill. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

certainly welcome to the officials.  I dare say that I hope that 

the officials from Kindersley don't join with me in ganging up 

on the minister and provide him with the help that he 

desperately needs on a Bill like this. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Justice minister in the province has 

committed to changing legislation concerning pension benefits.  

And the legislation that he's proposing deals with pensions in 

another area but I think it's relevant to deal with that as well. 

 

The report, as the Justice minister is going to be presenting, 

deals with issues of fairness, flexibility, and control.  The 

highlights of the panel's recommendation include: part-time 

employees should be entitled to become members of the 

employer pension plans.   A member of the pension plan 

should be entitled to a pension after two years of continuous 

employment.  Survivors' benefits should be enhanced and 

common law spouses should be recognized for the purpose of 

survivors' benefits.  Plans should not discriminate on the basis 

of gender.  Pension advisory committees should be established 

to encourage plan members to participate in their pension 

plans.  Plan members should have more flexibility in their 

retirement income.  Lifetime registered retirement income 

funds should be introduced as alternatives to life annuities. 

 

And in the conclusion of the study that was put together by the 

Minister of Justice and the panel that he commissioned was: we 

need to protect the pension 

benefits of the province's workers and allow those workers 

greater control of their pension plans, he said. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of your colleague's recommendations -- 

and they're all excellent recommendations -- in light of those 

recommendations that pension benefits in this province should 

be dealt with particularly with respect to fairness, flexibility, 

and control and that the people involved should have greater 

control of their pension plan, I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if 

you could provide us with any substantial studies that you and 

your department have done that would essentially give the 

people of Saskatchewan an indication of why you felt it 

necessary to make these kind of changes in this plan in light of 

the statements that your Justice minister has made about 

fairness, flexibility, and control. 

 

We in the opposition certainly don't believe that the changes 

have anything to do with fairness, flexibility, or control.  We 

think, Mr. Minister, that you were very ill-advised in making 

the changes in the pension plan.  The pension plan was dealt a 

severe blow in the April budget after there was considerable 

amount of concern, I'll say, from the folks of Saskatchewan -- 

after there was a considerable amount of questions raised with 

certainly, I would suspect, your back-bench MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) and with the opposition, and 

considerable amount of people calling you and your officials, 

I'm sure. 

 

You've seen fit to make some more changes in the plan and 

again throw it all up in the air, not to mention the plan . . . that 

the people who administer the plan in Kindersley, the amount 

of concern that it raised with them.  First of all, the day before 

the announcement is made, they receive lay-off notices.  And it 

throws the whole place into chaos.  I spoke to the employees of 

the Pension Plan that day of the budget announcement.  And to 

say the least, Mr. Minister, they were devastated. 

 

No indication whatsoever that you were considering making 

those changes.  And that extends beyond the employees of the 

Pension Plan, but it also extends to the people who were 

participants in the pension plan.  No indication whatsoever 

from you or your officials.  No consultation with them.  

Absolutely no indication that you were going to be making any 

changes, and yet you saw fit to make those changes, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I'm wondering if you would take the time to justify your 

actions, justify to the employees of the Pension Plan your lack 

of fairness, your lack of flexibility, and certainly your lack of 

control over how you had made these changes.  I wonder if you 

would spend a few moments explaining to the people of 

Saskatchewan and justify for us and the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan your actions, particularly that fly in the face of 

your colleague, the Minister of Justice's recommendations on 

pension benefits. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

for his questions.  First of all, let me respond to the suggestion 

that the amendments that are being brought forward fly in the 

face of the legislation that is being introduced under The 

Pension Benefits Act.  And I 



3062 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

simply want to say, Mr. Chairman, that in fact all of the 

amendments in this Bill are in keeping with and compatible 

with the amendments to The Pension Benefits Act.  In fact 

there are provisions that are being introduced in this Bill which 

are parallel to those amendments in The Pension Benefits Act 

so that they are consistent. 

 

We listened to the people who are enrolled in the pension plan.  

Probably the widest consultation one can take is hearing all the 

members of any particular plan.  The members of the plan, 

after they announced it on May 7, made it very clear to us and 

it was supported by the former chairperson of the Pension Plan 

and other prominent people, women's organizations, they made 

it very clear to us that they understood that the province was 

having a severe financial difficulty.  They understood that the 

province couldn't continue to develop a growing unfunded 

liability which is $43 million, and in four years would be $80 

million.  Just financially that is not something that could 

continue. 

 

Overwhelmingly people who contacted us said that they 

understood that.  But they also said that they knew that the 

government had to make some changes, and also said, thirdly, 

that they would very much prefer if the government would 

leave the plan into place, save the money that the government 

had to save, so that they would have a vehicle in which to 

provide themselves a pension and still be able to contribute. 

 

We listened to what they were saying.  And we listened to the 

member for Kindersley who on June 9 in this legislature said 

the same things.  I have the Hansard here with me.  The 

member from Kindersley, and rightfully so, said you should 

consider some of the other options.  And we did because we 

thought the suggestions that were made were excellent 

suggestions. 

 

And so we have, instead of abolishing the plan altogether, left a 

vehicle in place for future changes and improvements as we 

consult more widely over time to make the plan more 

accessible to those people to whom it is not for financial 

reasons accessible now, target it better, and the vehicle is there 

in order to be able to achieve those things. 

 

(0915) 

 

But the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is simply that the province 

finds itself in some very severe financial difficulties.  We 

cannot afford to continue a plan which grows to an unfunded 

liability of $80 million in four more years.  But having dealt 

with that, we left in place a structure for people to still be able 

to contribute to a pension plan and we hope that people will 

take advantage of that. 

 

There are some people who cannot contribute to an RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan) because of their income 

situation.  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, as it will be, will 

provide them with that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't believe that, and I 

don't think people of Saskatchewan believe that statement you 

just made about the fairness and the type of flexibility that 

you've put into the plan.  What we indeed 

suggested to you, Mr. Minister, was that you could look at the 

government match or you could look at the matching pension . 

. . minimum pension guarantee.  You could look at those types 

of things.  We were suggesting to you, sir, to look at them 

individually, certainly not as a whole package.  We were also 

suggesting to you that those types of things could've been 

looked at for a very short period of time. 

 

If you felt, as you suggested to this House all along since it's 

opened this spring, that the fiscal restraints drove you to do 

this, why then do they not drive you to look at other pension 

plans?  Why do they not drive you to look at other unfunded 

pension plans in this province? 

 

And we can look at other ones like the government pensions.  

We could look at the teachers' pension, who has an unfunded 

liability in the billions.  And then, sir, last and final, and I think 

the people of Saskatchewan are very critical of you and your 

decisions, is your own pension -- is your own pension, sir. 

 

You've taken away the pension plan.  You've taken away the 

pension plan of 54,000-some-odd people in Saskatchewan.  

And it had an unfunded liability, as you suggest, of $40 

million.  Your own pension plan singularly has an unfunded 

liability of $1 million in your own.  And you stand up and say 

to the people of Saskatchewan that they couldn't sustain it. 

 

Well can they sustain yours?  Can they sustain you for very 

long?  One million dollars in your own, and he's telling the 

people of Saskatchewan, we can't sustain it -- we can't sustain 

$40 million expenditure on behalf of the province for 54,000 

people, but we can sustain it for myself. 

 

Where is the fairness in that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister?  

Where is the fairness in that?  Where do you see . . . I would 

like you to explain to the people of Saskatchewan where you 

see the fairness that your Justice minister so openly promised 

to the people of Saskatchewan with respect to pension changes.  

Where is that fairness when 54,000 people have an unfunded 

pension liability of $40 million, and you yourself have an 

unfunded pension liability of $1 million sitting in a bank 

account, waiting for you to retire.  I would think the people of 

Saskatchewan would be thinking sooner than later, that would 

be a good idea. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could just take the time to 

compare those two pension benefit plans.  Just take a few 

moments of the committee's time this morning to compare 

those two pension benefits -- yours at $1 million for yourself, 

and $40 million for the people of Saskatchewan in a pension 

plan that was directed at people who ordinarily would have no 

opportunity to participate in a pension. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I 

want to correct the member because he is not providing the full 

information in his comments.  Many steps have been taken by 

the government prior to 1982 to address the difficulties which 

our pension plans were having in the public service and the 

pension plans of MLAs. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3063 

In 1978, as a result of those considerations, the question of 

unfunded, ongoing unfunded liability in the public service 

pension plans and in the plans of members of this legislature, 

was corrected.  And it was changed to a . . . I usually define it 

as a money purchase plan so that since 1978, all members and 

public service pension plans are fully funded because they are 

the money purchase plan arrangement.  People in the plan prior 

to that were left on a grandfathered basis. 

 

But the problem that the member from Kindersley raises has 

already been addressed.  We're dealing . . . he wants to deal 

with a question of fairness.  Well the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan which was, I want to say, poorly designed . . . It was a 

plan designed more for the purposes of an election campaign, I 

believe, in about 1986.  It has some good features in it which 

need to be examined.  And that's why the plan will stay in place 

while all of that review is taking place, to see if we can indeed 

provide fairness in a good pension plan, fairness to the extent 

that it will provide people an opportunity to become members 

of a pension plan who today are not able to afford to because 

the plan as it is now or as it has been before these amendments 

really was a plan for the wealthy. 

 

True, many of the people who are in the plan had modest or no 

incomes, but by and large people who are in the plan from a 

household income were high income people.  And on top of the 

fact that they were high income people, the taxpayer subsidized 

it because of the matching $300.  There was nothing fair about 

the plan as it was.  It needs a major overhaul and some major 

reviews over time to address the question of fairness, to make 

sure that it's targeted to where it needs to be provided. 

 

We're not done with the whole question of unfunded liability in 

the public sector pension plans, whether it's the teachers' plan 

or the public service or the whole range.  And I announced in 

the budget on May 7 that we were going to appoint a pension 

reform commission which would consult with all of the 

stakeholders, consult with the public, review where we should 

be going in bringing in some recommendations so that we can 

fully address the question of unfunded liability in our pension 

system which is a fairly, pretty extensive one.  It's not unique to 

Saskatchewan.  As a matter of fact, it exists to a far greater 

degree in many other provinces in this country because by and 

large we have managed our affairs a little better than some 

other provinces. 

 

So we're not done with that.  That's the next step. And as soon 

as . . . sometime this fall I hope to be able to appoint, the 

government hopes to be able to appoint, the pension reform 

commission who will begin that work so we can address the 

whole question of pensions and matter of particularly of the 

unfunded liabilities which the taxpayer faces. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I think a whole lot of people in 

Saskatchewan would disagree with you; 54,913 people 

probably would be a good start.  They disagree with you that 

they are poorly targeted.  Fifty-nine per cent of the people in 

the pension plan have an income of zero to $10,000; that's 

statistics from the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, membership 

statistics.  Fifty-nine per cent have an 

income of less than . . . between the figures of zero and 

$10,000.  Thirty-six per cent have an income between $10,001 

and 26,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, your whole basis of your argument seems to be 

that those people . . . oh but those people have another member 

within their family that's earning a lot more money.  I wonder 

for the people of Saskatchewan if you could substantiate that 

claim because I'm not sure you can.  I think it would be 

incumbent upon you to provide us with the same type of 

breakdown of total family income relative to these people from 

the zero to $10,000 range, and we'll see whether or not they 

have an income, as you suggest, that is a high income.  I don't 

think it is.  Mr. Minister, when people that are earning pension 

benefits in this province have an income of between zero and 

$10,000, I would think that most people in this province would 

say, that's exactly where it should be targeted at, exactly where 

it should be targeted at. 

 

I wonder also, Mr. Minister, if you would take the time to 

provide me with the numbers of public employees in this 

province that have a matching contribution to their pension 

plan.  How many government employees in Saskatchewan have 

a matching contribution to their pension plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well of course, Mr. Chairman, they 

all do.  But that exactly . . . the member makes the point that I 

was trying to make earlier -- it's an employer-employee pension 

plan.  Same thing is for people who work for IPSCO; there is 

an employer-employee agreement to have a pension plan to 

which there are contributions either equally matching or some 

form of matching arrangement. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is something else.  It's 

basically a social program.  There is no employee-employer 

relationship here to provide a matching contribution, and that's 

why it needs to be seriously reviewed to make sure that it 

meets the criteria of fairness, meets the need of those who most 

need the assistance to be able to develop for themselves a 

pension. 

 

The plan as it has been, which was designed by the former 

government, did not meet that need.  Indeed there are some 

people who, as the member said, have enrolled in the plan who 

personally don't have an income from zero to $10,000.  But I 

can guarantee the member opposite, anybody with an income 

between zero and $10,000 is not on their own contributing to 

this pension plan.  That means there must be a substantial 

income in the household. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give us the numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well we'll tell you what the 

problem is, if the member wants to know.  The problem is that 

when the former government designed the plan, that question 

was never asked.  There was never a requirement made to find 

out what the family income was.  And that's one of the things 

that I think we need . . . the new board when it's appointed 

needs to review that criteria to determine how we can better get 

that information. 

 

But I want to add something else.  I don't have it here 



3064 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

because it wasn't my study, but I know that the former 

government did a study -- Mr. Lane when he was the minister 

-- which proved exactly the point that I'm making, that a large 

percentage of the people who were enrolled in the plan . . . and 

I don't know whether that report was ever made public . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well table it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't have it.  You should check 

with the former minister.  But I do know that some people had 

access to it back in the 1980s, and some of us had an 

opportunity to take a look at it -- I don't have it here -- showed 

clearly that in fact the major portion of the people in the plan 

had fairly extensive family incomes, who did not need a 

subsidy from the taxpayer. 

 

I don't think it's fair to ask the taxpayer to subsidize myself or 

my spouse, a relatively well-paid cabinet minister as compared 

to a lot of other people, or subsidize the spouse of the member 

from Kindersley -- I assume he has a spouse; I shouldn't be 

using him as an example person -- but anybody who's got a 

substantial family income.  There's no reason why people 

working as a waitress and paying taxes, who cannot afford to 

be in this plan, should subsidize those kinds of individual.  The 

plan as it was did exactly that. 

 

We said that that was not fair.  We said it was not well targeted 

and particularly when we face the kind of financial situation we 

face in the province.  We found that we had to make some 

changes and that's what this proposal here today does. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So we're to go on the basis that you assume a 

study that you don't have shows what you want it to show.  

That's what you're saying to us this morning, Mr. Minister.  

The study, although I don't have it and I don't know where it is 

and I don't know whether it was even done or not, I think it 

shows what I want it to show.  I think we're going to have to 

get something a little more substantial from you, Mr. Minister, 

this morning to substantiate your claims.  If indeed this study 

does show it, let's see the study.  He doesn't have it, he says, 

but I think it shows what I want it to show. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that's a pretty poor basis to make changes 

in any plans, I'd say.  And I think 54,913 people that are 

pension plan members would agree with me.  Oh, Mr. Minister 

stands up and so righteously says, but those people with the 

income levels of zero to 10,000, they have other income.  But I 

don't have any studies to prove it, but I think there was one 

done.  I think there was one done one time.  And I think it said, 

I think it said that they had other income.  I think it said that. 

 

(0930) 

 

Where is it?  Let's see the studies.  Let's see the studies that you 

conducted yourself, sir.  What studies did you conduct that 

substantiate your claim?  Absolutely none.  You made no 

studies of this, and if you did, we'd appreciate seeing them.  

And I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan and the pension plan 

holders would appreciate seeing your studies.  Where are they?  

There isn't any.  So the minister . . . we just have to accept his 

word when he stands up and says, I assume there was a study 

done.  I assume it shows that these people had other income, 

but I don't know where it is.  You're going to have to do a 

whole lot better than that for the pension plan benefit holders in 

this province to believe your claim. 

 

Mr. Minister, public employees in this province have a pension 

plan and the government pays into that pension plan and the 

employee pays into that pension plan, and that's all well and 

good.  But there are lots of people in this province that don't 

have an opportunity for those same type of things; lots and lots 

of people in this province that don't have that same opportunity.  

And that's why the pension plan was put in place -- for people 

who don't have that same advantage, who don't have an 

employer pension plan.  That's why it was put in place.  And I 

would suggest in this day and age anybody would believe that a 

pension plan is pretty important, pretty important.  You have a 

pension plan.  I have a pension plan as an MLA.  Public 

employees in this province have a pension plan.  And they all 

think it's good. 

 

And yet you're suggesting that people that are outside of 

government or outside of employer benefit plans shouldn't have 

that.  No rights.  They don't believe . . . Oh, they don't need it.  

I guess they can get along somehow themselves.  The same sort 

of thing as the Minister of Agriculture's been saying: oh, they 

can get along somehow. 

 

Mr. Minister, when zero to $10,000 income is suggested by 

you, 59 per cent of the people in the plan hold that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well here it is.  I'll pass it over to 

you.  It's your own statistics.  When 59 per cent of the people 

have that income level, I think the plan is very definitely 

targeted to where it belongs.  And until you can provide us with 

any substantial studies that prove your claim, I don't think 

we're going to accept your argument.  And I don't think the 

people of the province, and particularly the pension plan 

employees, should be swayed one little bit by your arguments. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I said, public employees, MLAs, we all have 

matching government contributions.  And it amounts to 

substantial amount of money.  How many public employees are 

there in this province that have a matching pension plan?  How 

many? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, I answered 

the question earlier that everyone who works in the public 

service is enrolled in the pension plan.  That's part of the 

agreement that it's there.  Whatever the number of public 

employees is -- I wouldn't want to venture a guess, but it's 

several thousand -- they are covered by the pension plan as per 

the agreement between the employer and the employees. 

 

Now the member says that there are a lot of people who don't 

have an opportunity to enrol in the pension plan.  I agree.  But 

that's why the Saskatchewan Pension Plan will continue.  They 

will still be able to enrol in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  It's 

just that there will no longer be a matching contribution paid by 

the taxpayer.  Because the fact is, Mr. Chairman . . . If the 

member from Wilkie is finished, I will then continue speaking, 

Mr. Chairman.  The fact of the matter is that this pension plan 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

has an unfunded liability in its short existence of $43 million 

and in four years was going to have an unfunded liability of 

$80 million.  And frankly, Mr. Chairman, we just can't afford 

that. 

 

And therefore the plan has had to be changed so that there no 

longer will be a matching contribution, but people who want to 

contribute can still contribute because they may decide that it's 

a good place for them to invest in the pension plan.  We want 

to leave them that choice.  And if they chose to do that -- and 

many have expressed a desire to do that -- they will have that 

vehicle available to them. 

 

If they chose to enrol in some other fund of some kind to 

arrange for them a pension in future years such as GICs 

(guaranteed investment certificate) or whatever, that will be 

their choice.  But we're going to leave them the vehicle which 

is there.  And in the interim period we're going to be reviewing 

what kind of other alternatives might be available. 

 

And with the vehicle there it will give us an opportunity to be 

able, as some point in time when the province can fiscally 

afford it, provide a plan that is actually workable, that assures 

that people at the lower end of the income scale are able to be 

part of a pension plan, something which they're not now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan the taxpayer 

subsidizes MLA pensions.  And they subsidize yours and they 

subsidize mine.  They subsidize public employee pension 

plans.  They subsidize teacher pension plans.  They subsidize 

nurses' pension plans.  They subsidize every single public 

employee in this province's pension plan -- every single one of 

them.  And you don't seem to have any problem with that, and I 

don't think generally in society anyone has any problem with 

that.  What they do have a problem with is a minister that 

stands up and says that we're going to deal with the issues of 

fairness, flexibility, and control, and then takes the pension 

plan away from the people that are most in need of a pension 

plan. 

 

I wonder if you could explain to the people of Saskatchewan 

that hypocrisy.  How can you suggest on one hand that it's good 

for me . . . it's good for me as an MLA and it's good for you as 

the Finance minister.  And I would suggest it's handsomely 

good for you as a cabinet minister and as a government MLA 

whose been in since after the program was changed.  I would 

suggest to you that it's handsomely rewarding to you. 

 

And it's good for me as a public employee in this province.  It's 

good for me as a nurse in this province.  It's good for me as a 

teacher in this province.  It's good for me an an MLA in this 

province.  And yet it isn't good enough for those people who 

don't have an opportunity to participate in one.  Where is this 

fairness that you're talking about?  Where is it?  Where is the 

fairness that you're talking about? 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont there he says, oh get 

off of it -- the great socialist, the great equalizer back there.  If 

he had his way, everything would be the same in this province.  

But it would be just a little bit more equal 

for himself, wouldn't it, sir?  Just a little more equal for 

himself.  He'd make sure his was well taken care of, just as it is 

as an MLA.  He'd make sure it's well taken care of.  He'd make 

sure it's well taken care of for himself.  And it is.  And the 

Minister of Finance is well taken care of for himself.  But let's 

make it all equal, but just a little more equal for myself.  That's 

what he's suggesting.  Get off of it, he says. 

 

He doesn't want this debate to take place.  Any time anybody 

raises any opposition to this government they want to shut 

them up the same as they did in the GRIP legislation.  It's a 

little bit embarrassing, I'm sure.  It's a little bit embarrassing for 

you people over there when we bring up the fact that you have 

a pension plan yourself. 

 

The member for Regina Rosemont has a nice little pension 

plan.  He's been in -- what is it? -- a couple of terms now?  Nice 

pension plan.  I've investigated to find out what the pension 

plan is after a couple of terms.  It's not that bad.  Not that bad. 

 

The Finance minister, his is even a lot better though.  He got to 

be a cabinet minister.  He got to be a cabinet minister so it 

shoots up substantially.  It shoots up substantially because he 

got to be a cabinet minister in this province.  And, Mr. 

Minister, not only does it shoot up substantially, you were on 

the old plan, the unfunded plan. 

 

And the member from Quill Lakes, he's also on that old, 

unfunded pension plan.  And it's no wonder, it's no wonder that 

these people are here . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  We've been making 

good progress the last couple of days in committee.  But this 

morning we seem to be having some problems.  Members from 

both sides are interrupting those who are asking the questions 

and those who are answering.  This slows down the process. 

 

Also remind members that we have officials here in the House 

whose job it is to assist the minister to answer questions.  I note 

that it becomes difficult for these officials to hear what is being 

said when members around them interrupt or hold loud 

conversations.  So I think just out of basic courtesy members 

should tone down their remarks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It might be 

interesting for the people of Saskatchewan to find out as MLAs 

who is on that old formula plan, the really rich plan that there 

was.  Might be interesting for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is one member from the Quill Lakes -- ah, there he is, the 

member for Quill Lakes.  I'm not sure; we haven't calculated 

what his pension plan would be.  It's not quite as good as the 

Minister of Finance because he was never a cabinet minister, 

thank God. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, he was too. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Did he make it at one time?  He did, sorry.  

Sorry, he did make it.  He did make it.  So he would have a 

good pension plan then.  Is it a million?  Has it reached a 

million?  Has it reached a million dollars yet?  I would 



3066 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

think it's getting close.  You've been in a long time; I'm sure it's 

getting close to a million. 

 

We're a little bit unclear whether the member from Regina 

Elphinstone is still on the old plan.  Maybe he could tell us.  

Are you still on the old plan?  We're not sure.  He's not sure.  

He doesn't know what year he was elected the first time.  But I 

think he is.  I think he is, for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan, I think he is.  He doesn't want to tell anybody. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about Gerry? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I'm getting to Gerry.  We'll get to Gerry.  

We'll deal with these alphabetically, how would that be, Mr. 

Member from . . . 

 

The next one is the member from Saskatoon Fairview.  The 

member who stands up and says we're going to deal with the 

issues of fairness, flexibility, and control.  We're going to 

protect the pension benefits of the province's workers and allow 

those workers greater control of their pension plans.  Well, he 

certainly did that in his own case didn't he, Mr. Minister?  He 

certainly did that in his own case.  He made sure that his 

pension was protected. 

 

The next one down the list is the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana.  The next one . . . the old member from Saskatoon 

Nutana, the current Speaker. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order.  Order.  One of the 

very important rules that we have in the Assembly that in no 

way should members try to draw the Speaker, the chief 

presiding officer of the Assembly, into the debate, because the 

Speaker is not in a position to defend himself or to enter into 

the debate. 

 

Also it might seem to those that are listening that by drawing 

the Speaker into the debate that you are, in that way, providing 

examples in your remarks that otherwise might not be the case.  

And therefore I ask the member to retract his remarks. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We would retract the remarks dealing with the 

former member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

The next notable on the list is the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale and the current Premier of this province.  His 

pension plan is very handsomely subsidized by the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, very . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What happened to the alphabet? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, we're getting there.  I said we're going to 

deal with the member from Arm River last. 

 

The next, the next member is the Member from Regina 

Churchill Downs, the Associate Minister of Finance, who also 

took part in the exercise, who also took part in the exercise to 

cancel pension benefits.  And the next member is the member 

from Regina Dewdney, the Finance minister.  The Finance 

minister of the province of Saskatchewan who is dealing with 

the issues of fairness, flexibility, and control, Mr. Minister. 

 

And the final one is the member from Regina . . . or from 

Arm River, the gentleman over here.  And he has suggested to 

the people of Saskatchewan that he's willing to put up his 

pension plan if you guys will, and I think it's on the record.  I 

think it's on the record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think 

it's on the record.  The member from Swift Current, he doesn't 

believe that's the case, but it's on the record.  Look through the 

Hansard, look through the Hansard of May 14, page 427.  

You'll find that for yourself. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Write the cheque. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And he says, write the cheque.  He doesn't got a 

cheque to write.  How can he write the cheque on a pension 

plan when he isn't collecting any pension plan benefits yet? 

 

(0945) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He should be. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the Associate Minister of Finance says, he 

should be.  Well I would think . . . I would think, sir, that 

54,913 people in Saskatchewan would be suggesting that 

maybe you should be collecting the pension benefits you so 

generously set out for yourself . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You're not very old yet?  Well this pension plan legislation 

guarantees you're getting older by the day, I would think.  The 

people of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan feel, sir, 

that you've done them a big disservice, a huge disservice. 

 

We don't have any problem in this province contributing to 

MLA pension plans -- and I outlined the ones that are 

collecting it, are going to collect it --  and they don't have any 

problem subsidizing public employee pension plans, and they 

don't have any problem subsidizing taxpayer expenditures on 

teacher pension plans or nurses' pension plans. 

 

But yet that housewife out there that has a pension plan that she 

has put together for herself . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're called home-makers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The home-maker -- I stand corrected -- out there 

in Saskatchewan today that has a pension plan that she has 

carefully set aside a little bit of money for her future, somehow 

another . . . isn't right.  Can't have that in this province.  Can't 

have that in this province.  Doesn't matter if there's a potential, 

as there always is in marital relations, for breakdowns -- doesn't 

matter about that.  Her husband has a substantial amount of 

income so we can't subsidize her one nickel -- doesn't matter 

about that.  Doesn't matter that people in this province with a 

zero to $10,000 income have no opportunity to participate in a 

pension plan -- doesn't matter about them. 

 

All it matters about in your minds is that you get yours.  That's 

all that matters -- you get yours.  You get yours and the 

member from Swift Current, he's on a pension plan I think 

already with teachers' pension plan . Yes?  Doesn't matter.  

Taken care of. 

 

As long as the member from Swift Current is taken care of, 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3067 

doesn't matter about these people.  Doesn't matter one little bit.  

Zero to $10,000 income -- doesn't matter about them.  He 

probably gets . . . Doesn't for a moment care about them.  

Eighty per cent of the participants in the pension plan are 

women.  Doesn't matter about them.  Doesn't matter about the 

home-makers of this province.  Doesn't matter about them.  

Doesn't matter about the single parents.  Doesn't matter. 

 

Don't care about the small businesses of this province, the 

employees that are working in a small business that don't have 

the opportunity because their employer can't afford to pay for a 

matching pension plan.  Doesn't matter about them.  I'm taken 

care of, the member from Swift Current says.  I'm taken care of 

so that's good enough. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister of Finance, it isn't good enough.  And that 

is why you've had to bring the pension plan back, at least in 

skeletal form compared to what it was before.  And I would 

suggest the people of Saskatchewan, sir, believe that it should 

have been reinstated completely -- reinstated completely.  Or at 

least, the very least, what it should have been done, the very 

least what it should have been done is have a look at the 

matching contribution and perhaps ratchet it down for a brief 

time period.  Or, and I say or, look at the minimum pension 

guarantee for a certain period of time.  Those things might -- 

might -- have been accepted.  Might have been accepted. 

 

But I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could provide us today with 

any studies that show any kind of indication that your 

department has gone through, any exercise that they have 

involved themselves in in the last little while that will show 

how many people now are likely to opt completely out of a 

pension plan as a result of your actions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

respond to the member for Kindersley.  And I want to do it by 

making three points, maybe four. 

 

First of all, the government did a very extensive consultation 

with the public and stakeholders and organizations prior to the 

budget to find out from the people of Saskatchewan what they 

believed should be a major priority of this first budget of this 

new government. 

 

I can recollect a number of places, and there were others, 

because we had so many . . . we had well in excess . . . 60 

meetings across Saskatchewan.  Well I can remember Yorkton 

and Melville and here in Regina and Indian Head and 

Humboldt and Prince Albert and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, 

where clearly the message was there as it was in other places 

that the government had to get the finances of this province 

under control and get the deficit down and eventually eliminate 

it all together. 

 

People in Saskatchewan understood and understand today that 

there is no choice in that.  I wish that in the last 10 years the 

former government had considered that to be just as important 

as the people of Saskatchewan did.  They said that we had to 

get this deficit under control and that actions had to be taken on 

the expenditure side to do just that. 

 

This change in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is the 

result of that direction which the people of Saskatchewan 

expect their government to take.  It is incorrect to say that 

people cannot participate in the pension plan.  Indeed they can 

still participate in this pension plan.  People can make 

contributions to the pension plan.  New entrants can enrol in 

the pension plan.  Existing ones can continue to make 

contributions up to $600 a year.  So that opportunity still 

continues.  If there are some employers out there who are small 

employers and do not or cannot set up their own pension plan, 

they too can join with their employees and contribute to this 

plan.  So the vehicle in order to provide that opportunity 

continues to remain. 

 

But when you're faced as a province with the kind of financial 

dilemma, crisis -- I might put it as strongly as that -- as we are 

in Saskatchewan, a legacy which we inherited, no making of 

this government, you have to then priorize where you're going 

to spend your money.  And we chose to target some of the 

money saved for things like an increase in the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan, commonly referred to as SAP which provided 

a top-up for senior citizens who have very low incomes.  When 

you have limited money, you have to target that way and 

priorize where you're going to provide the assistance, within 

what is affordable by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  This 

budget provides that. 

 

There is no other place in Canada -- there is no place in Canada 

-- where the government and its employees do not contribute in 

a matching way to pension plans.  It's not unique here in 

Saskatchewan.  But I can tell this to the member from 

Kindersley, the member from Moosomin, the member from 

Wilkie that every other province that has looked at this plan 

that we have in Saskatchewan, introduced by the former 

government, has rejected it.  Manitoba didn't go with it.  

Alberta decided not to go with it.  Every other province took a 

look at it and said it is not a very good plan, and there have to 

be better ways to do it. 

 

So I think the arguments clearly are unrefutable that a change 

has to be made: one, financially the province can afford; two, 

the plan is not targeted to the people who need the help the 

most with limited funds that are available, that the taxpayer has 

to pay; and three, a vehicle should be there for people who 

might want to contribute to a pension plan of their choosing, 

and the way that the plan will exist will provide it with that 

vehicle. 

 

And I forgot to answer the question which the member from 

Kindersley asked. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I was hoping you'd get to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I got carried away with my solid 

arguments. 

 

The member asked, do we know how many people will opt 

out?  The answer is no, we don't know.  We won't know that 

until people have indicated that they would like to.  But that's a 

choice they're going to make. 
 

All I can say is that indeed there have been some who've 

indicated that they'd be interested, but they want to see; they 

want to take their time to think about it, see where they're better 

off.  But there are also others who have said, 



3068 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

which actually caused us to make some of the changes that we 

made since May 1, who said, we want you to keep the plan in 

place even though we know that the taxpayer can't afford to 

subsidize it.  And so that's why the plan will be kept in place. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you've 

given us the government rhetoric that we've heard for the last 

nine months regarding the pension plan and the reasons it was 

discontinued and the reasons you were going to discontinue.  

And then you've decided to at least let it operate without 

matching . . . the matching contribution.  You've suggested that 

people across this province have said we must look at pensions, 

we must look at the Saskatchewan Pension Plan as one way to 

address the deficit. 

 

But I'm suggesting to you that what you've done is basically 

put the burden of addressing the deficit on the backs of low 

income individuals.  Because the province of Saskatchewan 

was only matching contributions made by individuals whose 

net income was less than I believe $12,000 a year up to, and I 

believe it was . . . it diminished up to, what was it, 30,000? 

 

But there are public employees -- teachers, nurses -- public 

employees across this province who have their pensions and 

they'd make a contribution, I believe, at 7 per cent; the 

government matches it by 7 per cent.  So a teacher, even 

starting at the minimum wage of some $30,000, that's $2,100 a 

year, if I understand.  And you're taking away $300 match by 

the province to a few people on a very low income.  And then 

you talk about our poor seniors. 

 

And I notice some members' heads shaking on the other side.  

And I don't know why they're shaking when they're going to 

have a $50,000 pension plan coming in for doing nothing.  And 

there are people out there who are very legitimately . . . make a 

contribution to our society. 

 

What I would like to know is how many people in the province 

of Saskatchewan, all public employees, who have their pension 

plans matched by the province -- how many people?  And that's 

everyone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I can't speak for the Crown 

corporations, but I think across the piece you're looking at 

15,000.  That's a ballpark figure; I don't have the statistics in 

front of me.  So if you look at the Crown corporations and 

SaskTel and teachers -- of which there are 1,100 or 1,000 -- 

public servants who work for the regular public service. 

 

But having said that I want to correct something else that the 

member made opposite.  This pension plan -- it's not a pension 

plan for the poor.  I don't think . . . If the members opposite are 

arguing that, I think that they should reflect on their desire to 

be accurate in their arguments.  Nobody who had an income in 

the area of 10,000 to 15,000 was contributing to this plan.  But 

I'll tell you what was happening.  People were contributing to 

the plan whose household incomes were 50,000, 40,000, 

$100,000, and the taxpayer was subsidizing.  Because it was 

lawyers' spouses and doctors' spouses and executives' spouses; 

people of some significant means 

were contributing to this plan and the taxpayer was subsidizing 

it. 

 

I don't think that the taxpayer should have to subsidize that 

kind of a pension plan, particularly in the fact that the province 

is broke.  You have to make some choices. 

 

Do you spend your money subsidizing spouses, man or woman, 

because it goes both ways; or dependants, who may not be 

spouses because there was some of that that was being done -- 

sons and daughters of people whose incomes are high.  Do you 

put your money there when the province has limited resources?  

Or do you put additional money into the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan for senior citizens with low incomes?  Or do you put your 

money into home care so that people can get the care that they 

need so that they can live at their homes? -- part of the wellness 

approach to health care. 

 

We had to make some of those choices.  And we made those 

choices.  And I think quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, they were 

the right choices. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if lawyers are contributing or 

spouses of lawyers or if individuals . . . and the plan may have 

been available or been open such that lawyers' spouses could 

contribute.  But what we're suggesting, Mr. Minister, and what 

we said all along is we're not suggesting that you take a lawyer, 

who has already been a pretty good planner, you take a teacher 

who's already in a very decent plan, or you take some other 

well-paid employees.  We see the figures, Mr. Minister, 

indicate that it's home-makers, farmers, and part-time 

employees who are the greatest participants in this plan. 

 

And if indeed, Mr. Minister, there were guidelines, there was a 

limit as to what you could make to have the province 

contribute, and if you want to address the fact that maybe a 

lawyer's spouse is contributing, well then maybe look at the 

spousal income or the family income.  But I dare say the 

women across this province and the women across this country 

are getting tired of the fact that they're always lumped into one 

family unit and don't have that individual ability that a lot of 

women would indicate they'd like to have. 

 

(1000) 

 

Now if you feel that there are a few here . . . it seems, Mr. 

Minister, when you look at -- and as I indicated earlier -- the 

province's matching some 7 per cent of salary of 30 or 40,000 

of a public employee and the public employee puts, let's say, 

40,000 at 7 per cent is 2,800, and the province kicks in 2,800, 

well what about the few people out there . . . and the majority 

of the people involved in this plan were women. Why will the 

government not seriously look at addressing the fact of those 

individuals who are in families or in situations of low income? 

 

And if you want to eliminate . . . we've asked you that, we've 

asked you that, to look very seriously.  And if there are some 

deficiencies in the plan, well then make some changes to 

correct it.  But let's not eliminate everyone because there are 

few deficiencies. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3069 

And therefore, Mr. Minister, I would like you to get the 

information of all the people across this province -- you said 

there's some 50,000, it could be even higher -- but I would like 

the information of all the teachers . . . and this goes a little bit 

beyond just the Saskatchewan Pension Plan people here for that 

information, you're going to have to get it from all departments.  

I'd like to have the numbers of all the people across this 

province, whether they're . . . anyone working for government 

or anyone who has a matching contribution by government, I'd 

like to have the numbers, I'd like to have the dollar value that's 

annually contributed, and I'd like to have the percentage. 

 

And I'd also like, Mr. Minister, for you to take the time to -- as 

we're looking at this legislation, looking at the pension plan -- 

to review it and at least give the individuals who are stuck in 

that low income bracket, legitimately involved or in that low 

income bracket, give them the ability to have part of their plan 

matched by the province.  And there's no doubt in my mind that 

yes, you would save some money. But in the long run to 

address the problems of low income seniors, I think we need to 

think ahead to the 20 and 30 years down the road.  I don't think 

a government from now on, from today to eternity, want to 

have to always look at bumping up the seniors' income plan.  

Why not help people build for their future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well by and large I think the 

member from Moosomin and I will agree here in many of the 

things that we're saying.  What the member is saying . . . agrees 

to is something I have said in that there are major flaws in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan -- major flaws.  And it needs to 

have another look to meet the kinds of things that the member 

had just talked about.  How do we provide people who, even 

with the matching contribution, were not able to afford even 

$300 to get into a pension plan, because this plan did not 

provide those people that opportunity.  They were left out. 

 

So all of that is worthwhile addressing, and that's exactly what 

we intend to do over the next while in the context of the 

financial situation that the province faces in order to come up 

with a plan when we can afford it, one which is affordable 

which meet those people's needs, rather than putting the bulk of 

the taxpayers' money in subsidizing those people who don't 

need the assistance.  We can't afford to do that, and quite 

frankly, in principle it is the wrong way to go.  So all of that 

needs to be reviewed and will be reviewed. 

 

The one thing the member from Moosomin says which I found 

particularly interesting because I was in this House when the 

pension plan was introduced several years ago . . . and the 

opposition then, which was not the members opposite -- they 

were on the government side -- suggested that there should be a 

provision where household income or family income would be 

recognized and considered in the determination of eligibility of 

assistance. 

 

And the government of the day, the minister of Finance at that 

time, Mr. Lane, rejected -- rejected that suggestion.  Maybe 

there was a good reason for that.  We didn't think there was 

good reason for that.  He said no, we're not going to do that.  

Obviously he was not concerned about 

the problem that the member for Moosomin and I share 

concern about, and that is how do we provide assistance to 

those who cannot on their own afford to develop a pension 

plan.  He preferred to develop a plan that provided assistance to 

those who could afford. 

 

We can't afford this plan as a province right now.  It needs a 

major look at how we can provide an opportunity for people to 

enrol in the pension plan.  So therefore we have eliminated 

basically the funding that the taxpayer provides here, but we 

have left the instrument of the pension plan for people who can 

make a contribution to a pension plan to continue to contribute 

to the plan and develop for themselves a pension. 

 

I might add that without it, many of them would not be able to 

develop a pension easily because they could not purchase an 

RRSP because they're not income earners.  But the plan as we 

are going to provide it will give them that opportunity, and I 

think that that's a plus. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, one thing I would also 

suggest in view of the comments just made is the fact that if 

indeed you felt household income should be taken into 

consideration, if we take that same argument, we could look at 

the public pension plans we have today.  And you could have a 

public employee that's pulling in 30 or 40 or 50 or in some 

cases $100,000 a year.  Is it necessary for the province to 

match those contributions? 

 

Because you basically have high income families, then having 

the province match . . . and in some cases, Mr. Minister, you 

have two individuals, both the husband and wife working for a 

public system.  Whether it's two individuals, two 

schoolteachers, they're both being matched.  They've got both 

their contributions being matched. 

 

Or you may have a nurse and a schoolteacher.  Or you may 

have a government employee in the province of Saskatchewan, 

somebody working for a department and maybe their spouse 

working as a teacher or a nurse.  Both of those individuals have 

their contributions, their personal contributions matched by the 

province. 

 

What I am suggesting, Mr. Minister, if we look at it very 

seriously . . . And let's go back to prior 1981.  Why did the 

province change from a formula plan to an annuity plan or a 

money-funded plan?  Because the province didn't fund the 

pension plans of the day and realized they couldn't afford them, 

so they changed the system. 

 

What I'm asking, Mr. Minister, is that as we've discussed, you 

take a very serious look at allowing those individuals, those 

low-income individuals, those single women, or even 

home-makers -- individuals who have been involved -- 

part-time employees, and at least allowing and working with 

them and allowing the Saskatchewan Pension Plan . . . I believe 

this Bill is going to allow the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to 

continue to operate.  But I would suggest that you take a 

serious look, and I'm asking for a commitment on your part that 

you will look at ways of helping people build pension plans 

because it will be for the betterment of everyone in this 

province. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think that that's a very good 



3070 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

thought that the member indicates here today.  We're prepared 

to look at that.  In fact I indicated earlier, we will be looking at 

how we can provide a better system and meet the needs that 

this other plan that we are changing here has not met.  And that 

is something that we will do. 

 

I think, first of all, before we come forward with any solutions 

to that, we need to have the pension review commission do its 

work because we want to know our situation with regard to 

pensions and unfunded pension liabilities in the public sector as 

a whole, so that we know where we're starting from. 

 

One of the reasons why we got where we got, where we are 

today in unfunded liabilities and ad hoc-ery and pension plans 

all over the place, is because nobody ever sat down and said, 

hey, let us look at having one workable system that is available 

to everybody.  And stacking took place on individual pension 

plans over time, without any due consideration of whether they 

would be able to be funded or whether they would be 

affordable.  And frankly, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan which 

we're changing here was part of that creation; that, I think, 

wrong psychology and wrong approach. 

 

I agree with the member who just spoke, that we need to take 

an overall look.  And we intend to do that.  We intend to do the 

pension review commission to look into the unfunded liability 

and pensions.  We will not do it in isolation from the people, 

the stakeholders who are involved, the employers and the trade 

unions and their membership.  That's a very integral part of that 

study.  But it will be done. 

 

And then we also have to look, as the member indicates, at how 

we make sure that people who are on low incomes or part-time 

jobs, who don't have access to a pension, can be assured of an 

income in their retirement years. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if we could deal with a couple of specific questions 

with respect to the changes in the plan and how they're going to 

be done.  I wonder if you would give us any indication of when 

the people that are enrolled in the pension plan can expect a 

letter from your officials, your department, with respect to the 

changes in the plan and their options that are available to them 

within the plan; of when they can opt out or when they can . . . 

all of the things associated with the plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that likely late 

September.  There are some final negotiations we have to 

complete with the federal government on the roll-over 

provisions for those who may want to withdraw, so that they 

don't get hit with massive taxation retrieval of their 

contribution. 

 

So we're looking at about late September to provide all 

members with information about where they're at and what 

their options are.  But I think just as important, they will have a 

six-month period in which to be able to consider what they 

want to do.  We're going to give them all the time that they 

need to think this thing through. 

 

I hope, quite frankly, personally, and I'm sure that the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan people will on their own be 

encouraging people to remain in the plan, because it is in their 

best interests to look down the road into the future.  But late 

September is the time for an explanatory letter from the plan 

itself; and after that they'll have six months to make their 

decision. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could outline to us 

where your discussions with the federal government are with 

respect to RRSP eligibility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am told . . . as a matter of fact the 

deputy minister of Finance is in Ottawa yesterday and today, 

dealing with a number of things, and I instructed him to touch 

base on this one. 

 

I have spoken personally to Mr. Mazankowski and asked him 

to address this as quickly as he can.  He indicated that he 

would.  He was not in Ottawa, he was in his constituency.  

When he was finished with his work there he'd be going to 

Ottawa.  So basically it awaits the ministerial statement or 

letter or whatever he needs to do to get this thing into place. 

 

I am informed that at the officials' level, there is agreement and 

support for what we are doing.  And we're just simply waiting 

for the minister to have the time, because Ottawa have been on 

their summer break, to address this issue.  And he assures me 

he's going to do it very quickly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if . . . we've had a 

number of calls about the pension plan.  I'm sure the pension 

plan people have had literally hundreds, if not thousands, of 

calls from pension plan holders about the changes in the plan 

and what's all going to happen and everything like that.  The 

vast majority of people, I believe, want to stay in the plan.  You 

may be offering them some attractive ways of getting out of the 

plan, but we think most people want to stay in the plan and we 

certainly encourage them to stay in the plan.  We're hopeful 

that there will be a return to sanity on your part and that you 

will review all of these provisions that were in the plan 

previously and look at reinstating them. 

 

We've also received a number of people that . . . a number of 

calls from people that very much doubt your sincerity in all of 

this and they're looking to get out as soon as they possibly can.  

And they're also wondering, first of all, will their full matching 

contribution be able to be withdrawn? 

 

(1015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I share the sentiment of the member 

from Kindersley that I too hope that they will be, by and large, 

deciding to stay in the plan.  And in fact the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan people have been working on a communication 

brochure, which they do annually anyway, telling people about 

the advantages of having a pension plan, hopefully to 

encourage them to stay in. 

 

But for those who may want to withdraw -- and there are some 

who will for all kinds of reasons -- they will be able to 

withdraw the contributions which they have put in.  They will 

be able to withdraw the matching contributions that have been 

put in on their behalf because clearly it 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

was stated that it was their contribution once it was made.  And 

they will be able to withdraw the earned interest, minus 

whatever small handling cost there might be, I think.  I'm not 

sure that that would be significant, but yes, as far as the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan is concerned, those funds are 

theirs.  It is their property and they will be able to make a 

decision on their own on how they want to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Will your government be offering any kind of 

encouragement to stay in the plan?  Will you be engaging in 

any kind of an advertising campaign?  Or will it simply be a 

letter going out to the participants outlining their options? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes.  There will be a 

communication to all of the members indicating to them the 

advantages of staying in the plan, and there will be a promotion 

of the plan which happens annually, as it always has been, to 

indicate to people how the plan works, how they could become 

members of it, what their advantages are to be part of it.  So the 

answer to the question, to the member's question, is yes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well it's interesting, Mr. Chairman, people from 

the other side are chirping that we're on overtime and they're 

wanting us to speed this all up and get through this messy 

business of the pension plan changes as quickly as possible.  

But I'll tell you right now, we don't intend to just move this 

along to expedite your time today.  We're going to take our 

time and deal with this stuff the way we think that the people 

involved in the pension plan would want us to. 

 

I just got a note in here a few moments ago from a participant 

of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  The NDP stabbed me in the 

back, is what he says in his little note here.  And he would like 

for myself to give him a call about the changes in the pension 

plan after we're finished here today . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Well if you want to have a look at the note, Mr. Member 

from Rosemont over there, I'll say to you, it most certainly is 

not the member sitting beside me.  And the gentleman's name, I 

don't know whether he'd want me to say it publicly here or not, 

but the note is here if you want to come over and have a look at 

it.  It's right there for you. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think in conclusion here, we're going to draw 

this to a conclusion rather quickly now, but nevertheless I think 

we're going to go through a few statistical pieces of 

information with respect to the pension plan before we close 

here. 

 

There are 54,913 people enrolled in the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan as of the end of 1991.  The average government match, 

the last available statistics, are $243.  That was in 1990.  And it 

would be interesting to know whether or not your projections 

of the amount of money that the unfund liability of $43 million 

takes into account a $300 match or indeed the accurate figure 

of $243, which is the government match as of 1990. 

 

We also want to get on the record that the people involved in 

the pension plan had an income of . . . 59 per cent of those 

people had an income of zero to $10,000.  The next level of 

income was from $10,001 to 26,000, so 

36 per cent of people fell into that category, for a total of 95 per 

cent of the people that were involved in the pension plan had 

an income of less than $26,000. 

 

And in this day and age where we all face . . . and everyone 

that's involved in various relationships with other people find 

that occasionally those relationships don't work out.  And we 

recognize that the vast majority of cases they do work out, but 

there's a certain group of people out there that their marital 

relationships don't work out.  And they find themselves in a 

single-family relationship, by themselves, single parents, single 

mothers, single fathers.  They find themselves in those 

circumstances. 

 

And then the minister says, while the program was paying too 

much to a family before, they find themselves on the outside 

looking in because they are not in a family unit any more. 

 

Seventy-seven per cent, the most recent statistics of '91, 77 per 

cent of the people involved in the pension plan were women in 

this province -- 77 per cent.  And the distribution of 

occupations, the member from . . . the Minister of Finance 

suggests that it was poorly targeted and only the rich got it. 

Well 42 per cent of the people in this province that contributed 

to the pension plan were home-makers. 

 

They are obviously high income people in this province.  The 

minister is suggesting that only high income people contributed 

to this plan.  They are obviously high income people -- 

home-makers, 42 per cent of them contributed to the plan. 

 

The next highest level of participants was part-time employees 

in this province -- 28 per cent of the people involved in the 

pension plan were part-time employees. 

 

And the minister says well only high income people 

participated in this plan.  So I guess the high income part-time 

earners, part-time employees in this province are in that 

category. 

 

The next available statistic high is the farmers of this province 

-- farmers contributed . . . 12 per cent of the people in this 

province that were in the plan were farmers.  And we all know 

how high income farmers are these days.  Froze out, droughted 

out, changed programs, the whole works, they're high income 

people.  That's why we've got to take this stuff away from 

them. 

 

And then we looked down at the age distribution of the people 

that are involved in the pension plan.  Between the ages of 50 

and 65 is where the largest group of people involved in this 

pension plan are; 45 per cent of the people that are involved in 

the pension plan were between those age groups. 

 

They are obviously people that, in my judgement, likely have 

worked their entire life up to that point, find themselves in a 

position when they reach 50 to 65 years of age that they don't 

have a pension plan.  They realize the importance of a pension 

plan so they decide to start setting aside some money for their 

retirement day that is coming rather quickly. 



3072 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

And then when we get down to the final set of statistic here, the 

distribution of the pension plan holders and where they live in 

this province, the vast majority of people that contributed to the 

pension plan lived in rural Saskatchewan in communities of 

zero to 5,000 people -- 55 per cent of the people who belonged 

to the pension plan lived in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So what we see here, Mr. Minister, I can only conclude by 

saying what we see here, is a government that's intent, 

absolutely intent on reducing the income levels, reducing the 

retirement benefits to people in rural Saskatchewan that are 

farmers, part-time employees, and home-makers.  I think that's 

the only conclusion that we can draw from this.  And 

particularly the women of rural Saskatchewan, 77 per cent of 

the people involved in this plan are women. 

 

Rural part-time or . . . home-makers or part-time employees or 

farmers that are in rural Saskatchewan is where this plan was 

generally targeted at.  And the statistics bear that out.  That's 

where the plan was generally targeted at, and that is where the 

plan is being taken away from. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we find it absolutely shameful that a 

government would suggest to the people of Saskatchewan that 

that plan was not targeted correctly -- absolutely shameful that 

you would describe it as poorly targeted. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan wanted this plan.  I 

sincerely hope they continue with this plan.  I sincerely hope 

that this government recognizes the error of their ways and 

brings the pension plan back in the complete form that it was. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think that the people of Saskatchewan do 

not agree that you've been fair with them.  I think they do not 

believe that you've been flexible with them.  I do not believe 

that they think that you have given them control over their 

pension plan.  The Minister of Justice said that we need to 

protect the pension benefits of the province's workers and allow 

those workers greater control over their pension plans.  And I 

don't think that you have done that, sir.  I don't think that by 

bringing the pension plan back in skeletal form like you have 

brought it back has accomplished that goal. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, people of Saskatchewan I think will never 

forget this.  The home-makers of Saskatchewan, the part-time 

employees of Saskatchewan, the people in rural Saskatchewan 

won't forget this, the changes to the plan.  And we want the 

commitment from you, sir, that you will look at providing 

pension plans for those people in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, in the interests of 

time, I'm not going to repeat all of the arguments that I made 

earlier because many of the things I would say I have already 

said, and they're on the record. 

 

On the final comment about the importance of pension plans, I 

want to tell the member opposite that I don't disagree.  Pension 

plans are important.  Income security in one's latter years are 

important.  But we have to find the 

best mechanisms in which to make sure that those guarantees 

or those security provisions are provided.  I have the same 

interest in doing that as the government does and as the 

member from Kindersley indicates that he has.  So that 

assurance we can provide. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have an 

amendment that we would like to make to clause 17 and amend 

it as following: 

 

 Amend clause 17 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause 21(1) (n.2) as being enacted therein the following 

clause: 

 

 "(n.3) requiring the minister to seek advice and provide a 

reasonable opportunity for receiving advance public 

consultations and recommendations on any proposed 

regulation or any proposed amendment to the regulation 

made under this section". 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, all of the things that 

the member has here are provided for already.  The 

implications of this may be such that I would want to fully 

understand what they are before I could agree to this 

amendment.  At some other time we may want to consider it.  

The member had given it to me a day or two ago, and we'd had 

time to look at it.  But for now I think we should not 

incorporate this amendment. 

 

Clearly we're going to consult.  As a matter of fact, when the 

board is appointed . . . right now there is a board of three 

people, two ministers and an official who is a member of the 

plan.  But there is a provision in the Act and a third of the 

members of the board have to be participants in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  So some of that is already 

covered over.  But there will be no changes beyond what this 

Act does without the prior and full consultation. 

 

So I think I will recommend to the House that for now we don't 

proceed with this amendment but we take a good look at 

bringing in an amendment at another time that we know what 

its full implications are.  I don't argue with consultation.  That's 

the way I prefer to operate as an individual and that is the way 

the government prefers to operate. 

 

So I'm going to recommend to the House that we not approve 

this at this time, but I will guarantee to the members opposite I 

will take it under advisement and come back -- if an 

appropriate thing can be worked out -- at a future time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, we're wondering whether or not the 

people that you are appointing to the board, if we could as 

opposition have input into that decision of who is appointed to 

the board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I welcome suggestions from 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

anybody.  And if members opposite have some, want some . . . 

make some recommendations, I would welcome them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We would accept that then. 

 

(1030) 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At this time I'd like to 

take the opportunity to thank the officials for coming in today, 

for coming in from Kindersley -- it's a long ways, as I know.  I 

certainly recognize that they've gone through a very difficult 

period of time since the budget.  I think we all recognize that. 

 

They've received literally hundreds of calls, if not thousands -- 

I think they could probably confirm that -- about changes in the 

pension plan.  I think they've done an excellent job in fielding 

those questions for the plan members in Saskatchewan.  And I 

can only say that I think that the pension plan in Kindersley has 

shown, clearly shown, that it's a good plan, and indeed the 

people of Saskatchewan support the plan and I believe will 

continue to support the plan.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I too would like to 

thank my officials from the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and 

from the Department of Finance for their assistance in helping 

to provide the answers here today, but for all the work that they 

have done and continue to do in the public service.  They do an 

outstanding job.  We, I think, as all the people of 

Saskatchewan, are fortunate to have the quality of the people 

we have in our public service, and I'd like to join the member 

in thanking the officials. 

 

Bill No. 93 -- An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Labour to please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me today is Dave Argue, who is the executive director of the 

labour relations branch; and Susan McGillivray, who is a 

research officer in the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, this Bill, as you well know, has caused a considerable 

amount of consternation throughout the province over the past 

few months among many, many people.  The worries that were 

there of course originated from press releases about the 

potentials of the Bill as well as from private conversations that 

people said that they had with different officials throughout 

your department, throughout the industry, and of course even 

with ourselves. 

We understand, having discussed the new Bill with some of the 

people that had the major concerns, that the original draft Bill 

has been overhauled considerably.  We're going to ask you for 

a confirmation of that. 

 

The understanding we have is that the entire thing was gone 

through basically line by line by all parties concerned and that 

there was basically a compromise position taken on the entire 

draft Bill and a new Bill was drawn from that.  And this 

consultation that led to compromise is something that both 

sides apparently are not totally satisfied or happy with, but are 

saying that they can live with it in view of the fact that the 

other sides have got considerations that need to be met as well. 

 

And out of the necessity to have the Bill put into place because 

of certain commitments that were made probably I guess back 

through the election, the parties have agreed that if you can't 

stop it, you may as well negotiate the best deal you can get and 

try to live with it. 

 

So that seems to be the position of the parties involved.  And as 

a member of the opposition, it is my duty I suppose to try to 

point out the problem areas and to try to get to negotiations and 

to try to get people to agree to some kind of a compromise that 

they can live with.  And I believe that we have accomplished 

most of that from what I've been told. 

 

But my job isn't quite finished because I think the general 

public needs to know exactly where these compromises are and 

how they will affect certain people. 

 

So I want you to generally explain for the public how the 

original draft Bill has been changed, what those changes in 

general terms will mean, and how they will now affect both the 

unionized workers of the province and the people who will be 

employing them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the remarks 

of the member.  This is an industry where labour relations have 

been very difficult historically.  I've told the member before 

that during my years as the deputy minister of the department, 

this was the main focus of most of my work.  I think I spent 

something like 25 per cent of my time as deputy minister on 

construction industry problems.  Those were in the turbulent 

'70s where there were a lot of strikes and a very difficult 

bargaining atmosphere.  And that wasn't just confined to 

Saskatchewan; this is a common problem throughout Canada. 

 

And during those years the employers, with the assistance of 

the building trades, came up with the idea of employer 

organizations being accredited or certified by law to be the 

bargaining agent for employers so that you would have a 

structure on both sides of the table, and within that structure a 

collective bargaining would occur.  And this is the basic 

scheme of the Act that we have presented. 

 

Now the member will recall that there was a committee that I 

set up to inquire into a number of problems related to collective 

bargaining in the industry and to make recommendations, and 

indeed they did; and that the draft, first draft of any legislation 

was prepared by the 



3074 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Department of Justice on the basis of the report of that 

committee.  And I recall the member tabling that document in 

the House, and that was appropriate. 

 

We had sent it out to various people.  There was no big secret 

about it, but it did not reflect any instructions from the 

government or any instructions from me or the department.  It 

was simply a rendering of the committee's report into 

legislative form so that people could see what it would look 

like if the committee's report were enacted in its original form.  

And consultations began on the basis of that document. 

 

The process was long and involved and very intense, as the 

member knows, because I know that he was a contributor to 

that whole process.  And I thank him for his assistance in 

bringing this matter to a conclusion. 

 

This is the nature of that industry.  They're tough bargainers all 

the way around.  Nothing is easy.  Nothing is ever easy in that 

industry, and it wasn't this time.  My belief was that at the end 

of the day, however, in the spirit that the member referred to in 

the sense that something had to be done here and that, because 

something was going to be done, we would work together and 

try and come up with something that everybody could live 

with.  And that indeed is what I expected to happen and that is 

what happened.  And I'm very, very pleased with the end result.  

I think we have a piece of legislation that will serve the 

industry well. 

 

I am pleased with the approach of the building trades who have 

compromised their best result . . . their best . . . their fondest 

hopes, both in the committee process and in the subsequent 

consultations.  And also my thanks to the employers.  I 

recognize that they had to swallow several times but at the end 

of the day they have a package that they're comfortable with. 

 

And that's about the best that you'll ever get in this industry, is 

a piece of work that doesn't satisfy anybody fully but yet a 

piece of work that everyone can be comfortable with.  And I 

hope that we have that here.  I think it's an appropriate Bill 

having regard for the present realities in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As to the areas where compromise occurred, there certainly 

were compromises around the idea of the spin-off problem and 

that was a major area of discussion on both sides.  That seems 

to have been resolved satisfactorily. 

 

Within that there's sort of the reverse spin-off where a 

non-union contractor creates another company for the purpose 

of undertaking a union project, and that is, as I understand what 

has been agreed here, doesn't compromise the non-union nature 

of the operation.  And I think the Bill provides protection for 

the employer in those circumstances.  The Bill has also 

clarified the status of the previous existing collective 

bargaining agreements and that was the third area of 

compromise. 

 

Now there were other adjustments in wordings and that sort of 

thing, but I think I've identified the major areas of adjustment 

as the consultation process drew to a close.  And I thank the 

member for his question. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm taking it 

from your comments now that you believe that the problems 

related to changes to the spin-off company aspect that might 

have forced employers to go outside of the province to hire 

workers to come in or to perhaps tender outside of the province 

and bring work forces in to do jobs, that that no longer will be a 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that will no longer be a problem, 

and I think the employers understand clearly . . . we all seem to 

be of one mind on how this is going to work.  And I think you 

accurately reflect it. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That certainly was 

one of our major concerns because if we were going to work on 

such a complicated issue, as you have termed it to be, and I 

agree with you fully that it probably is, wills are very fast and 

hard on both sides. 

 

But in the final analysis, the bottom line has to be that we have 

to somehow encourage -- maybe protect is not a good word, 

but we can use the word, encourage -- the use of in-province 

labour force so that our own people in fact are the people that 

get the work that we have to do, for the most part.  Obviously 

there have to be some exceptions to that. 

 

And I would think, of course, back towards home where 

occasionally in the oil industry we have to bring some workers 

in from Medicine Hat or some place because they have the 

technology available very quickly and are able to go to work on 

the particular jobs that need to be done.  But for the most part, I 

think we all want to see the lion's share of the work put into a 

position where we are competitive, to have that work done by 

our local folks. 

 

So I'm happy to hear that that potential is there that this 

situation is resolved.  Because of the very complexity of the 

nature of the industry and the nature of the fact that it's hard to 

get folks to agree, as you've pointed out, from the years of 

turmoil in the 1970s, it's very probable that we'll be back at 

some amendments to this Act at some future date. 

 

And I expect that this is the kind of thing that is ongoing and 

that we'll likely see the need for change as we evolve as a 

nation and as a working industry-based people as we switch 

from one base of natural resource to a base of more 

diversification in our labour force, as we switch to 

industrialization -- I suppose might be the greater word to use 

-- as we start to process and manufacture more of our own 

goods, rather than ship them around the world perhaps, which 

might be a direction that we could go.  We will see even more 

problems of course developing as those changes come.  So I 

think we'll end up debating these issues back and forth. 

 

And I'm quite aware of the minister's need to be on an airplane 

to do some very important meetings in our country very 

shortly, so I don't want to ramble on too long here.  But I do 

want to ask you for a commitment.  Because of the bit of a time 

constraint that I'm placing myself under in order to try to 

accommodate you, I will ask you for a  



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3075 

commitment that you would answer any questions that we 

might have, that we might miss today by shortening it up, that 

you might commit yourself to answering those questions for us 

as you get on with the constitutional debates and find yourself a 

little more free with time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'm glad to do that.  I invite the 

hon. member to submit questions to me and indeed to meet 

with me and the department people about the implementation 

of aspects of this Bill. 

 

Before I end my remarks on this, I just want to draw to the 

House's attention the provisions respecting a jurisdictional 

assignment plan.  This is a long-time goal of mine and of the 

industry to find a way to eliminate jurisdictional disputes, or at 

least a process for concluding them without any work 

stoppages or wobbles on the site.  And in this respect, 

Saskatchewan is right at the forefront of developments in 

Canada.  And I'm extremely pleased that the parties have 

agreed that this division should go into the Bill. 

 

And I also want to make clear that we will continue to 

co-operate with all partners in the industry and with the hon. 

member in further developments under this Act. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you for that commitment, Mr. 

Minister.  I have one more short question.  And I've had quite a 

few inquiries from local governments throughout the province, 

and they want to know how this legislation will affect them.  

So just for the record for their needs, could you comment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This legislation affects only unionized 

contractors, and it does not affect the non-union, the 

unorganized sector of the industry at all.  It would affect them 

if and when they become certified by one of the building trades 

unions.  But for the unorganized part of the industry, this Bill 

just simply doesn't apply. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  I'm sure they'll be 

happy to hear that.  The only thing that I have to add to this 

now for this moment is that in the event that this Act presents 

some problems and as the months go on now if we find that 

there are problems -- I'm sure you'll do this; I can see no reason 

why you wouldn't -- but I would like you, as you wrap up, to 

give us a commitment that you would come back and do other 

amendments to the Act to alleviate any problems that might 

come up. 

 

And with that, I'll conclude my remarks here and thank your 

officials for coming in and thank yourself for your diligence in 

delivering this package. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we no doubt will be 

coming in with fine tuning to this Act in the future, and we will 

be following a similar consultative process that will involve the 

opposition. 
 

I also want to thank my officials for all of the tremendous work 

that they've done here, in addition to the people who are here.  

The deputy minister Merran Proctor and Graham Mitchell, who 

the federal government was kind enough to second to us to 

assist us and who is an expert on the construction industry 

labour relations, was also available and did a lot of work.  And 

I want to 

acknowledge their participation in this. 

 

Before sitting down, I also want to thank the opposition for the 

way in which they've accommodated me and my schedule in 

this and other matters before the House and tell them that I do 

appreciate it very much. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 38 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 91 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and 

Gas Corporation Act, 1985 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Energy and Mines to 

please introduce the officials here with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The official 

that we have with us this morning is Doug Karvonen, sitting to 

my left, and Doug is with the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, as I mentioned when we first looked at this Bill, we 

don't find a whole lot wrong with it.  As a matter of fact, we 

think that it will probably be a very good Bill, and it is a very 

major step, I think, in a direction which we agree with, and that 

is where you'll allow foreign investment into Saskatchewan. 

 

We also think, Mr. Minister, that some of the benefits from 

your amendment here would maybe increase the share value 

where people . . . it'll strengthen the value of shares because the 

base will be stronger.  As we noticed, shares went from $16 

down to 5, and we think that this will probably bring it up.  It 

should in fact be a benefit to the employees who are buying 

shares in the company. 

 

I also think, Mr. Minister, that it is a major, major step from 

what we have been used to from your side of the House where 

you seem to have always wanted to control and keep the 

investment within Saskatchewan.  We have always argued that 

the broader the base, the better the industry.  And so we are 

saying here in this Bill you are doing the right thing.  We 

congratulate you, sir.  On more than one occasion, we found 

that your department is accepting change to what the old stand 

used to be, and we hope that that continues. 

 

I myself, Mr. Minister, spent a lot of my time working in the 

oil industry, both as a worker in the oilfields and also as an 

agent for a major oil company, and we found that they make a 

contribution to the economy.  And certainly with Saskoil 

having proved that they do have the management that's needed, 

and with this Bill they should then be able to attract the 

financial base that they also need to expand and grow, as we 

hope they should. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, at this point we don't have a lot of 

problems with this.  I will say to you, sir, we will be watching 

how it evolves and maybe at the next session we may be 

talking to you a bit more about it.  But at this 



3076 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

 time I think that all of my colleagues have mentioned to me 

that they too feel that this is a step in the right direction, and we 

applaud you for it.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess there was no 

question so I don't have to respond at length.  But we believe 

that this also a step in the right direction, was to develop the 

industry in Saskatchewan.  And I think the member for his 

comments. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Pages 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I think I would like to thank the minister for 

bringing in his official even though there wasn't a lot of work.  

I appreciate that fact you brought your officials in, and I want 

to thank you for that too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank 

the official for coming in.  He waited for awhile out in the 

hallway, but I don't think that we overworked him today. 

 

(1100) 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me today I have Doug Cressman who is the deputy minister 

and Hugh Hunt who is director of wildlife. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and the 

minister, and welcome the officials here as well.  I know the 

two officials.  I know them a little bit by now and they're very 

capable officials indeed. 

 

And I think that as an opening comment, Mr. Chairman, I 

should say to the minister that we have been consulting on this 

issue over the last little while.  And to the minister's credit, I 

want to say that I believe quite sincerely that we have had a 

major, if not a disaster, a major occurrence particularly in the 

southern part of the province; but indeed across the province 

we have averted I believe a show-down. 

 

Because the way the original Act, the amendment was 

intended, was certainly not being accepted, Mr. Chairman, by 

the people of this province, particularly cattle ranchers and 

farmers in the south and in the south-west area.  And it had the 

potential of having disastrous effects throughout the province, 

particularly when these people were so upset with the 

possibility of losing control of their leased land and the ability 

to hand it down from generation to generation.  That there was 

this possibility -- not only a possibility -- it was assured 

because there were already municipalities, complete 

municipalities who had barred and put up signs saying no 

hunting this year. 

And I'm sure that many members of this legislature were 

feeling the impact of that, because it transmitted itself right 

across the province to all of the hunters, all of the people who 

were drawn, all of the people who finally had the ability at 

least, to go out and shoot that trophy mule deer, of which I was 

one, I have to admit. 

 

And now we could see the spectre of all of this land being 

posted in protest by the people, by the ranchers, and by the 

farmers of this province.  Mr. Minister, because of your action, 

that threat was averted.  And I want to commend you on that. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister -- and I say that quite sincerely -- I think 

what the . . . your willingness to co-operate with the opposition 

and your willingness to co-operate with the farmers of this 

province in recognizing the fact that what you were intending 

to do was not in the best interest of this province.  And you 

listened to people, and you took seriously their concerns.  And 

what we have before us now is an amended version of the 

amendment to the Act.  And I know it's going to get 

complicated as we go through this process. 

 

But I want to say, and I want to say to the Minister of Finance, 

that if you would have taken the route that your Minister of 

Natural Resources has taken and listened to people, many of 

the traumatic experiences that the people of this province are 

going through right now could have been averted.  And I 

certainly say to you as far as the pension plan that we have just 

witnessed this morning -- that shallow, hollow replica, it's not 

even a replica of the the pension plan -- that fiasco could have 

been avoided. 

 

And I certainly say to the Minister of Agriculture, if he would 

have taken the example set by his colleague, many of the 

problems with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

Bill and many of the other fiascos, FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) and the livestock cash advance could 

have been averted. 

 

And I say to the Minister of Health, if the Minister of Health 

would be listening to people and changing, being willing to 

change . . . not at our request of the opposition alone but 

because of what the people are asking.  We could get into the 

chiropractors and the thousands and thousands of petitioners or 

into the optometrists or into diabetics.  All of these areas could 

have averted the confrontational process that we are seeing 

taking place right now. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, I want to recognize the fact that you have 

been instrumental and that you have been helpful to the 

opposition in addressing the concerns that the folks out there 

have had.  And I want to go on record as saying that. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Minister, I think I basically have one 

question for you before we get into the meat of the amending 

Bill itself.  And that is that it is my understanding that you have 

agreed to meet with the lease holders this fall and that you are 

going to be pursuing a process whereby an appeal process can 

be set up.  Could you bring me up to date of your intentions on 

that issue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

opposition for that question, and I also would like to thank the 

opposition and the groups involved in helping us to get this Bill 

through.  It's, I think, no argument that the Bill is far-sighted 

and a benefit to the province as a whole.  There were some 

misunderstandings with the Bill and some concerns were 

expressed.  And we were able to meet with the different groups 

involved, and with some co-operation from the opposition, 

co-operation and help from people like the member from 

Shaunavon who talked to the farmers and brought back their 

ideas, we were able to have amendments made to the Bill 

which will help to address those concerns. 

 

The other problems, concerns that were raised were addressed, 

as you have mentioned.  We in fact have been doing land 

review meetings across the province, talking to all our lessees 

about not only critical wildlife but oil and gas leases and 

community pastures and lease rates and a whole lot of things.  

And we have agreed that we will work to get some sort of 

appeal mechanism set up so that people who have problems 

with the critical wildlife Act or land, lessees who have 

problems will have some appeal procedures whereby they can 

be heard. 

 

We have agreed to set that up.  We have agreed to talk to them 

about regulations which were their concern.  And they were 

looking for assurance that agriculture would continue to be a 

prime use of this land, and I think we've addressed those 

concerns and misunderstandings.  And I think it's . . . this Bill 

is I think an example of the politics of the '90s. 

 

It was a Bill that was started by the previous administration.  

It's a Bill that costs little now and has a potential for huge 

benefits which I think our children and our grandchildren will 

thank us for having the foresight to do this.  It was started by 

one government, carried through by another government with 

co-operation from all the groups that were involved. 

 

And I think that's the sort of thing that people are looking for 

from politicians, is co-operation to do things that are right for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I just 

want to add one fact.  You said this was the politics of the '90s 

when you go out for consultation.  I submit to you, Mr. 

Minister, that the big difference here so far has been that we 

have heard a lot of lip-service being given to consultation.  But 

the problem with most of your ministers in this government is 

that they don't listen to the people. 

 

And my point was, sir, that you have done some consulting in 

retrospect, but more importantly you have listened to them.  

And that is why we are here today, and I think we can do away 

with this Bill in fairly short order here. 

 

But before I turn it over to the amendments, the member for 

Maple Creek whose area is very, very dramatically impacted 

by this has a few questions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to echo my colleague's congratulations to you for the 

work that you are preparing now to go through to alleviate the 

concerns of many of the people of the 

province, but in particular of interest to me, many of my 

constituents who obviously had a lot at stake in this process 

simply because of the geography of my constituency which 

contains not only The Great Sand Hills of Saskatchewan, but 

also the great Cypress Hills of Saskatchewan, two great 

geographical entities that in themselves are spectacular and 

tremendous, found only in one location basically in our 

province. 

 

Each of those on its own merit of being almost totally different 

is spectacular to say the least, but presents certain kinds of 

problems for the folks that live there, and of course a lot of 

those problems generated by what happens in this Assembly. 

 

Now the folks that we talked to and discussed things with -- 

and they're the same people that you've been talking to through 

your officials and probably personally -- have expressed that 

point of needing an appeal process.  And I wanted to deal with 

that just for a minute, because I think it's very important that 

people feel comfortable that they have a place that they can go 

as a last recourse if something goes wrong, even if it's only in 

perception and not in reality; a place that they can deliberate 

their concerns where they feel that a third independent party or 

group not affected directly at the moment, not under any 

pressure to make any one-sided decision -- that kind of a place 

to go to to vent your frustrations or to explain your problems 

and get a fair hearing, that's all important. 

 

And that was illustrated so very well, Mr. Minister, in the years 

gone by in the relationship between property owners and the 

petroleum and gas industry.  And as you will recall and know 

very well, The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 

Act provided for the Surface Rights Arbitration Board. 

 

That board has evolved into a very functional entity and one 

that has done a tremendous amount of good work in the 

province.  It has solved many, many problems, and it has also 

in many cases provided that sounding board for people who 

just needed some place to go to get another opinion or a fresh 

view on how things should be happening or could be 

happening.  And it has served very well. 

 

And I want to make a suggestion to you and get your 

comments.  The suggestion would be that you perhaps use that 

entity as a base to start this appeal process for those folks with 

problems in the habitat area or in the area of leased lands and 

that sort of thing.  And I suggest what you could possibly do is 

work through that Act and provide an extension to that board 

that would in fact deal with these kinds of problems. 

 

It might be that you would use different members on the board.  

The present board of course has people from both sides of the 

industry sit on the board and then it has a chairman that 

basically runs the thing.  You could do that same type of thing 

here and you could appoint some people that represent the 

cattlemen of the province.  You could have a few people that 

represent the wildlife federations and people that are involved 

with those kinds of things, and a couple of people that would 

represent the department's needs, and sit on that board and 

come up with decisions on an arbitrary kind of a basis after 



3078 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

listening to both sides of the story. 

 

And it's not run like a court in that you don't have to hire 

lawyers.  You don't have to spend a lot of money.  You can go 

there and represent yourself.  All you spend is your day's time 

and your travel expenses to get to the hearing.  You make that 

application as an individual, if you want.  You do have the 

choice to take legal counsel if you want, but you don't have to.  

And the same goes for the other side, if there is another side in 

a dispute.  They can take legal counsel or they can represent 

themselves.  And I think that's a very good vehicle and a very 

good plan.  And I wonder if you might consider that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in meeting with the 

stock growers and other lessees, we've committed to meeting 

with them to discuss this.  We suggested September; and they 

said October would be better, after harvest.  So we're 

committed to meeting with them to work out some sort of 

appeal mechanism.  And certainly that's one of things that we 

could bring to the table, one suggestion we could bring to the 

table. 

 

Our only concern is that we provide a fair appeal system that 

satisfies the lessees and doesn't create a huge bureaucracy that 

costs a lot of money.  We haven't had . . . We've got 2.5 million 

acres under critical wildlife since the past number of years, and 

we are not finding large numbers of complaints.  But we 

certainly do want to provide some sort of mechanism.  We've 

committed to do that.  And we'll take your suggestion to the 

table when we talk to the lessees. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, because it was 

my concern too that we not get into a bureaucracy that would 

be extremely expensive or hard to deal with or require an awful 

lot of legal expertise in order to resolve what most of the time 

would probably be reasonably easy questions to resolve.  And 

this structure that I mentioned is already in place, so it might be 

easy to work from that foundation. 

 

What we're talking about in this entire Bill of course was the 

changing of the position out in the country that was going to 

affect the very livelihoods of a lot of people.  And I think that 

we needed to probably go through this process to get it sort of 

straightened out once and for all.  With all fairness to you, Mr. 

Minister, I think you inherited something of a dilemma here, 

because the Act of course was in place.  And I believe that a lot 

of the fears and concerns that were prevalent throughout the 

rural areas had started with that original Bill.  The fact that you 

came to amend it meant of course that it came to a boiling point 

and people's frustrations with the whole thing were sort of 

catalyzed at this particular time. 

 

So I'm glad that we are going to be able to take a shot at trying 

to alleviate a lot of these problems today.  And without any 

further to-do about it, I'm going to turn it back to my colleague 

and yourselves to go on with the amendment so that we can get 

on and get the thing straightened out. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too 

would like to commend the minister on the changes that he's 

making to the Bill, and all the consultation that has been taking 

place recently with the players on this Bill. 

 

I've been in contact with a lot of my constituents because there 

is so much of the area in the south-west that is affected by this 

Bill.  And attending a meeting in Orkney, listening to their 

concerns here some weeks ago, I relayed those concerns on to 

the minister.  And in a very positive way the minister has acted 

on this and I do commend him on that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We're going to go 

through this process now as effectively and efficiently as we 

can.  We are observing a little bit of a problem because we 

have the original Act, which was going to be amended by An 

Act to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

which is about a hundred-page document or whatever, and at 

the same time we're going to now have amendments to the 

amending Act to the original Act.  So we'll try to go through it 

as precisely as possible. 

 

Mr. Chairman, clause 2 of the printed Bill . . . and I'm talking 

now about the amending Act to the original Act.   Clause 2 of 

the printed Bill, I move that we make the following 

amendment, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Add the following sections after section 2 of the printed Bill: 

 

 "New chapter number and long title 

 

  3 The chapter number and long title are repealed and the 

following substituted: 

'Chapter W-13.2 

  An Act respecting the Protection and Management of 

Crown Lands for Agriculture and Wildlife'. 

 

 "Section 1 amended 

  4 Section 1 is amended by striking out 'Critical'. 

 

Critical will no longer be in there. 

 

 "Section 2 amended 

  5 Section 2 is amended: 

 

   (a) by repealing clause (a); and 

 

   (b) by adding the following clause after clause (c): 

 

Which will then become clause: 

 

   "(d) 'wildlife habitat lands' means Crown lands 

designated as wildlife habitat lands 

pursuant to section 3". 

 

And then, Mr. Chairman, further: 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

 "Section 3 amended 

  6 Section 3 is amended by striking out 'critical' wherever it 

occurs: 

 

   (a) in subsection (1); and 

 

   (b) in subsection (2)". 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair has a procedural difficulty with the 

amendment that has been proposed by the member for 

Rosthern.  The amendment seeks to amend sections of the 

parent Act which are not in the Bill before the committee and 

are out of bounds and are out of the scope of the Bill that's 

before us.  However, with leave of the committee, I will allow 

the amendment to proceed.  Is there agreement?  That's agreed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This 

clause also is somewhat complicated and I'm not quite sure 

whether this affects the original Bill, but if it does, we'll seek 

leave for the adoption of this amendment as well. 

 

Section 3 or clause 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

 Renumber existing section 3 of the printed Bill (that's the 

amending Bill) as section 7. 

 

And: 

 

 Add the following section after renumbered section 7: 

 

  "Section 5 amended 

  8 Section 5 is amended by striking out 'critical'". 

 

And I don't think that you should have the same problem here 

because it is referring to the printed Bill that is before us. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 

would move the following amendment of the printed Bill, the 

amending Bill: 

 

 Amend existing section 4 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering it as section 9; 

 

 (b) by striking out subsection (1) and substituting 

the following: 

 

  "(1)Subsection 6(1) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

   "(1) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), no person shall 

grant or transfer freehold title to wildlife 

habitat lands."; 

 

 (c) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

  "(2) Subsection 6(2) is amended by striking out 'critical'."; 

 

 (d) by renumbering existing subsection (2) as subsection (3); 

and 

 

 (e) by striking out "Critical wildlife": 

 

  (i) in subsection 6(4) of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered subsection 9(3) of the printed Bill; and 

 

  (ii) in subsection 6(5) of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered subsection 9(3) of the printed Bill; 

 

 and substituting "Wildlife". 

 

The Chair: -- Again there is a reference to "subsection" which 

is not in the Bill before us.  Therefore I would ask if there is 

leave for the amendment to proceed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could just ask leave of the 

Assembly for a one-minute consultation with the Clerk on a 

matter of procedure. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The following amendments that I 

wanted to make, it has been recommended that this is the 

proper, most appropriate time to make them.  So, Mr. 

Chairman, I would move that we add the following sections 

after renumbered section 9 as follows: 

 

 Add the following sections after renumbered section 9: 

 

 "Section 7 amended 

  10 Subsection 7(1) is amended by striking our 'critical'. 

 

 Section 8 amended 

  11 Subsection 8(1) is amended by striking out 'critical'". 

 

The Chair: -- Again this amendment proposes to amend items 

which are not in the Bill before us, although they are part of the 

parent Act.  Therefore again I would ask for agreement of the 

committee to proceed to deal with this amendment.  Is that 

agreed?  That's agreed. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 



3080 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, on clause 5 or sections 5, 

actually what I will be proposing here is an amendment that 

deals with both clause 5 and 6.  And I propose that we: 

 

 renumber existing sections 5 and 6 of the printed Bill as 

sections 12 and 13. 

 

And 13 simply is renumbering of "This Act comes into force 

on the day of assent" clause.  So it's a housekeeping chore. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 

to thank the minister for his co-operation in this.  And normally 

what we do is thank the officials too, and the people who have 

been watching must be wondering why the officials are here 

because they haven't done anything. 

 

But I want to point out to the public that that's not the case.  

There's been a lot of work that has gone into the Bill by the 

officials behind the scenes, and I think we should recognize 

that because they are instrumental in coming up with the 

complicated amendments and making me look good in making 

them.  And I want to recognize the fact that without them, it 

would not have been possible, and also the Legislative Law 

Clerk that has been very instrumental in making sure that this 

has been guided through the proper channels. 

 

So I would take this opportunity to thank the officials and the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I also would like to 

thank the officials for coming in and the co-operation from the 

opposition. 

 

(1130) 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Agriculture to please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it gives me pleasure to 

introduce on my right, Doug Moen from the Department of 

Justice; on his right and soon to be on my left, Darcy 

McGovern; and behind Doug, Terry Scott from the Department 

of Agriculture. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, what I would like you to do 

is go through the Bill, not in a legal sense, but in a kind of a 

clause-by-clause basis that deals with the different items on 

your leaseback program and how it's going to be handled, 

starting probably with 27.1 and going through.  If I've got some 

questions after that, then we'll kind of go through it clause by 

clause.  But I've got some questions I want to ask. 

 

But first of all, I want your view of the world in this one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

opportunity to outline for the members opposite the major 

features of this legislation. 

 

The piece by which it's become known has been the six-year 

leaseback program.  This is a provision through which farmers 

who lose title to their land following foreclosure, quitclaim, or 

judicial sale would have a lease offered to them for the 

property that they had previously owned.  It would give them 

the opportunity to farm that land for an additional six years, 

provided they met the conditions of the lease that they would 

negotiate with the lenders with whom the agreement was made. 

 

Lenders include chartered banks, credit unions, trust 

companies, Farm Credit Corporation, Ag Credit Corporation, 

and the provincial Crown. 

 

The eligibility for leaseback is for farmers who are Canadian 

citizens and permanent residents of Saskatchewan who remain 

Saskatchewan residents for the period of the lease, who are 

legitimately farmers, and who are over 18 years of age.  That 

right is assignable to spouse or child or the spouse of a child of 

that farmer. 

 

There are exemptions with respect to who is eligible for the 

lease.  Lenders may refuse to offer leases to farmers if the 

farmer has been dishonest in their dealings with the mortgagee, 

if deterioration of the farm land is occurring through the 

absence, neglect or wilful act of the farmer; if the farm land has 

been abandoned; or if the farmer had the ability to meet his or 

her obligations under the mortgage but did not do so. 

 

The intent of the exemptions is to give the right of lease to 

farmers who are genuinely interested in pursuing farming and 

who are doing their best to make progress on their farms and to 

protect their interests so that they may overcome their 

short-term financial difficulties through the period of the lease. 

 

If there is disagreement on the terms of the lease, then the 

farmers have access to a board which will be called the Farm 

Tenure Arbitration Board that will judge whether the . . . will 

hear the farmer and the lender with respect to the fairness of 

the offer, with respect to the adequacy of the discussions that 

have taken place till then. 

 

In the event that farmers are offered leases, they have the 

option of leasing all of that land or any part of that land which 

they would choose under the lease program.  There are some 

technical matters that you may wish to ask about that I will 

respond to then. 

 

I will go then to the next significant point which is the 

maximum limits on land in the program.  The maximum 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

amount of land that a farmer can lease back or assign for 

leaseback is the greater 1,280 acres or $36,000 assessed value 

of land.  There is another limitation that says in the event that 

some land is under the lease but a farmer owns other land, the 

total of the farm land owned and leased under the program may 

not exceed the greater of 2,560 acres or $72,000 in assessed 

value. 

 

This program applies only to new mortgage debt.  The program 

does not apply to mortgages entered into after the coming into 

force of the program. 

 

There has been concern expressed by some that this would 

have an impact on the future.  It's not intended to.  It's intended 

to provide stability for farmers who are in difficulty with their 

land mortgages as the result of the serious circumstances over 

the last number of years. 

 

It's not intended to deal with people who from today on, or the 

day of the coming into force of the Act, get into difficulty as a 

result of the negotiations they make.  It's meant to clear up a 

serious debt crisis in Saskatchewan that has accumulated over 

the last number of years; and to give stability to farmers as they 

deal with their debt difficulties. 

 

The arbitration board that I talked about will be in place, but 

they can also . . . the farmer and the lender can take their 

disputes to the Court of Queen's Bench.  The Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board will be appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council after consultation with farm organizations 

and financial institutions. 

 

The provincial government will assist in providing the financial 

institutions with compensation for the last four years of the 

leasing period.  It's an understanding as a result of the 

consultation in the Farm Debt Advisory Committee process, 

that it is a matter of almost custom with financial institutions in 

renegotiating circumstances with farmers, that farmers having 

lost access to their land have been given two years of lease 

provision by the financial institutions. 

 

It's recognized that financial institutions would want to 

continue that practice, and that for the last four years of the 

six-year period they would be compensated if there was a 

difference between their lease revenues and the value they 

could have gotten from their assets had they put them on the 

market.  So there's compensation in that regard. 

 

The program has a sunset clause to it.  It does not apply to any 

land that is dealt with after June 1, 1997.  So the final land that 

can enter the program will be on June 1, 1997.  That will mean 

that the last land will exit the program six years . . . or the latest 

date it could, would be June 1, 2003. 

 

There is a voluntary mediation process that farmers can access 

prior to actions, either of foreclosure or of voluntary transfer.  

And that's to facilitate discussions that have not taken place 

under present legislation, which requires that mediation take 

place only after notice of other actions against the debt have 

occurred. 

 

Farmers will have the right to sign a waiver on their statutory 

exemption on specific assets.  This will allow 

farmers to use assets that presently are restricted under law, 

particularly in the credit union system, from being used as 

security.  It will allow farmers to use those assets to acquire 

credit for purposes of their farming operations.  That waiver 

will not apply to household or personal items. 

 

Then there is a protection . . . there are redefined circumstances 

around home quarter protection.  The determination of whether 

mortgaged land is a homestead will occur as of the date the 

mortgage is granted in the case of future mortgages.  Existing 

farm land mortgages cannot obtain home quarter protection by 

virtue of creating a homestead where none existed prior to 

proclamation.  So it prevents the creation of a homestead on 

property that has a mortgage against it.  The purchase money 

mortgages and construction mortgages will be excluded from 

the current homestead waiver process. 

 

Then there are several other Acts that we will be dealing with 

in a moment that are consequential to the amendments, to the 

implementation of the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that we on this side of the House have 

had a great deal of representation from the credit union system 

regarding this Bill and the changes that you're making.  And 

we've had significant amount of questions being raised from a 

number of areas.  And I'd like to have your response to this 

from the perspective of the credit unions who have raised it 

with us. 

 

They have said that what they feared was that the producers 

there would say to the credit union this.  Well if you're going to 

offer me the lease on my mortgage and I am having a great deal 

of difficulty making my payments and if I renege on my 

payments for a year and then come back in and say I can't make 

these payments -- and there are very innovative ways of doing 

that -- then the credit union will have to say that I will not only 

lease this back to this individual when I foreclose on it, I will 

also have to have him have the right of first refusal at the 

conclusion of that six-year leaseback at a different volume of 

dollars. 

 

(1145) 

 

And I have had personally credit unions and board members 

and managers come to me and say, if that happens we're going 

to hit the deck; we're going to be broke in a short order because 

instead of dealing with the ones that they are dealing with in a 

traditional way, the others are going to come in and say, you're 

going to deal with mine too. 

 

And so instead of having 10 quarters of land that they're 

working on, they get another additional 20 quarters of land that 

are in that risk area.  And when that happens, then the next 

batch comes in and says, we're going to get ours done too.  And 

it doesn't take long for people to understand where the whole 

trend is, once it starts to go. 

 

And I'd like to have your view of how you intend to stabilize 

that credit union focus that has come.  As a matter of fact, 

we've had some very, very strong representation from credit 

unions who have very, very serious financial difficulties at the 

point where they are today.  And they don't need additional risk 

in order to get 



3082 Saskatchewan Hansard August 26, 1992 

them going down that slippery slope. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I appreciate the concerns brought forward 

by the member opposite, Mr. Chairman.  We have also been in 

an ongoing discussion with the credit unions and the Canadian 

Bankers' Association with respect to the program. 

 

I should say at the outset that this program is the consequence 

of probably one of the most open consultation processes that 

has happened around a tough issue in Saskatchewan in many, 

many years, where four representatives of financial institutions 

-- one on behalf of Canadian Bankers' Association, one on 

behalf of Farm Credit Corporation, one on behalf of the credit 

union system, and one on behalf of ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) -- sat at a table with farmers and 

officials to explore fair ways of dealing with the farm debt 

crisis.  And it was they who proposed the solution that's here. 

 

And one of the things that's clearly intended in the legislation is 

that there is a discipline about the regulations and about the 

processes by which people can access the program.  It is no 

one's interest to open the province or the financial institutions 

to the risk you describe.  And it is both in the description of the 

regulations, in the description in the Act of the exemptions, that 

people who do not play fair with the system will not have that 

right, and in the description of a very disciplined Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board whose role it will be to make sure that 

people who try to use the system in their own interest but not in 

the public interest are prevented from doing that. 

 

I want to say at the outset that that has been a common 

statement within the Farm Debt Advisory Committee and their 

presenting the report, and in all of the discussions that we've 

had with the financial institutions.  And I might mention that 

the financial institutions have worked hand in glove with the 

officials from the Department of Justice in writing both the 

legislation and the regulation so that any concerns they might 

have could be identified. 

 

With respect to the credit union system in Saskatchewan, it is a 

strong system.  It is a system oriented in the history of our 

province and it is in our common interest to make sure that a 

disciplined process is in place so that nothing changes in that 

regard. 

 

With respect to impact of the program on the province, the 

farmer, the financial institutions, it is reasonable to assume that 

the program will stabilize land values.  Because what will 

happen is that farmers who otherwise would have . . . because 

they could not provide capital to purchase land after having lost 

it or given it up, they will now retain the opportunity to farm 

that land for an additional six years or four, depending if 

they've been in the process before. 

 

So that hopefully it creates both stability for the farmer, avoids 

a flood of land on the market as farmers are experiencing 

financial difficulty.  And it's clearly in our common interest to 

support this kind of a program which results in stability both 

for the farmers and for the financial institutions in the province. 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not sure whether you waylayed my 

concerns.  Have you got the regulations written already?  Have 

you just about got them concluded?  I'm not sure what a 

process would be, since you have indicated that you've 

involved the lenders in the discussion on the regulations.  Have 

you involved other agencies, farm organizations, in the 

discussions about those regulations, to see whether there has 

been a consistency in the approach, not only to protect the 

lenders but to assist those who really need the help in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  With respect to the regulations, they 

are close to completion.  They are working on fine detail, as 

discussions go on.  But we have dealt with the western wheat 

growers, the National Farmers Union, the Sask Wheat Pool, 

and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) with respect to consulting on the regulations for 

the program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On a matter that has arisen, not necessarily 

from the minister's point of view -- and I'm talking the federal 

Minister of Agriculture -- but Farm Credit Corporation clearly 

has a federal mandate.  Bankers also have a federal mandate.  

Credit unions and individuals probably have the most serious 

implications in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Putting that aside, do you have a consensus from Farm Credit 

Corporation that they're going to be involved in this?  Or are 

they going to change their own program in order to 

accommodate this, or is it a combination of both?  What have 

you received as a consolation in relation to that, understanding 

what the news have told us about where the federal Farm 

Credit Corporation is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, appreciate the question.  

Unfortunately the Farm Credit Corporation . . . or there is 

nothing in writing from the minister, put it that way, that at this 

point confirms the federal government's commitment to 

co-operate.  There is, however, there is a legal requirement for 

them to participate, both in previous versions of this Act and in 

this one. 

 

I hope that within a short period of time we can come to a 

resolution of that with the federal government.  The day we 

introduced the Bill -- I believe it was that day, I won't say that 

for sure -- but the president of the Farm Credit Corporation, 

Mr. Jim Hewitt, was here in the House.  And I met with him in 

my office afterwards and he said it was their intention to follow 

this program. 

 

It was several days later that the federal minister made 

comments different than that, and so it stands in that 

uncertainty with respect to their attitude towards it; but with 

respect to the legal requirement, there is a legal obligation on 

their behalf to participate. 

 

In terms of the impact on Farm Credit Corporation, Farm 

Credit Corporation has been giving leases six years long and 

longer for a number of years on occasion -- they're not always 

that long -- and I think it would be safe to assume that it was 

their practice that probably influenced the committee to suggest 

this as a remedy, because they were at the table to share their 

own experience with that. 



August 26, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

The only area then where there is a substantive difference 

between their practice in those cases where they offer six-year 

leases or longer, is that there will be a Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board that will determine whether in negotiations with Farm 

Credit Corporation the farmers have been offered a deal that 

was fair and consistent with that that other people were 

receiving. 

 

So it's fair to assume that this is not a major change for the way 

Farm Credit Corporation operates relative to . . . if one believes 

that farmers in fact ought to have the right to appeal to a fair 

and impartial body with respect to whether they've been treated 

fairly. 

 

To give Mr. McKnight's comments on this -- and I think it 

should be on public record -- he has said to us that about 80 per 

cent of those whose land is taken back by Farm Credit 

Corporation do have leases offered.  So there is only a 20 per 

cent where there may be a dispute.  And so I think it's fair to 

assume that there should be able to be co-operation in the 

implementation of this program. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- This is going to be a very technical and 

probably a legal committee that you're going to be having to set 

up.  But it's going to have to have some substantial credible 

people who are going to deal with this in a way that is going to 

be perceived to be fair, legally being fair, and all of things 

related to that. 

 

And that leads me to an observation, and I would make this 

observation.  And I'll do it by question: what are you planning 

on doing in establishing the committee, and who are you going 

to ask to have people on the committee and make 

representation to you? 

 

Because I seriously think, for example in the old Land Bank 

Appeal Board, we had a lawyer chair that committee so that it 

would be done in a legal way and that you wouldn't run into a 

problem in dealing with it that way.  And I think under the 

circumstances that we've got here, you're going to be dealing 

with contracts, you're going to be dealing with the legitimate 

and even some illegitimate reasons for wanting to have tenure 

on the lease.  And so you're going to have to have a serious 

look at how it's going to react.  And I think we need to take a 

serious look at it.  If you want to talk about that after lunch, 

we'll do that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 93 -- An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 91 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and 

Gas Corporation Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments now be read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move the Bill now be read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, just on a point of 

order, I believe we referred to the Bill as The Critical Wildlife.  

My understanding is there was an amendment to change the 

name of the Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- I am instructed that it changed the name of the 

parent Act but not the Bill.  So I think we are correct with that. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


