




















































Hansard: July 14, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1473 

 July 14, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Petition of the undersigned farmers and citizens of the 

Province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan entered into legally 

binding contracts with them to provide a Gross Revenue 

Insurance Program explicitly guaranteeing that the 

provisions of the contract would not be changed without 

notice before given to farmers by March 15, 1992 and that 

the Government has announced its intention before the 

Courts in Melville that it proposes to pass a law saying 

farmers received such notice when in actual fact they did 

not and concerned that the crisis on the farm is being made 

much worse by these actions. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 

 

1.)allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

2.) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program to be 

set up on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio 

instead of a risk area formula. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

There are people here from the districts of Hearne, Briercrest, 

and Tilney.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan bid to attract Piper Aircraft 

Corporation to this province: how much has this proposal 

cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to date; has the 

government position changed since bid was first 

announced?  To date what are the costs and details of all 

travel including bureaucratic and ministerial, names of 

travellers, and dates of excursions?  Which government 

department paid for the travel costs, and costs of travel 

broken down by trip?  And now that the management has 

changed at the Piper Aircraft Corporation, what is Cyrus 

Eaton's role in respect to Saskatchewan's bid? 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Assembly, a group of 4-H exchange 

students who are visiting our province from New Brunswick, 

along with other guests that have come here today from 

Saskatchewan.  They're visiting in my area of the province in 

agriculture district no. 14 and they have been hosted in the area 

and have visited many places, the Moose Jaw air show, and 

rodeo, a tour of the Big Muddy, I understand, and many other 

events. 

 

Today they're visiting in Regina and will be visiting the IMAX, 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) sunset 

ceremonies, and of course our legislature here today.  I would 

like the members here to help me welcome them to our 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to 

the rest of the members of this Assembly, sitting in the 

opposition gallery, my wife Jeanette who today is accompanied 

with relatives from Switzerland. 

 

With her are Marlis Schneider, Heinz Nyffenegger and Marti 

Nyffenegger.  Heinz is a production process engineer with the 

Holderbank Cement Manufacturing Company, the biggest 

manufacturer of cement in the world, who also have three 

plants in Canada.  And I would like them to stand up and take a 

bow. 

 

They're going to go out to the cement factory today, Mr. 

Speaker, to check things out over there.  And perhaps 

considering that all of our cement factories are no longer in 

operation in Saskatchewan, they might convince Holderbank to 

come over and show us how to get it rolling again.  So please 

help me to welcome them. 

 

And I would like to also welcome Warren Martenson who is 

sitting up behind them today.  And we're glad to have him back 

with us as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The results of a 

survey were released today indicating that 64 per cent of 

Saskatchewan residents favour expanding the province's 

nuclear industry.  Saskatoon's support is at 70 per cent.  I find it 

encouraging that the majority of people of this province 

support searching out alternate energy options including 

nuclear energy.  However, the government continues to turn a 

blind eye to a perfect avenue for such development -- an 

agreement with Atomic Energy of Canada. 

 

We in Saskatchewan could take a leadership role in developing 

not only alternate forms of energy but exporting the technology 

to other nations.  It makes little sense that the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) on the one 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

hand encourages uranium mining in Saskatchewan, but on the 

other refuses to take advantage of millions of dollars in 

research and development funding.  To suggest that it is okay 

to mine uranium but not ensure that it is processed and used 

safely is hypocritical at best and profoundly irresponsible. 

 

Saskatchewan has an important role to play in providing 

technological expertise to countries using nuclear reactors as 

well as setting safety standards, or refusing to sell our uranium 

to anyone who will not meet our guidelines.  For this very 

reason I once again encourage the NDP government to not let 

this opportunity slip through our fingers. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

today the Minister of Health announced the expansion of the 

renal dialysis satellite program at Prince Albert's Victoria 

Union Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minimal care dialysis program currently 

provides treatment to nine chronic, medically stable patients in 

the Prince Albert area.  We expect that the expansion will 

accommodate an eight additional patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, previously a number of patients were required to 

travel to Saskatoon two or three times a week for treatment.  I 

think today of one individual who contacted me during the 

election campaign and asked if this program could be expanded 

because her parents, who were elderly, were forced to move to 

Saskatoon.  They had the inability to travel back and forth two 

to three times a week. 

 

And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 

moving ahead with positive moves with respect to health care, 

education, and other areas.  And I want to congratulate the 

minister on her announcement today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, on July 9 the hon. member from 

Nipawin, the hon. member from Pelly, department officials, 

and myself had the opportunity to tour the alfalfa dehy industry 

in north-east Saskatchewan thanks to the Saskatchewan 

Dehydrators Association.  The Minister of Rural Development, 

the Hon. Darrel Cunningham, met with the association in the 

morning.  The tour included the Tisdale plant, the Arborfield 

plant, both sun-cured and green-alfalfa field operations, and the 

laboratory. 

 

Many significant points were noted on that tour, Mr. Speaker.  

The strong support for the existing method of payment under 

the Western Grains Transportation Act is very important to the 

survival of this very important industry. 

 

The announcement by the Saskatchewan Dehydrators 

Association to take a leadership role in phase one of a plan to 

research the development of an alfalfa dehydrated cube -- this 

is very significant as the export demand for good quality, long 

fibre product is growing. 

 

This is also good news for the farming community that utilizes 

alfalfa as part of their farm management practices. 

Thanks to Dale Pulkinen and Dale Davidson and Ian Meyer for 

a very informative tour. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from 

Kindersley, I want to remind members again that they do not 

refer to members by their proper names, or ministers by their 

proper names, but ministers by their portfolios. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted today to 

talk a little bit about the importance of the regional park system 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and of one of the 

parks in specific -- the Eston Riverside Regional Park. 

 

I attended a number of functions there over this past weekend.  

The park is located 15 miles south of Eston on the South 

Saskatchewan River.  It's just part of a network of excellent 

regional parks throughout this province. 

 

Some of the concerns people were telling me about while I was 

at the functions on the weekend were the concern about the 

highway leading to the park and the possible ripping up of that 

highway. 

 

Some 700 people attended various events on the weekend at 

that park.  It has an excellent nine-hole golf course, Mr. 

Speaker.  They are working towards fund raising with the goal 

of construction of a new swimming pool in the park.  It's just, 

as I said, a part of the regional park system throughout the 

province.  And I would ask all members to support and 

continue supporting the regional park system throughout the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Over the weekend I 

attended Ogema's 80th birthday.  At the official opening I was 

proud to be called upon for a few remarks before the unveiling 

of their second edition of their local history book, Prairie 

Grass to Golden Grain. 

 

I applaud the history book committee for having the foresight 

to update their local history.  It is crucial that we preserve our 

heritage and the spirit of our past, for without our past we have 

nothing to learn from or to build from for our future. 

 

I also want to commend the community of Ogema and 

surrounding areas for an event well planned.  An event such as 

this takes a tremendous amount of organization, co-operation, 

and community effort.  One of the fair organizers with the 

agriculture society told me when the grant money wasn't 

available this year, of course they were disappointed, but they 

realized that there were other priorities for taxpayers' money.  

And they dug in, worked together, and held a bigger and better 

fair than ever. 

 

I was amazed at their three-day agenda, which included 

pancake breakfast, ball games, team roping events, children's 

rides, two parades, museum days, a thrashing 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

demonstration. And the list goes on. 

 

The theme, "Ogema 80" -- "Proud of the Past", well 

exemplifies the community spirit and determination which will 

be a key to Ogema's success in the future.  Please join me in 

congratulating Ogema on an event well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, today in the city of Moose Jaw, at 20 different venues, 

seniors from across Saskatchewan are participating in this 

year's 55-plus seniors' games.  Last evening I was pleased to 

join the Minister of Community Services as she opened the 

seniors' 55-plus games in Guthridge field in Moose Jaw. 

 

Sponsored by the Saskatchewan Seniors' Fitness Association, 

with support from Sask Lotto, these games are bringing 

together seniors from all eight zones in the province.  And I 

venture to guess there is hardly a seat in this House not 

represented at the seniors' games in Moose Jaw. 

 

There are in total 550 participants in the games.  And the 

seniors are competing in events ranging from story-telling to 

track, from golf to playing bridge.  The winners in Moose Jaw 

will go on to the national games in Prince Albert next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the view of this private member, the seniors  

who are today gathered in Moose Jaw, many of them the sons 

and daughters of the original pioneers, are pioneering once 

again.  They are pioneering a wellness model for the whole of 

life, a model based on the wellness of body, mind, and spirit.  

Mr. Speaker, I extend my best wishes to all the participants, all 

the local organizers of the event, and may the best zone win as 

long as it's zone 3. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Negotiations with AECL 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question . . . I 

have a couple of questions to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, in a poll to be released today, two-thirds of 

Saskatchewan people say you should be considering the 

nuclear option.  Far, far more people than voted NDP are 

telling you to get on with creating jobs and building the future.  

And they are specifically endorsing moving toward the nuclear 

option. 

 

Mr. Premier, 18,000 jobs lost in Saskatchewan and one out of 

ten people on welfare.  I ask you, Mr. Premier, do you believe 

that the limit of your responsibility as a government is to 

simply blame the previous government and just to ignore this 

crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. 

member refers to a poll . . . a newspaper article in which a 

poll was just released.  It's pretty difficult for us on this side of 

the House to comment on a newspaper article when we haven't 

seen the questions that were asked on the poll nor have we seen 

the results of that poll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Therefore it is pretty difficult for us to 

make any comment on that at all at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

yesterday we heard the Minister of Finance say your 

government is not responsible for job creation and that the 

18,000 jobs lost in this province are not your problem.  In the 

Premier's own city of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, there are 

thousands of people out of jobs.  And a week ago we learned 

that there was one in ten of the people of Saskatoon are on 

welfare. 

 

Given that dramatic, hurtful numbers, can you give the 

Assembly an update on the status of the negotiations that you 

are doing to restore the nuclear energy deal and to replace some 

of those jobs that you and your government have destroyed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If all the jobs 

that were declared by AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

when they signed the MOU (memorandum of understanding) 

came to Saskatchewan, it would be a very, very small 

percentage of the replacement of the jobs that you're talking 

about, the 18,000 that you're talking about. 

 

An update on what we've been doing -- we have, as I've 

indicated in this House before and I've indicated publicly, that 

we are currently and have been negotiating to have AECL 

come to Saskatchewan with their research department. 

 

As I indicated to the former premier several weeks ago, we 

indicated that we were not interested at this time to commit to 

any kind of a nuclear reactor, nor are we interested in 

committing to a waste disposal site in Saskatchewan.  But if 

AECL is interested and if the federal government is willing to 

co-operate to bring the research department to Saskatchewan, 

we are very interested in talking to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest to the member opposite that this government 

better realize that they ran an election and told the people that 

they wanted to govern.  You wanted the responsibility of 

government and now you must accept that responsibility.  A 

deal with AECL promises hundreds of jobs immediately and 

thousands of jobs in the future.  Saskatoon and all the people of 

Saskatchewan need those jobs, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I want to put it to you quite simply: have you been 

negotiating with AECL, as your ministers claim, or have you 

simply abandoned the people of Saskatoon and the city of 

Saskatoon? 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I can say 

unequivocally we have not abandoned the people of Saskatoon 

if that's what the member is asking about.  We're very 

interested in every person that lives in Saskatoon and also in 

every person that lives in Saskatchewan. 

 

The member is quite right that we wanted to govern.  So did 53 

per cent of the people think that we should be governing in this 

province.  And there are still a lot of people in this province 

who are saying that we should be governing and we would like 

to govern.  If the opposition wasn't so obstructionist, we could 

continue on with the governing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the strategy of the NDP 

government is quite clear to everyone -- keep people on 

welfare, keep them unemployed, and keep them desperate, then 

you can do anything you like. 

 

Mr. Minister, I say to you, the fact is, sir, you have plenty of 

options to create jobs that would cost you very little or nothing.  

Instead, what you do you go on a spending spree foolishly 

marketing savings bonds at cost to the taxpayer and frittering 

away any chance we had of jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask you.  I would like to ask the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, before the end of this week will you 

commit to making a full report to this Assembly on the status 

of any work at all that you are doing in pursuing the nuclear 

option.  Mr. Premier, will you do that for us please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the hon. 

member opposite is that the minister has given the full status 

report just a few moments ago, and the question that he's 

advocated and has been giving full status reports not only to the 

legislature but the public of Saskatchewan.  The public of 

Saskatchewan is very fully informed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I have been told that the minister 

has had a copy of the poll sent to him, so maybe he would like 

to get up . . . Mr. Premier, I would like to direct the question to 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, we have lost 18,000 

jobs, down the tube.  We have the highest number of people on 

welfare in our history, and despite your hatred for the capitalist 

media, the only thing that saved your skin has been the 

kid-glove treatment that the capitalist media has given to you 

on these horrible, absolutely terrible numbers. 

 

Mr. Premier, I put it to you this way . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Premier, I put it to you that you are not 

seriously pursuing the nuclear option and that your own cabinet 

ministers cannot agree what it is or what it is not that you are 

doing. 

We know for a fact that many of your own Saskatoon caucus 

members have now come over to this side and they support this 

option.  Mr. Premier, I ask you therefore: as an hon. member, 

would you put on record your own personal position on the 

future of the nuclear option in Saskatchewan?  Will you do 

that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not here to answer 

my own personal views; I am here to answer the policy of the 

government which is what question period is all about.  And I 

will continue to answer the policy of the government.  I will 

tell the hon. member opposite that the employment in the 

province in Saskatchewan rose by approximately 1,000 people 

from May to June, 1992, something which the hon. member 

neglected to raise in his questions of yesterday or in his 

questions of today. 
 

The reality also is that 18,000 loss over the last year really is 

the result of 10 years of devastation and mayhem and havoc, 

which was wreaked by the former administration. 
 

There are some encouraging signs.  It's not to say that the job 

will be done overnight or easily, but we are embarking upon a 

program which will try to get sensible, steady growth going in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

If the hon. member is saying that we should return to the days, 

the 1980s days of billions of dollars of taxpayers' subsidies 

spent for the big business corporation friends of the people 

opposite, I can tell the hon. member: forget it.  You lost the 

election.  The people of Saskatchewan want a new direction to 

support the small-business people of this province.  That's our 

policy for the 1990s. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Status of Swift Current Pasta Plant 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, in this government's 

never-ending desire to destroy everything positive ever done by 

the previous government, they've done more to contribute to 

the 18,000 more jobless situation in our province than to solve 

it. 
 

Unemployment continues to grow, and the government 

continues to end economic projects that would provide people 

with jobs and income. 
 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is, will the Acting Minister of 

Economic Development please update this House on the status 

of the Saska Pasta plant in Swift Current. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Economic Development in the next few days may be in a 

position to give a full update report with respect to Saska Pasta 

or other matters which the hon. members may have directly 

advanced to them. 
 

I would say to the hon. members and the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan that what we have to realize, that this 

province's financial situation, the government's 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

financial situation, as a result of the last 10 years is very 

precarious to put it mildly.  And as precarious, it does not 

allow, nor should it by way of responsible economic 

development, a policy which -- I'm saying as a general 

statement -- involves a holus-bolus approach of cheque-writing 

of taxpayers' money in order to support economic progress. 

 

Where they are justifiable and they can be justified by the 

studies in the appropriate economic returns and where money is 

available, we'll consider it.  That is a general approach.  The 

report with respect to Saska Pasta, you can get in the next few 

days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that's scary.  

That is really scary.  I say there goes another project down the 

tubes just from that statement. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government obviously doesn't care if 

this project falls through the government's ever-widening 

cracks which means that you must also not care if people in the 

region of Swift Current, in that area, go without jobs and are 

jobless. 

 

The minister knows that the private sector is ready to move into 

this pasta plant and is waiting for the NDP government to go 

on with its commitment.  They're ready. 

 

My question: will the minister give this House his assurance 

that he will do his . . . colleagues and associate ministers of 

Finance, and not do what they did with Promavia and 

bad-mouth the project in public, as is sort of shaping up here 

today, and that they will give serious, immediate consideration 

so that we can get on with the creation of hundreds of jobs in 

that area and provide farmers with a much-needed new market 

for durum wheat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to give the hon. 

member my assurance -- as I do the House and the people of 

Saskatchewan -- that we will do all that is reasonably possible 

to encourage business, not only in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but to maintain business in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We will do this in the light of the economic circumstances 

which we have been faced with and the cards, the hands that 

we were dealt with by the opposition opposite, the member 

from Rosthern, who virtually bankrupted the province when he 

was on the treasury benches, virtually bankrupted.  This is the 

record and the legacy that this new government has to face 

with. 

 

And I find it rather ironical, putting it bluntly, Mr. Speaker, 

from a so-called free enterprise party advocating the merits of 

the magic of the market-place, to see those gentlemen getting 

up, arguing that business in the province of Saskatchewan can 

only be conducted if we hand out large bucks of taxpayers' 

support for them.  I have more confidence in the small-business 

community than you do, sir. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, everything this government 

touches, it destroys -- the GRIP program, the fine hospital 

system we have, rural highways, the Piper project, the AECL 

deals, just to name a few.  Eighteen thousand more jobless 

people in our province this year than last, and this government 

now plans to let literally thousands more jobs go down the 

tube, all for $6 million.  Now that's not a lot of money for this 

whole province.  And that's all your commitment is, according 

to these articles that we read here. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is: will the minister commit to Swift 

Current and the private sector involved that he will ensure that 

the project gets an unbiased review, and that if the 

government's analysis results in not proceeding with the pasta 

plant that the analysis will be made public so that we can know 

what you're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, with the greatest of 

respect to the hon. member opposite, I don't think I'd want to 

have him or his caucus colleagues decide whether a person 

knows what he or she is doing or not.  Because judging by the 

last 10 years of record, these are the gentlemen opposite who 

virtually bankrupted the province and obviously don't know 

what they're doing. 

 

I say to the hon. member opposite as I did a few moments ago, 

we need business activity in this province.  We encourage 

business activity.  We want business activity to come here.  We 

think, however, that in the 1990s, dictated by the circumstances 

in which we find ourselves, that the best business is the 

business which operates on its own, gets the capital going on 

its own, gets government helping out where it can from a 

regulatory and other point of view in order to provide jobs and 

economic options. 

 

Saska Pasta, any of these operations which are on the table for 

consideration, will receive our very careful consideration, but I 

repeat again to the hon. member, thanks to the legacy of the 

last 10 years the idea that only business can profit and be 

attracted to the province is if there's large scales of taxpayers' 

dollars is an idea, sir, whose time is gone; long gone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the role of 

king of exaggerations has switched back from this side to that 

side.  The fact of the matter is that the province is not so 

bankrupt that it can't afford to spend a few million dollars to 

create a lot of jobs in a city like Swift Current, and especially 

with the spin-off you would get from not only processing 

durum wheat into pasta and selling it around the world, and 

especially into a U.S. market that's knocking on the door and 

begging for the product, but especially with all the spin-off 

effect of having a market for all that durum.  Mr. Speaker, will 

the Premier assure us that vengeance against the past 

administration will not enter into his decision to destroy that 

plant. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I frankly find the 

member's question, and as I'm sure most members in this 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

House do, to be at least confusing if not absolutely 

contradictory.  I don't know what more I can tell the hon. 

member with respect to Saska Pasta or any other business 

option; if it's there and it makes economic sense we'll be there 

to help it out where we can.  Full stop, period. 

 

But we're not going to be helping it out concurrent to the Tory 

style of helping things out.  The spin-off from Supercart, and 

from Joytec, and from GigaText, and Nardei industries, High R 

Doors, and Dad's Cookies, as a partial list, is the kind of 

spin-off where there were absolutely zero jobs and millions of 

dollars of loss.  I say to you, sir, that if you're asking me to go 

back to the 1980s I'm saying no, because the people of 

Saskatchewan rejected you and the way you bungled the 

economy.  This is a new government and a new era of 

economic development in the 1990s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancellation of FeedGAP Program 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, would you please 

tell this House what effect your removal of the FeedGAP 

program will have on jobs in the Saskatchewan livestock 

industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the discussions are going on 

with the feeding industry and with the department.  Clearly any 

government intervention in the economy has an impact and 

changes, and that also has an impact.  The fact is that we are in 

a situation where we don't have a lot of excess dollars to spend, 

and the challenge I've put to the feeding industry is to 

demonstrate that the next dollar that ought to be spent for 

economic development in Saskatchewan ought to be spent for 

those purposes.  We also need to then determine from what 

other sources we would take those funds, because we are in a 

situation in Saskatchewan where we simply do not have the 

resources, and you all know why, to spend money that we 

simply don't have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you've been scrambling for 

eight and a half months to develop a strategy for Saskatchewan 

agriculture.  And apparently in the course of developing this 

strategy, it's you who didn't realize that by removing FeedGAP 

-- at a saving you say of $8.5 million -- you would threaten 

4,200 jobs, two packing plants, many farms, feedlots, and rural 

communities. 

 

Mr. Minister, what value, what value does your department 

place on jobs in the agriculture industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite would . 

. . if she would have more information than she discloses, 

possibly contribute to the discussion. 
 

The fact is that there are many impacts on the livestock 

industry in Saskatchewan, and which part of that impact this 

kind of intervention involves is a good question.  The industry, 

if you talk to the industry, if you've taken time to talk to the 

industry, comments that the piece that really concerns them is 

that the Alberta government is injecting 

millions of dollars into their feedlot industry, and in fact buying 

the industry. 

 

So for us to participate in that kind of activity, in a bidding war 

against a province that is now undertaking the kind of folly that 

the previous government in Saskatchewan undertook here, 

which has virtually put us without any financial flexibility, for 

us to compete in that kind of a game does not make any sense. 

 

So I've asked and I've engaged in some very positive 

discussions with the feedlot industry.  They recognize, they 

recognize the dilemma the province is in, and they recognize 

the misleading kinds of activities the previous government 

engaged in with respect to their rhetoric around agriculture, and 

they are going to be working with us in examining the issue 

and seeing that we do get the best kind of economic 

development that we can afford in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I have talked to 

the cattle feeders association, the Saskatchewan stock growers.  

I've spoken to the hog producers.  I too have talked to exactly 

the same kinds of people you're trying to let this House believe 

have been telling you what you want to believe. 

 

Now by scrapping the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) program, you've placed our feedlot industry in a 

position of disappearing overnight, just as Manitoba's had, by 

truck and rail car to Alberta.  How do you intend on replacing 

the jobs lost, and what is the dollar value of creating one job in 

this industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite seems to forget that 

a month or two ago, or three or four, she had a very different 

stance throughout the Saskatchewan budget, that we in fact had 

not dealt severely enough with the financial dilemmas in the 

province.  Which stance is it you would take?  The fact is that 

the province has very little financial flexibility, that businesses, 

including farmers, are willing to do what they have to do in 

order to make a profit because they are more efficient. 

 

I've said it in the House before, if you were here to listen, that 

the hog industry in Saskatchewan is the lowest-cost hog 

production industry in Canada.  We have . . . within the hog 

industry we have a great deal of energy willing to invest in the 

future and to look at the prospects here because they can do 

business without government intervention.  The feedlot 

industry is unique and that discussion is going on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you are the Minister of 

Agriculture.  You're the one that's supposed to be making the 

decisions.  And how in the world can you justify placing a 

$240 million industry at risk, 4,200 jobs at risk, at a cost, I 

remind you, to government of less than $3,000 per job, while 

Crown Life jobs, on the other hand, will be subsidized by some 

$300,000?  That's the cost value.  Okay? 

 

For goodness sake, when are you going to have the courage to 

admit your mistakes and stop making the 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

opposition, who were inept in government, look good? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite draws attention to 

the number of bad deals that have been engaged in in this 

province.  The fact is -- and the member opposite knows it -- 

that if the economy is going to function effectively under these 

circumstances in the '90s, if one is conscious of what's going on 

in the '90s, is that business will do well because they do well on 

their own, not because government subsidizes their input costs. 

 

The fact that we have a neighbouring province that is going 

between 2 and $3 billion in the hole this year, and 2 and $3 

billion in the hole next year, is not cause for us to try and 

compete in a bidding war in order to bankrupt ourselves even 

further than we are now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, will you commit yourself to 

introducing an internal committee to look at the way that 

you've been handling FeedGAP and the Saskatchewan 

livestock industry and come up with suitable alternatives in 

order to preserve the livelihoods of the livestock industry 

workers in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite may be 

aware that there have been ongoing discussions looking at that 

question.  I thought I had said that in my first answer, that in 

fact several days after the budget announcement I met with the 

Saskatchewan stock growers.  I answered questions at that time 

and encouraged them to engage in the discussion I referred to 

earlier.  There has been discussion with a number of 

representatives of the industry.  There's been ongoing analysis 

within the department. 

 

The fact is the issue is much more complex than the superficial 

analysis of one little piece of money.  What is the impact on the 

feedlot industry in Saskatchewan?  What is happening in the 

packing industry?  What impact do grading systems have on 

where Saskatchewan cattle are slaughtered?  What impact do 

exchange rates have?  What impact do interest rates have?  The 

fact is that Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan business 

people want to do business on their own, and they do not want 

to rely on government support on the input costs side.  And we 

will work with them to do what we have to do to keep the 

industry healthy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have an 

example to the east that can show you exactly what can happen 

to a livestock industry, and it is Manitoba.  And the kind of 

unilateral decisions you've made by not consulting people in 

this field who do want government left out of their affairs has 

resulted in the kind of blunder that you have created. 

 

Now I want you to stand in this House today and say that you 

indeed did not make an error by cancelling the FeedGAP 

program out and out because there's not one person in the 

industry that agrees with you.  You stand up and tell this House 

that in fact you have had support from 

people in the industry for doing away of the FeedGAP program 

and making us completely uncompetitive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, in 

collaboration with the Leader of the Liberal Party, have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Under the leadership of the Liberal 

Party.  Finally you've got a leader over there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Under the leadership possibly, yes . . . 

have an interesting perspective of the world because they 

believe on one hand that somehow we should come to grips 

with the financial crisis here, that we should promote a 

business environment where people want to do business.  But, 

but we should continue spending money in a way that we 

cannot afford to spend it.  The fact is that the feedlot industry 

in Saskatchewan, their only enemy is the Alberta government, 

and the Alberta government is engaging in financial strategies 

that hopefully the member opposite would condemn because 

she certainly was not supportive of the degree of reductions we 

did here.  So I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimate to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I have a couple of items of business.  The first one is one 

for which I do not have leave, but of which I gave the members 

informal notice yesterday.  I'll be asking for leave, Mr. 

Speaker, to move a motion that the Estimates and 

supplementary Estimates for the Legislative Assembly be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Estimates.  I gave to 

members opposite a copy of this yesterday and asked for their 

comments.  I'll now formally ask for leave to introduce this 

motion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the Estimates and supplementary Estimates for the Legislative 

Assembly, being votes 1 to 3, 5 to 7, 20 to 23, and 26 of vote 

21, and for the Provincial Auditor, being vote 28, be 

withdrawn from Committee of Finance and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have but two 

short questions of the minister.  The first is:  when will the 

Provincial Auditor's proposed changes to The Provincial 

Auditor Act be examined by the office of the Minister of 

Finance in light of the 1992-93 budget? 

 

And secondly, when will these proposals be brought forward to 

the legislature, and what will their impact be? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Although the member may ask 

questions, the minister has had his turn at introducing 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

the motion, and there is no mechanism for the minister to get 

up and answer the member.  Certainly I assume that the 

minister will make the information available to the member in 

another mechanism. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm going to rise and ask leave for a 

motion which the members opposite have had no notice of, but 

of which there's been some discussion.  I'm asking for leave to 

move a motion that we go directly to government orders on 

orders of the day. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give 

notice pursuant to rule 34 that at the next sitting of the 

Assembly, immediately before the order of the day is called for 

resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for concurrence 

in the second report of the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures and any amendments or subamendments proposed 

thereto, I will move that the said debate be not further 

adjourned. 

 

(1415) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 17 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In motions for 

return, pleasure to move that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for return no. 17 showing: 

 

Regarding the Minister of Social Services: (1) the names of all 

persons currently employed by, or accountable to this office 

directly or indirectly, who were employed on or after 

November 1, 1991. (2) For each person listed in (1) the (a) 

details of employment including compensation; (b) job 

description; (c) qualifications, including employment history; 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior; (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired; (f) the actual 

date that the person started work; and (g) if employed on 

contract, a true copy of their contract the existence of which 

is required by law as set out in The Crown Employment 

Contracts Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a remark or two before we hear from the 

Acting House Leader or whoever is looking after this today.  I 

believe, Mr. Minister, that people have the right to know who 

the NDP is hiring.  The information is all published in the 

Public Accounts.  It is already public.  We are all asking is 

which of those were hired since November 1, 1991. 

 

The minister knows what we're asking for in these type of 

questions.  We want to know who are the individuals and who 

was hired since November 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm warning the government that if they 

refuse to provide this information now, then when the complete 

list of names for this year's . . . in fact, published in the Public 

Accounts, we will be tabling written questions for each and 

every name in the Public Accounts asking for the date they 

were hired, who hired them, and their qualifications. 

 

And there is nothing in freedom of information or any other 

law that denies that information to this Assembly or the public.  

And if we are refused now, we will ask for every one, once the 

lists are published in the Public Accounts.  Refusal, Mr. 

Speaker, now, is buying a big problem later.  Why is the 

government hiding this information? 

 

I have faith today, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is going to get 

up and say, we're going to honour this here motion that I'm 

putting in today.  But as of now, they've been refusing the 

information we've been wanting. 

 

The associate Finance minister says he is hiding it because the 

people he is hiring may have spent time in prison.  That is 

ludicrous, Mr. Speaker.  If he says, as he did two Tuesdays ago 

-- that's two weeks ago today -- that he cannot tell us about who 

he is hiring is because they may have been in prison, maybe 

that reflects on their qualifications. 

 

But the point is we do not want to know which NDP appointees 

were in prison.  We want to know the names and positions of 

all the people the NDP have hired since November 1, 1991.  It 

is not a big request, Mr. Speaker.  And I think if the minister 

isn't going to give this here motion that I've asked for . . . just 

go ahead and say that they'll answer all these questions, I'll be 

very surprised. 

 

So I'm hoping that the minister since two weeks ago has 

thought over a lot of the no's and amendments he's put in and 

will answer this one.  This is very important about the Public 

Service Commission, who's been hired and who hasn't been.  

He's also the minister for this department, and I'm hoping when 

he gets to his feet that they'll be no amendments to this one.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I'm not going to speak extensively on this.  This is similar to a 

number of motions which were moved by members opposite on 

June 30th.  I gave, at some length at that point in time, Mr. 

Speaker, the reasons why these motions could not be answered 

in the form in which they were then put. 

 

I said at that time as well that we want to give the members as 

much information as we can.  This is a government which is 

both accountable and accessible in a way which the former was 

not. 

 

And at that point in time, at that time I explained what we 

could provide and amended the motion accordingly. 

 

Accordingly, I move that this motion be amended as follows: 

 

That the words "by, or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly who are employed on or after November 1, 1991" 

be deleted and the following 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

substituted therefor: 

 

"in the minister's office." 

 

And that the words "including employment history" be deleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I made reference to some comments.  They're on 

page 1140 of Hansard.  I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- I recognize the member from . . . I forgot 

where he's from . . . Thunder Creek.  Sorry. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It happens to all of 

us as the summer goes on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we're right back where we 

left off on motions for return.  Members of the opposition ask 

very reasonable questions.  We're dealing with a very small 

number of individuals, at least according to the rhetoric that the 

government gives us on this issue, that they aren't hardly hiring 

anyone and that everyone that they hire is absolutely lily white.  

And yet we ask very legitimate questions about the individuals. 

 

And this minister that is now the minister of cover-up for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, last time in this debate throws 

out the idea that some of these people might have criminal 

records, so we gave him an out.  We said well, if they've got 

criminal records we don't expect you to release those because 

we wouldn't want to infringe upon the constitutional rights of 

anybody.  And we said, once you've dispensed with the 

criminals, then give us the rest. 

 

But this minister continues, in the face of public opinion, 

overwhelming public opinion, to hide.  And it all comes down 

to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that this government, this government 

must be engaged in some type of patronage operation that 

they're ashamed of.  They must be ashamed of it, otherwise 

there would be no reason for a minister of the Crown, one who 

stood in opposition time after time, berated the former 

government for exactly the same thing, promised he'd never do 

it that way when he was in government, and yet does it. 

 

And he always . . . you know it's just wearing a little bit thin, 

Mr. Speaker, that this minister on record so many times would 

stand in this legislature and attempt to hide what he's doing, 

with these silly amendments. 

 

I don't think that member would stand on a public platform 

anywhere in this province and try and justify that practice.  

Matter of fact, I would challenge the member from Churchill 

Downs, come out to my riding, come out to Moose Jaw, stand 

on a public platform and do exactly what he's done in this 

House and justify it. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  I don't believe that 

member's got the courage to do that.  I don't think any member 

of the front bench would have the courage to do that.  Not one 

of them would dare stand up in front of a crowd -- even a 

crowd of New Democrats these days -- and do what the 

minister is doing in this House.  Because face to face, he 

simply couldn't pull it off. 

 

It's why we have the Minister of Agriculture hiding from 

the pork producers in Swift Current today -- the same kind of 

mentality.  It's why we have the Minister of Rural Development 

hiding from the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) meetings. 

 

The bunker mentality of this government has just set in totally.  

These people do not want to face the folks that they serve.  And 

that's why the minister will stand in the House on motions for 

return and hide behind flimsy excuses, hide behind his 

majority, and not give the public the information that for five 

long years they sat in this legislature and demanded of the 

previous government. 

 

This is the new accountable . . . as was quoted to the member . . 

. as was the member from Riversdale's statements in 1989 in 

the bell-ringing debate.  Who are these new-found democrats?  

Well as I said in that particular debate, Mr. Speaker, these 

new-found democrats are the NDP.  And that's a pretty sad 

commentary for a group that a short eight and a half months 

ago went out and solicited the votes of Saskatchewan voters, 

promising never, never to be like that. 

 

And I say to the minister, before he stands on his feet with the 

next one, how about giving this Assembly a commitment that 

he will go into some public venue on these questions and 

attempt to do the same thing and take on the crowd.  Just go out 

there and give a commitment that he's willing to face the public 

in this province in a public way and say, I won't answer these 

questions for these reasons. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 26 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think that it's 

important that the folks who have been following the Assembly 

out through the province know exactly what we're doing.  So 

I'll just read through the motion so that they have an idea what 

we're talking about: 

 

Regarding the decision to cancel the agreement with the federal 

government and the AECL: (1) whether the minister 

responsible consulted with any groups or persons prior to the 

decision being taken; (2) if so (a) the name of the individuals 

involved in the consultation; (b) the dates and locations 

where the consultations occurred; (c) the content of 

representations made to the minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that there's anything in here 

that the government couldn't comply with in terms of giving us 

information. 

 

The question whether or not there was consultation with 

anybody shouldn't certainly be any kind of a secret for the 

government members to pass on to us and to the general public. 

 

And it's important I think, in view, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that 

there's been considerable question as to whether or 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

not this administration in fact does consult with the people out 

in the public, and the reality being that an awful lot of people 

are accusing the government of not revealing whether they 

consult and in fact saying that they don't believe that they do 

consult. 

 

Therefore I think it's probably a good chance for the 

government to sort of show the public that they have consulted.  

It gives them an opportunity to be able to sort of clear the air, I 

guess might be a term that we could use.  They could make 

themselves look responsible. 

 

Once again where a lot of people are seemingly losing 

confidence in the administration of our province, I think that 

this motion gives the government the opportunity to save a lot 

of face and to re-correct, if it is correct that they have 

consulted, re-correct the thinking out there in the public that 

perhaps they haven't consulted and that they aren't doing the 

job in the way that the public perceives that they should be 

doing it. 

 

(1430) 

 

I know myself that I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a government, 

before it takes an action as big as this particular action is, they 

should consult with a lot of people.  They may not necessarily, 

Mr. Speaker, have to take a long time to do that.  But they 

certainly should consult with people and get the varying 

opinions and ideas from all of those involved in the process. 

 

You see for example in this situation that when you don't go 

through with the deal, if you've made a mistake, you've cost so 

many people so very, very much. 

 

Now I will refer back to question period where the Premier 

suggested, or I guess it was the Minister of Energy and Mines 

suggested, that not many jobs were actually lost when this deal 

wasn't struck.  It is true that there were only jobs in terms of 

hundreds at the outset involved with this direct deal.  But what 

he doesn't explain and should explain to the people, is that 

there are thousands upon thousands of jobs that can be obtained 

through the spin-off when you take on a project of this kind of 

magnitude. 

 

It's not the immediate people that are going to be involved in 

the executive positions, it's the spin-off to the whole province 

that counts for all of the real, true benefits.  And certainly in a 

project like this, there would be a lot of spin-offs. 

 

Even if you didn't do a nuclear power plant, there's got to be 

just tremendous amounts of spin-off of not only job, but 

economic activity, because when you have all of these jobs, 

naturally you've got the wages, you've got those wages spent 

throughout the community.  If you have more money working 

and circulating, you perhaps keep some of the people that are 

now leaving the province.  That in itself helps us to build a tax 

base.  It helps us to keep an awful lot of our municipal 

administrations financed.  You have simple things like a 

grocery store selling more groceries to the people that didn't 

then leave the province.  So all of that . . . And I know that the 

people of this province are aware of studies that have been 

done over the years. 

I know that when I went to school, it was suggested that for 

every real, new job that you created, you would have a spin-off 

of between 7 and 10 other jobs throughout the community. 

 

Now if you have that within a community and then take that 

and magnify it throughout the whole province, it can be a 

tremendous boost when you bring in, say even 150 

management jobs that might in fact spin off to say 2 or 3,000 

other types of jobs.  Then you spin that off again 7 or 10 times 

for all of the related service industries that are required to keep 

those real, new jobs there and functioning.  Then you have a 

tremendous economic growth potential.  And our province 

needs that kind of a stimulus. 

 

We are always known in this province, for some reason, to go 

into recession first, then come out of it last.  Why, Mr. Speaker, 

should that be?  Why should we always be the first into trouble 

and the last ones out?  Why do we accept that in this province?  

There's no need to accept this kind of an approach to business 

and to life-style.  Sure, we're land-locked in the middle of the 

Prairies.  But knowing that and understanding it should make 

us equipped and ready and able to go out and do the things 

necessary to change our lot in life. 

 

And certainly it doesn't seem to me that it's proper that we 

should accept that our lot in life is to be second cousins or 

second-rate economic people in our country.  Because I believe 

that we have the intelligence, the ability, and the wherewithal 

to put ourselves in the mainstream of economic development in 

this country, right along with Alberta, right along with Ontario, 

or anybody else.  It's just a question of rethinking where our 

position is going to be and how we can change our position. 

 

And one of the ways, Mr. Speaker, of changing that position 

has got to be by going out and getting these projects that will 

start economic stimulation in our province, starting economic 

stimulation that in turn then leads to the development of a 

stronger tax base, leads to the development of more jobs that 

pay better. 

 

And then we won't have to accept the role of being the first 

ones always into economic trouble, the first ones into a 

recession, and then the last ones out while we wait for the rest 

of the country to bail themselves out and drag us along on their 

shirt-tails.  We can be the shirt dragging them.  There's no need 

to be second or last always.  We can change this direction.  I 

know we can. 

 

Alberta is not very much closer to an ocean than we are.  They 

got to go over the Rocky Mountains to find their way out of 

central Canada, just as we do.  But they took the option, Mr. 

Speaker, many years ago of pioneering something that was 

new.  And that, of course, was the petroleum industry.  If we'd 

have had that kind of pioneering done in Saskatchewan, I 

seriously doubt that there ever would have been a Leduc No. 1, 

or a Leduc anything.  I doubt if there ever would have been an 

exploration in oil at all.  Because this province has never had a 

history of growing or developing. 

 

We sit around and whine and complain and grumble 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

about how everybody else has got things, and we do nothing.  

We follow the administrations of the old school of philosophy 

of socialism which is to beg for somebody who's got more to 

share with us.  Well let's not be sharing any more, Mr. Speaker.  

Let's set a new direction, a direction of leadership, a direction 

of building tax base, a direction of creating jobs.  And nuclear 

development and nuclear energy can be that exact tool. 

 

The member opposite takes offence to my remarks, and no 

wonder, because he's been a part of it for so many years of 

dragging this province backwards, down the tubes, out of the 

race of economic development, just sits there and rips this 

province apart.  Everything's down; everything's negative; we 

never do anything positive. They just sit there. Day after day 

they sit there even in government, whining and grumbling and 

backbiting.  It's all they're good for. 

 

They don't know how to develop a good industry like the 

nuclear energy industry that could have been started with this 

deal.  This deal didn't say it was the whole ball of wax by any 

means. But it was the start, the nucleus, and we could have had 

the beginnings, Mr. Speaker, of an industry as big for this 

province as the oil and gas petroleum industry was in Alberta.  

This could have been the nucleus, the start of Saskatchewan 

becoming one of the richest provinces in this country, an 

economic leader, a leader of an economic base that could have 

put us in the forefront for many years to come, with a strong 

tax base, with many, many good-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just doing it without building a nuclear plant would have 

helped so very, very much.  But consider just for a moment that 

we would have went that one step further and built a nuclear 

power plant.  The members opposite would say, well what 

would you do with the power, because they don't have the 

vision, the understanding, or the foresight to understand that 

there are people in this world that need and will pay for energy. 

 

Alberta recognized that many years ago when they started 

investing in developing their oil and petroleum industry.  They 

knew that energy was the key to success, because you can trade 

energy for economic wealth. 

 

All over the world in order for anything to happen these days 

you need energy, because we know that the power of working 

from a man's backbone and his sweat is not nearly as fast as 

burning gasoline through an internal combustion engine.  We 

also know, Mr. Speaker, that nuclear energy of course can 

produce many thousands of times more energy output with 

smaller amounts of the material than petroleum does. 

 

There is risk, an enormous risk, and I'm the last one that would 

ever want to walk through a nuclear fall-out area or anything 

like that.  But the reality that has to remembered here, Mr. 

Speaker, is that nuclear energy is around us all through the 

world.  And the reality is that if a nuclear power plant blows up 

in Alberta, we're probably going to die three seconds later than 

they are.  There's no getting away from the fact that it's all 

around us, and by being afraid of it and keeping it out of here 

isn't going to save us if it blows up. 

So recognizing that fact, then we must deal with the real issues 

of making it safe, making it absolutely safe so that there is no 

errors, no chance of errors, and accepting the fact that if we 

have it, it's no more dangerous than if they have it across the 

border.  Knowing that it's going to be there somewhere then 

means that we must take that step forward and do all we can to 

make it safe, make it reasonable, and then use the product and 

find customers for that electricity. 

 

Who are the customers that these gentlemen across the way 

seem to think are not there, seem to think that we don't need 

any more energy, any more electricity?  Well there are two 

areas that you can look at, Mr. Speaker, for economic 

development in selling energy.  You can look internally and 

you can look externally. 

 

First of all, internally, who can use power?  Anyone that runs a 

factory or a production plant needs energy.  Tremendous 

amounts of cheap energy gives an economic advantage for 

people in industry to locate close to the sources of energy.  

That's a number one consideration.  I understand, for example, 

that in Saskatchewan we have no cement plants producing 

cement at the present time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to draw to the 

member's attention that his order of the Assembly is very 

specific in its questions that it asks, and nowhere does he ask 

the question of the merit or the merits of nuclear energy.  And I 

think he must address himself to the question that he put in the 

order for return, so I would ask him to come back to the order 

for return. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that the 

member opposite already heard all of these good arguments 

and they're going to take them into consideration.  Because it 

does provide them with the opportunity to get back to this idea 

of letting the people know who they communicated with when 

they decided to scrap this deal. 

 

It's important, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 

know that this government is in fact going out and talking to 

someone.  It's important for the people of this province to know 

who that someone was. 

 

If you're going to scrap as big a deal as this, it is absolutely 

incumbent upon you as a government to show the folks how 

you got your idea that you should scrap the deal.  If it was just 

out of vengeance against the last administration, the people 

won't buy that.  It has to be, in our society today -- a well 

educated society -- a reasonable approach to consultation, 

development of ideas, development of notions of what's good 

weighed against what's bad on the scales, those invisible scales 

again of justice that we weigh things on in our society when we 

make our decisions. 

 

I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that public hearings were held to 

the effect of providing that kind of consultation that we have 

somehow seemed to learn to accept in our society these days.  

Just going out and talking to your buddies in a political meeting 

isn't what we're talking about when we're talking about 

consultation.  We're talking about going out and talking to the 

folks that would have responded to a survey such as we heard 

about 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

earlier today where 75 per cent of the people indicated that they 

thought the government should have gotten into this kind of 

deal. 

 

Now did those people that are represented in that poll have a 

chance to consult with this government?  I don't believe they 

did.  I quite honestly can't see that the government would go 

against the wishes of 75 per cent of the people.  It would seem, 

even with three years to go to an election, foolhardy for the 

government to go against 75 per cent of the population. 

 

So I don't believe they held those consultations. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't underestimate their stupidity. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, my member says we shouldn't 

underestimate stupidity, but in all fairness to the government, I 

think they acted in haste rather than in malice.  And here's a 

chance for them to take a step back and to correct that haste 

and to correct the direction that they took. 

 

They can show the people of this province, if they did consult 

with anybody, any groups prior to the decision being taken, 

they can show that by putting it on the record. They can name 

the people; they can enter all of the documents.  And if they 

want to give not only the names of the individuals, it would 

lend even more credibility to their case if they in fact would 

show where they consulted with these people. And if they had 

any documentation related to . . . suppose they had a Hansard 

type of record keeping, or perhaps they were done in a meeting 

forum with minutes.  If there are minutes of meetings where 

they met with folks, those would be good evidence to the 

people that there was at least some attempt to discuss these 

matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's extremely important that if we do get 

that process, that we know the dates and the locations where 

these consultations took place.  Because if we don't know 

where these things happened, there will always be some people 

who will doubt that it ever happened. 

 

We want to give the government the chance to remove all 

doubt.  They have been very, very adamant in telling us that 

they did everything right.  The public is starting to doubt that.  

This is the opportunity for the government to take that step that 

is now necessary to regain the confidence of the people of this 

province. 

 

(1445) 

 

I personally, politically, don't think that they can do it.  I don't 

think that they did the right things.  I don't think they had 

consultations.  I don't think they ever talked to anybody except 

their own political people in their own political circle. 

 

I'm giving them the chance to prove me wrong.  Prove me 

wrong.  Show that you've consulted with people.  Show that 

you threw this massive deal away with some reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I've shown that the government not only 

needs an opportunity to demonstrate to the people of this 

province that they are above board and legitimate, I 

believe that I've made the case that they should support this 

motion.  And I don't know, but I think maybe some of my 

colleagues would want to speak on this matter for a while. 

 

So with that I hope the government will seriously consider the 

things that we've said and vote in favour of this.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  Again I do not intend to 

repeat the comments I made on June 30.  They were fairly 

extensive.  I explained that in almost all these meetings there 

were no formal minutes kept, thus we do not have accurate 

records of dates or what was said, or so on.  We are therefore 

going to move, for the reasons stated previously, going to move 

that the motion be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after "consultations" be deleted. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That all the words after consultations 

be deleted, about the second- or third-last line. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister in his 

remarks outlined the government's position and said that they 

didn't have the opportunity to take minutes or they didn't do 

that sort of thing.  It seems strange, to say the least, when 

you're dealing with something of the importance that that is, the 

AECL agreement, that you wouldn't be taking minutes on it.  

And I would suspect the people of Saskatchewan would hold 

the same view that I hold, Mr. Speaker, and they do not believe 

that kind of stuff.  No one in their right mind wouldn't be 

taking minutes at a meeting as important as the AECL 

agreement. 

 

What we are asking for in our motion simply is some indication 

from the government that indeed there was some consultation, 

because we don't believe for a moment what the minister is 

saying, that there was consultation.  And I think it only 

confirms it when the minister stands up and says there was no 

minutes taken.  No one believes that kind of stuff, and the 

minister should be ashamed of himself for even standing and 

saying that.  If there wasn't any consultations why doesn't he 

have the forthrightness to just stand up and tell us there wasn't 

any consultation. 

 

We have seen time and time and time again with this 

government, Mr. Speaker, that they haven't consulted and yet 

they try their best to tell everybody that they did.  They haven't 

consulted in agriculture; they haven't consulted in health care; 

they haven't consulted in this or anything else for that matter, 

Mr. Speaker.  That's why the people of Saskatchewan don't 

believe them about this. 

 

This AECL agreement had the potential for thousands of jobs 

in this province, Mr. Speaker.  At a time when we're losing jobs 

-- 18,000 was recorded here just recently; 18,000 jobs lost in 

this province -- you'd think this government would be jumping 

at a chance to go for an agreement like this, Mr. Speaker.  Not 

only the jobs, but 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

the investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There would have been millions and millions of dollars worth 

of investment brought forward into this province by an 

agreement like this, Mr. Speaker, and it seems absolutely 

incredible -- incredible -- if you want to believe their story 

about how poor a shape Saskatchewan is, that they wouldn't be 

looking at this thing a lot more seriously. 

 

The AECL agreement, Mr. Speaker, called for a penalty clause 

if they backed out.  I think they have conveniently forgot about 

it, just like the contracts for farmers.  They forgot about this 

contract as well.  Two million dollar penalty -- we haven't 

heard a word about that.  Has that penalty been paid?  It would 

be interesting to know.  I think the people of Saskatchewan 

would be interested to know, Mr. Speaker.  This agreement had 

the support of people right across this province, SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SARM, the 

chambers of commerce. 

 

Today's poll indicates again overwhelming support for it.  This 

cannot be overlooked, Mr. Speaker.  The members of the flat 

earth society that sit over on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, cannot deny the people of Saskatchewan this 

opportunity.  We need development in this province; we need 

investment in this province.  That's exactly what this agreement 

would give us, Mr. Speaker.  I can't believe for one moment 

that these people would want to turn down that opportunity for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hopefully . . . there's only one ray of hope that I see in all of 

this, was the appointment of Mr. Blakeney to the Cameco 

board.  Hopefully -- and I say hopefully again -- it signals the 

turnaround that this government is having with respect to 

nuclear energy.  Maybe if Mr. Blakeney is on the board at 

Cameco he will have the opportunity to drive some sense into 

some of these members in the next little while.  We only can 

hope that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The sale alone of the electricity generated by a nuclear plant 

would have put this province on the map, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have the opportunity to generate nuclear energy in this 

province.  We have the feedstock for a nuclear generator, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that's exactly what the people of Saskatchewan 

feel should be done with it -- just like they feel in other areas of 

diversification, just like they feel in . . . 

 

It's a natural progression.  We've got the nuclear energy 

feedstock.  We've got uranium.  Turn it into nuclear energy.  

Sell the energy.  Sell the technology.  It's wanted and needed 

all over the world, Mr. Speaker.  They're crying in California 

for electricity right now -- absolutely crying for electricity.  

And these people opposite want to turn it down, turn down the 

opportunity. 

 

The only thing that they seem to have any respect for is 

changes, unilateral changes, to whatever they feel is necessary 

in this province.  But the people of Saskatchewan will not 

support that kind of an attitude, Mr. Speaker.  We don't want a 

huge fence being put up around this province like they want, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Quill Lakes, he 

talks about fence . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I want to remind the 

member from Kindersley again that he is on the amendment.  

And the amendment simply says that all the words after 

consultations be deleted.  So I draw his attention that he's 

speaking on the amendment. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's important to 

note the kinds of things that would be possible in this province 

if we had an agreement like this.  I think it's important that the 

people of Saskatchewan recognize and know that they had no 

consultation with anyone on this, that they unilaterally 

cancelled the contract.  They did not want to proceed with this 

type of agreement, Mr. Speaker.  They don't want this kind of 

development in this province in spite of the fact that an 

overwhelming number of people do want the agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The potential in nuclear energy, nuclear medicine . . . Just a 

few days ago the Minister of Health officially opened a new 

component at a hospital that had a nuclear component to it, Mr. 

Speaker -- nuclear physics, nuclear radiation of foods, Mr. 

Speaker.  There is absolutely huge potential for this.  It should 

not be overlooked.  The government should at least consult 

with the people . . . with AECL to see what kind of potential 

this has in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I think it's only important that the 

government recognize the potential that this has and recognize 

that the people of Saskatchewan want this agreement, and 

recognize that it's a step forward, not a step backward as they 

seem to think.  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the member from 

Moosomin, I do want to draw the attention to members that 

when an amendment is made which only deletes words from 

the main motion and does not change the motion itself, then 

you must, you must keep your words to the amendment.  The 

debate is not concurrent, it is on the amendment, and the merits 

or demerits of deleting those words from the main motion.  

And that's what the debate is on. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, just a few comments and directed to the amendment 

in light of the question that has been put before the Assembly, 

brought to the attention of the government.  I find it very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that we . . . I think our 

question brought forward and that the amendment is addressing 

and changing, takes away a fair bit of the effect of the question 

and what the opposition is looking for -- the consultation 

process and the involvement. 

 

When the minister brings an amendment that subtracts dates, 

locations, and content, it would appear to me, as has been 

brought forward by my colleague already, that any time a 

government or a minister or anyone in business or any 

organization would meet and meet with a group of people, that 

there would be a time set aside for that meeting.  There would 

be a location that would be set aside, there would be a place to 

meet.  And indeed, Mr. 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

Speaker, you no doubt would have someone on hand to take 

notes and to keep a record of the proceedings of that meeting. 

 

And I find it very hard to believe that if indeed the minister is 

telling us that these consultations took place but they didn't 

have the time to indeed work and set up meetings, set up dates, 

set up times, and have a recording secretary on hand, it would 

beg the question, we actually wonder if at all, if any of these 

consultations took place at all. 

 

I would also like to think that any minister or any member 

involved at a meeting at any time, may not be able to remember 

the particular date but would have a pretty good idea of the 

location, the place, maybe the time -- whether it was afternoon 

or evening -- and the format of the meeting.  What took place?  

What was discussed?  The information that was laid forward . . 

. brought forward in that meeting. 

 

And as we are quite well aware, Mr. Speaker, many interest 

groups across this province have been asking for and will 

continue to ask for meetings with the government, with 

ministers, with members not only on the government side of 

the House, but certainly with members like myself.  All 

members of this Assembly will be requested to meet at some 

time or other.  And I think most of us take the time to jot down 

and set a date, set the time and jot it down on our calendars so 

we know when a meeting is coming up because we don't want 

to miss that opportunity to meet with groups. 

 

And I would think that if what the minister is telling us today, 

that indeed meetings and consultations took place, that there 

should be some record or there should be something available 

for the minister or for the government to bring to this House to 

indicate that the consultations took place, to indicate that they 

had -- whether it was two or three or four or five -- meetings. 

 

And roughly saying that around the middle of May there was a 

meeting, I believe it was around May 20, there was a meeting 

that took place between one of the ministers and a group.  In 

this case, we would have hoped that the Minister of Economic 

Development would have met with representatives from 

Atomic Energy.  But they would recall some of the times and 

locations when they met to discuss the Atomic Energy 

agreement. 

 

And so I think it is very appropriate that the opposition be 

asking the question, because the public want to know if indeed 

the consultations took place.  And one of the easiest ways to 

know if indeed consultations took place is to know that there 

are dates, there are times, there are locations, and that minutes 

were taken.  And whether minutes were taken or not, ministers 

or anyone involved would be very well aware of some of the 

discussion took place. 

 

That's the only way that we as an opposition are going to know 

indeed that the consultation process was followed.  And so I 

think it is very fitting that we ask that question.  And I find it 

very difficult to accept the fact that the minister would say no, 

we don't have that information available and so we're going to 

amend the motion.  I would hope that on the next proceeding 

motions coming 

forward that the minister would indeed give us the information.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the member from Churchill Downs takes a great deal of delight 

evidently, today, in what he is proposing for the Assembly.  

The fact that that member would bring in a closure motion and 

then decide . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  As an experienced member, the 

member knows well that is out of order. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member 

from Moosomin just said to the Assembly, it's absolutely 

hypocritical of this minister to delete those sections from this 

particular motion for return. 

 

Today in question period the minister responsible for Energy 

was asked questions.  He told this Assembly that there were 

ongoing discussions, there was want by the government to 

enter into an agreement with certain provisos.  Everyone in this 

province understands the MOU that was signed last year.  It 

has been well publicized what the contents of that MOU were 

in regards to the AECL deal. 

 

Now the government has chosen for their own narrow, political 

purposes, to represent that MOU to people in a way that I think 

is unfair, untruthful, and simply wrong-headed.  And what we 

have been asking, after repeatedly asking the minister in 

question period, asking the Minister of Energy and Mines, 

asking the Minister of Economic Development, where are you 

with those discussions with AECL and the federal government 

in regards to the MOU?  What portions of it are on the table?  

What portions aren't?  When did those discussions take place? 

 

Because as was brought forward today by the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone in this legislature, there are an 

overwhelming number of Saskatchewan people that believe 

that Saskatchewan needs to explore the nuclear option.  And 

yet this government is so afraid, so afraid of elements within its 

own party, so afraid, that they would put at jeopardy this 

province and the potential for us to develop ourselves and our 

people. 

 

And by deleting the dates and locations where these 

consultations are supposedly ongoing, if you believe the 

ministers, and the content of the representations . . . I mean, 

Mr. Speaker, we've recently had the Minister of Energy stand 

in this . . . announce to the public that Saskatchewan's power 

requirements don't even need another coal-fired plant.  The 

Minister of Economic Development the next day directly 

contradicts the Minister of Energy and said yes we do, that 

Saskatchewan's going to run out of power if we don't have 

another coal-fired plant.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, the 

public is totally, totally up in the air with this government as to 

what their intentions are and where they're going.  One member 

of the treasury benches says we need it, and one member says 

we don't. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, this question is totally 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

legitimate.  Because if there is nothing meaningful going on 

with AECL or nothing meaningful going on with the federal 

government vis-a-vis the development of our uranium 

resources, then we have to take the words of the member from 

Regina Elphinstone, the Minister of Economic Development, 

and concur from that that it's absolutely necessary for 

Saskatchewan to have another coal-fired plant.  And that along 

with that coal-fired plant will come certain environmental 

restrictions that the taxpayers of this province are going to have 

to live with.  Those restrictions mean that we're going to have 

to spend several hundreds of millions of dollars to achieve 

those energy requirements. 

 

If we don't believe him, then we have to believe the Minister of 

Energy and Mines, who says we don't need it, period.  And 

that's why it's very important for the public, Mr. Speaker, on 

this question, to know what the content is, which portions of 

that MOU are on the table, which portions aren't, what 

ministers are meeting, what officials are meeting, so that we 

can know that come 2003 -- or whatever date that the energy 

options panel named in their report -- that this province isn't 

going to have the lights go out. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if we are to continue to believe the 

government, then there is something going on.  And it is right 

and proper that people that are planning development, that 

people that are planning our cities, people that are planning 

industry know that our power requirements in the future are 

going to be met. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the opportunities that are present are 

something that no one in this province should be uninformed 

about.  And that is why we've brought forward this motion, this 

motion for return that simply asks the government to lay out 

some kind of an agenda that doesn't have ministers 

contradicting each other, that says to the public, this is the 

progression of events.  This is the portion of the AECL MOU 

that we're working on.  This is where you can have hope.  This 

is where there is no hope.  This is where the University of 

Saskatchewan can do some planning.  This is where they can't 

do some planning . . . all of these questions that would have 70 

per cent of the people in Saskatoon say that they are in favour 

of nuclear development.  And those questions have to be 

answered. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this amendment by the member from 

Churchill Downs is just another example after dozens of 

examples that we've seen in this legislature of a government 

that is closed, that doesn't consult, that has no intention of 

informing Saskatchewan people in the direction at which 

they're taking them.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find this 

amendment totally unreasonable. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 27 

 

The Speaker: -- All right, the question before the Assembly is 

the order of the Assembly do issue for no. 27 showing.  Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

It should be formally moved.  It is only on the order paper that . 

. . The member from Thunder Creek, if you wish to have it, it 

should be moved.  I could move it for him, but the procedure 

usually is that the member moves it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Point of order.  Earlier in the day the member 

from Arm River moved the motion and then was prohibited 

from re-entering the debate on the amendment.  And I think on 

the practices I have noticed in this Assembly, on these motions 

that the government wishes to amend, that the minister has 

stood and made the amendment, allowing all members the 

freedom to speak on the motion. 

 

And I don't wish to have myself removed from the debate 

anticipating what the amendment will be by the member.  I 

mean the motion was read into the record by myself at an 

earlier date. 

 

The Speaker: -- Will the member just give me a moment to 

consult, please. 

 

Order.  There has been some confusion about what may 

happen.  Maybe some bad advice had been given. 

 

If the member moves the order for return, he certainly can get 

into the discussion on the amendment.  And that has always 

been what we've done in this House, so the member should 

move it.  And if an amendment is moved, the member certainly 

can get into discussion on the amendment.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

advice.  I just noticed the previous member and it had me 

somewhat worried that I would lose my place.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 27 

showing: 

 

Regarding the changes to the prescription drug plan as they affect 

diabetics: (1) whether the Minister of Health consulted with 

the Saskatchewan Diabetic Association prior to the 

imposition of these changes; (a) if so, the dates and where the 

consultations took place; (b) the content of the 

representations made to the minister; (c) the names of the 

individuals consulted; (2) whether the Minister of Health 

consulted with any other organization or persons regarding 

the changes: (a) if so, the dates and where the consultations 

took place; (b) the content of the representations made to the 

minister; and (c) the names of the individuals consulted. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

move an amendment to this motion.  I'm not going to elaborate 

at length.  The reasons have been made very clear by the 

Acting House Leader on a number of occasions, as they apply 

to a large number of these amendments. 

 

But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is well-known 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

that the minister has indeed done extensive consultations on 

this matter, as the minister has and other ministers have on a lot 

of other matters.  That's an important process that the 

government is pursuing and will be developing into the months 

ahead to refine and improve this consultation process. 

 

It is well-known by yourself, Mr. Speaker, and by the 

Saskatchewan public that the period of time that this new 

government had in preparing for this legislative session and the 

budget and the short legislative session in December which 

passed an Appropriation Bill to finish off that fiscal year was a 

limited period of time. 

 

I can assure you and the House, and I can assure the public 

through this House and through you, Mr. Speaker, that this 

consultation will be a lot more extensive in the future as we 

have more time to prepare for another session of the legislature 

and prepare the legislative agenda of the government. 

 

In order to be able to respond to the member opposite and his 

question, I want to move an amendment which I believe will 

help to make the response adequate and sufficient and provide 

the information that the House needs and that the members 

asks for.  And so I move that the motion be amended as 

follows: 

 

That all the words after "as they affect diabetics" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) whether the minister consulted with any groups or individuals 

prior to the decision being taken; (2) if so, the names of the 

groups or individuals involved in the consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this, seconded by the member from 

Churchill Downs. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You don't need a seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You don't need a seconder?  Then I 

won't second it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, subsequent to the ruling that you 

just made, the member from Arm River was intending to make 

the motion on item no. 1.  He made the motion.  The minister 

made an amendment to the motion.  And when the member 

from Arm River wanted to speak and make his points on the 

amendment, I understand he was not allowed to do so. 

 

Subsequent to that you made the ruling that members do indeed 

have that right.  And my point of contention here, Mr. Speaker, 

is that because the member was deprived of his legitimate right 

to make his comments at that time, that he now be given the 

right to make his comments pursuant to that amendment that he 

feels so strongly on. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Speaker: -- We have admitted that some bad advice 

 was given to the member from Arm River on that.  If, 

however, the member from Arm River feels that strongly on 

the issue . . . Order . . . we will give him that opportunity once 

we have completed this return. 

 

But I do want to make it very clear that that will not set a 

precedent for the future, but that the member should not be 

denied his right to speak on that issue if he so feels.  So we will 

return to that issue after the decision is made on this order for 

return.  Okay. 

 

We are on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I find 

it strange that the government would want to delete everything 

after the words "as they affect diabetics" and replace it with 

two clauses that are totally innocuous. 

 

As I understand what the minister is proposing in the way of 

amendments, is just that the Minister of Health consulted with 

someone.  And I find this strange because the whole question 

of diabetics and their insulin supply is one of life and death.  

And obviously we would want the Minister of Health to be 

consulting with diabetics and people associated with diabetics, 

not just anyone at all.  And as I read the amendment as 

proposed by the minister, that's basically what the government 

is saying. 

 

I mean we have on record in this province, in this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, that Minister of Health, when she was in 

opposition, raising questions in this House with the former 

minister of Health in the previous government, questions as to 

whether people were actually going to die because of the health 

care system in this province. 

 

So I think it's totally legitimate, Mr. Speaker, that we had 

placed this particular question on the order paper because, as 

you know, diabetes is a very, very wide-ranging disease in our 

society today.  I mean it is almost astronomical when one hears 

about the numbers of people that are affected either in a minor 

or in a major way by this particular disease. 

 

And the minister's excuse, in saying that we're a new 

government, that we don't have time, I would just remind the 

minister that this is the same party, the same government that 

talked about bringing budgets in on time and was going to be 

open and consultative with just about everyone.  So we have 

diabetics going from a dollar a vial with insulin to $380 a year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the diabetics that I know went without 

their insulin for one reason or another, they'd get in very 

serious trouble very quickly.  I had a girl just down the road 

from me on the farm that developed diabetes when she was 12 

years old.  And her parents didn't realize that the disease was 

coming on.  There was indicators that I think most parents 

probably wouldn't recognize.  But anyway, she went into a 

diabetic coma and just about died.  And I've followed this girl's 

growing up.  She's now married and has a child.  I had the 

honour of being the master of ceremonies at her wedding.  So 

she's someone that is fairly special to me. 

 

And when the previous government implemented 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

changes to the drug plan back in I believe it was 1988-89, 

somewhere in there, by raising the deductible, this . . . At one 

time we contemplated having diabetics pay more.  And I 

remember the reaction from this girl and her family and sitting 

down and talking with them.  And they introduced me to a lot 

of other people that are involved with the diabetes association 

in Moose Jaw, and had the opportunity to sit down and talk 

with a lot of these people on the problems faced by families 

that have this as yet incurable disease in their family.  And we 

have to remember that diabetes has a large hereditary 

component to it. 

 

So any time, Mr. Speaker, that we who are charged with the 

public trust would take it upon ourselves to arbitrarily change 

factors in the lives of people with diabetes, you must be very 

careful.  It's not something you can take lightly. 

 

People will rationalize lots of things.  And if one young person 

says that because of cost or changing circumstances in their 

lives that I'm not going to take my insulin properly, we 

jeopardize that person's future.  We jeopardize their ability to 

get married and have normal children.  We jeopardize whole 

aspects of families' lives. 

 

And I think it would have been only appropriate, Mr. Minister, 

as we've pointed out, in the motion for return that isn't covered 

by the government's amendment at all, that before the 

government undertook such a major step, that there would have 

been some type of consultative process with these people. 

 

And we're simply asking, we were simply asking, I think, some 

fairly wide-ranging questions about what that consultation was 

about, what type of information the minister received back, 

what type of information her officials received back so that 

diabetics in this province would have a sense of security; that 

their families would feel secure in knowing that the health care 

system was going to continue to provide for them in a way that 

was reasonable, that was logical. 

 

And I think the government's all out attempt at budget 

reduction, holus-bolus, without any thought to people in our 

society that don't have any choice, is a wrong-headed approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after those consultations occurred, there would 

have been no problem with the Minister of Health, as other 

governments have done previously, with bringing in changes to 

the prescription drug plan that would implement higher fees for 

diabetics; higher user fees, if you will, for the folks that use 

insulin.  And at least the people that are involved in diabetes 

would have had a clear understanding and had been able to 

make representations to the minister, and the fact that there had 

to be special provisions in place. 

 

And we were simply asking, Mr. Speaker, that we get some 

detailed analysis from a very large department, a department of 

government that probably is as big or bigger than any else in 

government.  I mean we have hundreds, indeed thousands of 

people in the health bureaucracy.  And we would think that 

with a department that size expending this much of the 

taxpayers' money 

that there would have been ample opportunity for consultation. 

 

And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the questions that 

went along with changing the fees on insulin and the test strips 

and the other things -- the needles the diabetics have as a 

necessity of life -- have been talked about by our health care 

system.  So it wouldn't have been that difficult for the minister 

to piggyback onto some of those prior consultations and come 

up with a reasonable plan to present to diabetics in this 

province.  And at any time thereafter -- at any time thereafter -- 

make changes to the prescription drug plan.  It can be done 

with an order in council of the cabinet.  And I think people in 

the diabetic world would have at least felt some comfort. 

 

That obviously wasn't the case, Mr. Speaker, because the 

government now has seen fit to come in and once again hide 

behind an amendment -- an amendment that is so innocuous 

and wide-ranging that it doesn't give any comfort to the people 

associated with diabetes at all.  It doesn't give any comfort to 

that little girl who's now grown into a woman -- who is a 

diabetic, is raising a family -- that her concerns and her needs 

in our society are being listened to. 

 

And I think it's high time that the Minister of Health, as she 

goes through this next step of the wellness model, learn from 

some of the mistakes made prior to the budget process -- learn 

from some of the mistakes in relation to people like diabetics in 

our province in that there be some honest-to-goodness 

consultation, that there be some well-thought-out game plans 

that will take people, who depend on a particular thing like 

insulin for their life, some comfort into the future. 

 

Diabetics aren't unreasonable people, Mr. Speaker.  Many 

diabetics have the ability to pay, as you and I do, for their 

drugs, for their test strips, for their needles.  But there has to be 

provisions, and the only way there can be provisions is if the 

minister takes the time to do her homework and consult with 

people. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we thought that the motion was 

reasonable.  Because if nothing else -- if nothing else -- if the 

minister didn't do these things, it would then give a further 

impetus to people involved in diabetes.  And it would give a 

further impetuous to the minister if this motion had been left 

unchanged and this Assembly had adopted it and the 

information, as provided for the minister, was coming up short 

in the estimation of most people involved in diabetes, then that 

should be an impetus for the minister to make sure that the next 

time she doesn't come up short; that the proper consultation, the 

proper questions, the proper answers are provided. 

 

Because isn't that the whole reason for being a minister?  Isn't 

that the whole reason for being in government?  It's not simply, 

Mr. Speaker, to be answerable to the deputy minister of 

Finance.  That's not why one takes the oath to become a cabinet 

minister and to serve the public.  You don't do it simply to 

satisfy the deputy minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and I have both been in that position.  And I 

can tell you that when I swore my oath to serve in 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

the Executive Council of the government, it was there to try 

and achieve certain things for people.  And I would think that 

this Minister of Health, this Minister of Health which talks so 

much about wellness, which means keeping people out of 

institutions, keeping people out of the heavy cost side of our 

health care system, would want to do everything in her power 

to talk to people like diabetics to make sure that they never, 

ever end up in that situation of being in a coma, of being on 

life-support systems, of having to heavily utilize our health 

care system. 

 

And there's only one way to achieve that, and that is for both 

the government and the people needing the service to have a 

very clear understanding of where each other's going.  And I 

think these questions would have provided the public with an 

indication of where that process is going.  And if it's found 

wanting, then the minister has the obligation to clean up her 

act. 

 

And that is why the question was posed.  And if the minister 

feels uncomfortable about cleaning up her act, then I would 

suggest that the Premier swears someone else in the cabinet 

with the responsibilities for the Department of Health who does 

feel concerned enough about people like diabetics that they will 

talk to them before they move in such threatening ways. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to bring a few 

comments and add a few comments regarding the amendment 

and again the fact that the minister has made the decision to 

limit the amount of information that will be available to the 

opposition and to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we talk of opposition, Mr. Speaker, we're not just talking 

of the 10 members on this . . . or 11 members on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker.  We're talking about all the people in 

Saskatchewan, residents of Saskatchewan, because we're 

elected to serve the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to ask themselves: what are the 

government attempting to hide?  And when you look at a recent 

editorial and the headline that says, not so loyal NDPers need 

not attend, then one begins to wonder, well maybe that 

information isn't available.  Maybe they don't have the 

information available because there's a limit to the number of 

people who can attend certain meetings.  And certainly that's 

the question that is being raised, the question we must raise. 

 

And we've also heard over the last period of some nine months 

or so, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions where indeed cabinet 

ministers have met with groups or individuals.  But as we've 

done some research into who was involved, we find that most 

of the meetings were limited in who was invited.  They were 

meetings with specific people invited to them. 

 

Now I think it would be very imperative that the people of 

Saskatchewan and the members of this Legislative 

Assembly have the ability to ask for information regarding 

particular meetings, regarding the individuals who attended 

those meetings, regarding the consultation that took place.  And 

in fact we might be surprised, Mr. Speaker, to find that if we 

had a chance to really peruse the minutes or peruse any 

information that's available, that it might indicate that the 

government certainly has not listened or not acted on the best 

wishes . . . or the ideas that were put forward. 

 

When I look at the motion that is being presented by my 

colleague, certainly it's a motion that raises a lot of concern 

across the province of Saskatchewan.  And I think of a chance 

meeting the other day at an anniversary with a senior couple 

who have been long-time supporters of this government, who 

have worked very diligently over the last number of years to 

support the NDP Party, support their local candidate in my 

constituency. 

 

And the question was asked, if I had a moment to, while I was 

attending this anniversary, just to sit down and talk for a 

minute.  And knowing the couple very well, I knew that they 

would be willing to . . . and interested in discussing politics.  

And I said, yes, I would have.  I have lots of moments, but at 

the time I was fairly busy.  However, I would take a moment 

because I could see that they were interested in bringing up a 

few concerns they had. 

 

And so as I sat down I said, okay, what would you like to 

discuss?  And the comment was this, Mr. Speaker.  The couple 

. . . the individual said, I would like to discuss some of the 

things that this government is doing, this government of ours is 

doing that I'm not happy with.  And everyone in that room 

knew where that couple came from. 

 

And the first item of concern that they raised was the fact that 

diabetics would now have to pay for all their insulin, would 

have to pay for all the services that they require.  And they felt 

very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn't fair to put that added 

health burden on the backs of a few individuals.  And as my 

colleague from Thunder Creek has indicated, there are many 

people across this province who suffer with diabetes, many 

people across this province who are facing an added cost.  

There are many people who are on low or fixed incomes, that it 

is going to become a major problem for them to continue to 

have a decent amount . . . or a decent living and be able to 

supply for themselves the food and the clothing and the shelter 

when indeed it's going to cost some more money. 

 

And it begs us to wonder, Mr. Speaker, how much consultation 

really did take place, and therefore the question that was posed.  

We would ask, for the consultation process, what consultation 

process took place?  And the fact that we need dates and times, 

and they are a strong indication of the fact that the ministers or 

the cabinet or any of the government members took the time to 

sit down with individuals across this province and talk to them 

about health care issues, talk to them about chiropractic 

services, talk to them about optometric services, talk to them 

about the prescription drug plan and the changes. 

 

And we're finding every day, Mr. Speaker, that more and 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

more people are becoming very keenly aware of the changes in 

the drug plan and the fact that the deductible has gone from 

125 to $380 a year for a couple, a substantial increase for many 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think, in light of the fact that the government has 

suggested in their throne speech, and in this House on many 

occasions ministers have stood in this Assembly during 

question period and said that they are going to consult, that 

they will continue to consult, that they have consulted, they 

have talked to different groups, I think it is very imperative that 

they show the opposition, show the people of Saskatchewan, 

that they indeed have taken the time to sit down with groups, 

that they have set dates, that they have responded to requests to 

meet with groups and individuals -- not just sending out 

departmental staff but they themselves, as elected officials, 

would take the time to sit down with people and consult with 

them and ask for their views, ask for their input. 

 

Yes, we're all aware of the difficult financial situation our 

province finds it in, but there isn't a jurisdiction around the 

world that isn't facing major financial difficulty, and we're all 

going to have to work together on it. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to reconsider 

on further motions about deleting the dates, times, and places 

of consultation and indeed make that information available to 

the Assembly.  What has the minister, what has the government 

to hide?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: -- We will now, as previously agreed, return to 

return no. 17, and allow the member from Arm River to make 

his statements which he was not able to do before.  Order. 

 

Return No. 17 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We just had an 

error this afternoon. And before question period, or before the 

House went in today, Mr. Speaker, I wasn't real sure myself 

because it's been 10 years since I was whip and was up on all 

these here things.  I thank you and the Clerks for allowing me 

to rule that I could speak again because, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Speaker, what I did was to give you a chance when I was 

reading out my motion.  I just made a . . . I just thought that if I 

didn't make all my comments that maybe that . . . why should 

I?  Because maybe you're going to come through like I thought 

you would and give us all the information in my motion, no. 

17. 

 

I thought maybe you would . . . Because pretty well all I said, 

Mr. Speaker, to you, Mr. Minister, was I was warning the 

government if they refused to provide the information that that 

complete list of names for the year in fact would be published 

in the Public Accounts.  And it could be, you know, you might 

as well answer the question now and answer exactly what we're 

wanting because in a later time by next spring when the House 

comes back in, in Public Accounts we're going to get it 

anyway, or 

whatever.  Refusing now is buying a big problem for you later. 

 

And we don't understand why, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

from Churchill Downs is so stubborn on giving us this 

information.  They were the ones . . . he's part of the 

government that made election promises throughout this 

province of Saskatchewan that there would be open and honest 

government, that there would be no information held back. 

 

Now why, Mr. Minister, do you sit there so arrogant and just 

say we will give you nothing, absolutely nothing.  Because 

that's exactly what you're doing, because the information, Mr. 

Speaker, that we've asked you to give, that we've asked the 

minister to give, there's nothing wrong with it. 

 

All we want to know is who was hired and all the descriptions 

and information about them since November 1, 1991.  If you're 

not ashamed of it, why wouldn't you do it?  Why would you 

not give us that information?  Because you know that we know 

that it's political patronage.  We know, and we've talked about 

it in our Estimates, which has got to be weeks ago now, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's the same minister, when we asked these same 

questions about the hirings and the firings and the individuals, 

we wanted to know all this information and you were reluctant. 

 

I know why you're reluctant, and we'll be back in for . . . as 

your promise, we'll have another hour or two in your Estimates, 

and it'll relate back right to this very same question here, is who 

was fired after you formed government and then came back 

into work again, that had a job? 

 

There are several departments.  Rural Development is one that 

we know the individuals and we're not going to stop until you 

give us those names.  Somehow we're going to get the names.  

Because I know some of them, but there has to be hundreds 

more throughout government where they were given their pink 

slips.  Mr. Speaker, they were given their pink slips on a certain 

day and still . . . that they're gone, fired, but working the next 

afternoon -- never missed a day's work -- in the same 

department under a different job description. 

 

Now that is wrong, Mr. Speaker, that this government is so 

ashamed of that.  If they wanted to do that, do it out front like 

you promised. 

 

We've said here we want to know who you've hired and fired 

and especially who you've hired since November 1.  And that 

would have to include all the information we wanted here.  

And there's not a reason in the world why you couldn't do it.  

But why wouldn't you do it?  Because it's showing that you're 

an underhanded government, that you don't really care about 

keeping your election promise.  And I thought you would. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I definitely thought that this minister . . . I've 

known him since 1978, '77, and I thought that he's a man who 

would stand to his feet and see that his people -- because he's 

an elite member of the caucus; he's been there for longer than 

any of them pretty well -- that he 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

would say look, we have promised, we have promised this 

information. We have set an election time. We have said in this 

House, there's nothing that we'll keep back; there's no 

information that isn't public.  Anything this government does, 

no matter what it be, that it will be public information. 

 

So why, why are we only in here in six to seven months of 

government and a new government and says, no we're going to 

be arrogant and we're not going to give you information. 

 

It's the only possible reason that you wouldn't give us the 

names is because some of those names you would have to give 

us would be people that, individuals that were fired and 

rehired. 

 

We know, as I said, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 

made a promise that they're going to cut back and they're going 

to be careful and save money and cut back on department after 

department.  But we're finding that's not right.  We have many 

departments.  And that's why this motion's here about Social 

Services because we think, Mr. Minister, that you've hired 

more people back than what you laid off; that you want to 

make sure that your elite people that are out and work for you 

at election time, that they get favoured with a job. 

 

Now that's what we're after.  We want to know whether you're 

going to keep your promise on political patronage or not.  And 

it looks like you're not.  But if you are and you've nothing to 

hide, why wouldn't all this information and all these motions 

for returns . . . Why are you doing this on all the motions for 

returns, putting amendments in and saying, we'll tell you this, 

we'll tell you that.  And you even got a quote here.  And I'd like 

to read some of your quotes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deputy Finance, the minister . . . the member 

from Churchill Downs has got to be one of the worst . . . It's a 

member that I like as an individual, but he got to be one of the 

chirpiest members that I know.  And this is a stock answer that 

he has.  And I'm sure he made it up before he ever seen any of 

the blues. 

 

And I want to just put this few parts of this . . . I'm not going to 

go because I'm not going to take much time, Mr. Speaker, 

because you were kind enough to give me a chance to say a 

few words here.  But I do want to say this here, that after we 

brought this . . . The member from Kindersley brought in a 

motion for return along the same lines as mine.  And here's the 

stock answer.  And each one after this is along the same lines, 

because there's several motions for returns, and they're all the 

same. 

 

(1545) 

 

And he just arrogantly would not give any more reason to the 

next motion for return than he did for this one.  And he said: 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is our desire in these matters 

to answer these questions as fully as we can. 

 

Well now why, Mr. Speaker, would a minister stand to his 

feet and say, as fully as we can, and then turn around and put 

amendments in to cut out what we were really asking? 

 

The main thing we're asking . . . You might as well just say we 

refuse to give you any information at all.  Why don't you just 

stand up, Mr. Minister, and say, well this order here from the 

member . . . order for return . . . motion for return for the 

member from Kindersley, why don't you just stand up and says, 

zero.  We're not even going to amendment.  We're going to 

give you nothing.  Because you know what we wanted.  You 

know what I wanted in this one here, in my motion for return.  

You know exactly what we wanted.  We want to know one 

thing, and that is to get at your political patronage, whether 

you're doing it or not.  Because you promised there'd be no 

political patronage. 

 

So he goes on to say here: 

 

Notwithstanding that, the motion as it was written by the member is 

too indefinite to be answered.  There is really, I think, no way 

of defining the comment indirectly. 

 

In a sense, the minister is the . . .  When a minister is minister of a 

department, all the employees of a department are, in a sense, 

employed indirectly by him.  What we think the member's . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . the intent was -- right, thank you.  

What we think the intent was, you want to know the details 

of those who were working in the ministers' offices -- not 

necessarily paid by Executive Council . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, who is the minister to say what we wanted?  He 

tries to put it in his words.  Well I think this is what the 

members wanted.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when we put 

these orders for return in, we know what we wanted.  We knew 

exactly what we wanted and you're telling us, well I think I 

know what they wanted.  Well that's not correct. 

 

You're going on to say: 

 

. . . not necessarily paid by Executive Council but employed in the 

ministers' offices -- and therefore we are moving an 

amendment.  And I say to . . . at the end of my comments I'll 

move the following amendment, Mr. Speaker, that the motion 

be amended . . . 

 

And he goes on and talks for a while, for about two pages in 

here, and there are two columns, and then makes his 

amendment. 

 

He did the same thing all that day, two weeks ago today.  So 

naturally we're going to be a little upset, Mr. Speaker, when he 

knows that these particular motions . . . I'm not going to . . . I 

can't because I would be off what I'm talking about.  We're 

talking about the one Agriculture day; we're talking about one 

in Health.  They don't want to seem to come through with 

them.  But I'm not talking about it.  I'm talking about Social 

Services and what we wanted.  You just used your amendment 

to say, forget it. 

 

Why didn't you, Mr. Minister, as I said earlier, why didn't  



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

you just stand up here and say, we're going to give you no 

information at all because you said also in here, Mr. Speaker, 

the member from Churchill Downs said in here that the 

information we're asking for, this would be a book that would 

rival the New York telephone book. 
 

Well that's got to be just straight, pure arrogance because 

there's a lot of names in the telephone book in New York.  

There happens to be 14 million people there and we're only 

talking about a total of a million people in Saskatchewan.  If 

the whole million had a job in Social Services it wouldn't be 

nothing like New York. 
 

So you know that shows you the arrogance of our minister, that 

he's just trying to make fun of our questions.  He's trying to 

make fun.  But anyway, let's just say he's having his fun.  And 

we thought today that this minister, seeing that he's been 

around a long time, that this minister would come in here today 

and have a little different attitude than just walk over top of us 

and say, we're going to give you nothing and here's my 

amendment -- take it or leave it. 
 

Well it's not fair, Mr. Speaker.  It's not fair, never mind to us 10 

people in opposition here, never mind us.  It's not fair to the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan.  It is not fair because 

they have absolutely misled and misrepresented the voters in 

the province of Saskatchewan when they said, we will have 

open, honest government.  Everything we do will be open to 

the public. 
 

So the first motions for returns, no, we're not going to tell you.  

Why can't you, Mr. Minister, why can't you list all the 

individuals.  Why can't you list . . . Mr. Speaker, why can't the 

minister list every individual in Social Services where I'm 

asking, why can't you have that answer for us as an opposition, 

so we can take out to the individuals in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the individuals that you've fired and the 

individuals you hired, and the ones you fired to make it look 

like you were just getting rid of anybody because of 

qualifications and then hire back your NDP. 
 

That's exactly, Mr. Speaker, what they're doing because it's 

happening right over here, as I said, in Rural Affairs.  They've 

done it, and they're doing it.  And if they do it in one 

department, they'll do it at all.  And there's no sense any 

member saying I'm on a witch-hunt. I'm not. 
 

I'm absolutely dismayed that this government would break 

promises this quickly.  If you're not ashamed of the people you 

hired, the people you fired, then for goodness' sakes, answer 

the questions that we want.  Answer them.  Because somehow 

or other, as I said in my earlier remarks . . . and I'm going to 

close, Mr. Speaker, because it's just wasting our time and 

everybody's time when the minister just stands up here 

arrogantly and just says, we'll give you what you want and 

that's all. 
 

Now I've been here for quite a few years, and I've seen both 

sides do this and I don't like it.  I've seen our government do 

the same thing.  Some of the people would get up and say, well 

we'll give you this and we give you that.  And I earnestly and 

honestly don't like that.  If we're doing things right, then when 

we're in government and you're doing things right, whatever 

you're asking for should be public information, and so it should 

be answered as public information. 

 

And if you say that we did it and we say you did in the 1970s, 

two and three wrongs don't make a right.  It doesn't make it 

right.  Campaigns were ran on this here type of promises -- that 

whatever we do, it'll be different than we did before.  We 

apologize, they said.  Right in these kind of departments right 

here that I'm talking about in my motion, that we apologize that 

we got arrogant in the '70s and that we didn't keep in touch 

with people; we apologize.  They said that election time.  They 

said it for eight years.  But we're going to be different.  But 

they're no different.  They're still arrogant. 

 

Now if I could see that we were asking all these here 16 or 17 

motions here, Mr. Speaker, or 16 motions, and maybe we're 

getting all of them -- maybe two or three that they were 

amending.  But when you amend them all, every one, that is a 

sign of an arrogant government not wanting the people to know 

what we're doing.  They don't want people to know, because 

we can only make the accusations out there that we know that 

people in the departments have been fired, rehired, replaced 

into other departments, then you do . . . when why we have to 

have the names.  We got the names of some.  And you do the 

blood test, and what are they?  They're a high profile worker 

for the NDP.  That's who's keeping their job. 

 

But to make it look for the public that we're a nice, clean 

government, and we're just cutting back.  We're just cutting 

back.  And we're going to go just by qualifications.  So they 

fire them.  They clean out so many in a department.  They let 

them go and then hand-pick the ones that come back in.  And 

those are the . . . That's why we're suspicious. 

 

And we have a right to be very much so, because we're 

checking these people out.  And the ones that they're hiring 

back are of their . . . They're people that we didn't let go.  We 

kept them.  And they blamed us for being such a arrogant 

government that we up and fired everybody.  Well I'll tell you, 

what we did in 1982 in hiring and firing makes the . . . I don't 

know, makes us look mighty good today, Mr. Speaker.  It 

makes our people, our ministers, very responsible.  It makes 

them look real good. 

 

I was the minister for the Crop Insurance Corporation and I let 

one man go -- one man, one man go. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did you fire John Lautermilch, Gerry? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Somebody's squabbling from their seat over 

there, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I wonder if the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote wants to get into the debate later 

on.  Otherwise I would ask him to let the member from Arm 

River have his say.  He's got the floor right now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I don't understand why he 

does that.  But he's talking about a one Mr. Lautermilch.  And I 

do remember that . . . or I believe that's his name.  And they 

always blame me for firing him.  Well I couldn't help that he 

become 65 years of age and he had 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

to just lay off on his own.  I didn't never had a thing to do with 

him ever, and he knows that.  And I'm not going to respond to 

his questions -- his stupid questions from his seat. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member to please 

address his remarks through the Chair, not to individual 

members in this Chamber.  Why is the member on his feet. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Would the member entertain a question? 

 

The Speaker: -- Will the member entertain a question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes I will. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes he will.  The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- My question to the member, Mr. Speaker, 

is if the one member that the member referred to as having 

fired while he was minister of the Crop Insurance would be 

John Lautermilch who was an area supervisor for Crop 

Insurance, and if he recalls firing him about a month before he 

was due to retire at the age of 65. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I will say this statement and 

I'm saying it under oath, and it's an absolute fact.  I fired one 

man in Crop Insurance and that was the chairman of the Crop 

Insurance, Mr. Campbell.  And anybody else that was ever laid 

off when I was minister was fired completely by the board and 

nothing whatsoever to do with me entirely. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the member standing on his feet 

would like me to ask . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I was wondering if the member 

would permit another question about whether or not he ever 

interfered in firing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member is out of 

order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can see why that 

the members when I am talking about the election promise that 

they broke that they would never hire and fire, and there 

wouldn't be political patronage to no end. 

 

And that's exactly what they've done.  It's been the biggest 

political patronage I've ever known in my political career.  And 

the Minister of Justice stands to the feet and when he says that 

a person like Jack Messer is hired because of his qualification, 

and never thought of any political patronage whatsoever -- well 

he was the minister of Agriculture when I come in here, for 

goodness' sakes.  So no wonder when I start to rub them a little 

bit that they start to get antsy and want to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind the member 

that he is referring to Social Services and not to the total 

government, and I wish he would direct his questions to the 

amendment and to the question before us. 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry we got 

off the subject, but I guess it's because they have started asking 

me questions.  Let's sincerely get back onto the subject then, 

Mr. Speaker.  I've said very sincerely to you, Mr. Minister, 

we've already voted on this your amendment, but they've 

allowed me to come back in and make my comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister will reconsider to answer 

yes to all the questions that I've asked in this here motion for 

return, no. 17.  I wonder if he will do that.  Because if he will 

answer all those questions, you'll find that things will go much 

smoother in this House, because your arrogance, Mr. Minister, 

is what's causing a lot of problems in this House. 

 

Every place we move, whether it's department from 

department, from minister to minister, they sit there and snicker 

and they won't answer.  Will you, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 

minister, as I take my place, will you consider giving us the full 

answers to this motion for return, no. 17?  Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

If not, we're wasting our time, and we might as well just say 

absolutely no to them all and not even bother putting 

amendments in, because what you're giving us through the 

amendments is not what this opposition is after. 

 

What we're after is what you're taking out, and now that's the 

sign of arrogance.  But, Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister, will 

he or will he not comply with what I'm asking? 

 

(1600) 

 

The Speaker: -- I know we have taken the vote already on this 

return. However, as all people know, the purpose of the 

member speaking in the House, number one, is to have it on the 

record; number two, to influence other members.  It may be the 

member may have influenced some members on changing their 

minds, therefore I will put the question again on the return on 

the amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 28 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 28 

showing: 

 

Regarding the decision to pull the province out of the national 

standardized tests: (1) whether the Minister of Education 

consulted with any groups or persons prior to the decision 

being taken. (2) If so (a) the names of the individuals 

involved in the consultations; (b) the dates and locations 

where the consultations occurred; (c) the content of 

representations made to the minister. 

 

I so move. 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For reasons given previously under 

other motions with precisely the same wording, I move that the 

motion be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after "decision being taken" be deleted, 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

If so, the names of the groups or persons involved in the 

consultations. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would certainly appreciate the opportunity to make a few 

comments regarding the motion that I presented to the 

Assembly -- a motion I believe that is very pertinent to 

educators across this province, and not just educators, but 

certainly parents and the school-aged children in our province, 

and not only in our province but across our country. 

 

We've heard a fair bit the last little while, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about the national standardized testing program.  And as we 

met with the Regina Chamber of Commerce recently, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we were informed the chamber has taken a 

very strong position on the idea that there should be a 

standardized testing form across Canada. 

 

And they have indicated to us, Mr. Speaker, that they feel it 

would be very appropriate in light of the fact that national 

standardized testing is done in a number of other provinces 

across Canada, and they feel that it would just show to the 

educators across this nation that to enter into a national 

standardized testing program would indicate that Saskatchewan 

certainly has the ability to compete with the best of them, if 

you will, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think what I have found and what many people have 

indicated, the feeling was that when you talk about national 

standardized testing program, you're talking about a whole 

program dealing with every subject that is available to the 

students across this province.  And the indication we had from 

the chamber of commerce was that they feel that if we address 

the maths and the language arts, that we would show to the 

people, to parents . . . 

 

And I certainly get a lot of complaints from parents about the 

fact that there seems to be fewer and fewer days that our 

children spend in the school system, fewer and fewer days that 

they're actually spending at their desks and learning.  And it's a 

concern that has been raised with me.  And I'm sure members 

in this Assembly, members on the government side of the 

House, have had the same concerns raised. 

 

When we think of the fact that our school system is roughly 

200 days, when you take off teacher days and when you take 

off the . . . in our division and I believe right across the 

province now there is an extra hour a month that is given for 

teachers' in-house time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we find that 

actually there are fewer and fewer hours and minutes that our 

students are actually in the class-room learning. 

 

And it would appear to me that it would be very important, and 

it certainly wouldn't hurt to look at a  

standardized program and involve the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I think it would be appropriate . . . the 

motion we put forward is appropriate. 

 

And the fact that we were asking whether the minister, whether 

the department, whether the government in fact sat down with 

individuals and groups such as home and school organizations 

or parents and even students or even teachers to discuss the 

standardized testing program, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

it is fair for us to ask that question. 

 

And it is certainly fair for us to ask the minister to disclose the 

times, the dates, the places, and the information that took place 

or the information that was made available and certainly the 

comments that were made to the department and to the minister 

and to the cabinet, they in government, and whether or not 

cabinet and government actually listened to the individuals as 

they made their presentations. 

 

I think that in our discussion with the chamber of commerce, it 

appeared to me that their reasons for a standardized testing 

program weren't unreasonable.  I think they felt that the process 

of education in this province is one that can be competitive and 

that can compare, can compare right across this nation.  And it 

might be a way also of letting people know across Canada, and 

indeed maybe in North America, that we have a top-notch 

educational system in this province. 

 

So whether to say no to a standardized testing program, one 

begs the question and begins to wonder whether or not we 

indeed can compete if that's what the government is saying, if 

that's what the minister is saying, and if that is what the 

department is saying. 

 

So I think it is imperative that we have all the information that 

we're requesting.  It is imperative that we indeed find out from 

the minister who they consulted with.  And we would like to 

know who was involved and the individuals that were 

involved.  I believe when we asked for the individuals or 

names of individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason we do 

that is because we want to see if there was a broad section and 

a broad group of people that had some input into the decisions 

made by the department and by the cabinet and by the minister. 

 

And the fact that we continue to ask for dates and locations 

indicates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if indeed the dates and 

locations as the minister indicates, the Deputy House Leader 

indicates are not available, then one begs and one has to ask the 

question if indeed this consultative process was followed 

through and if in fact the government did sit down and talk to 

interested groups across this province regarding education. 

 

Because I believe education is very important.  I believe people 

right across this province feel that the more we go and the 

closer we get to the 20th century, the 21st century, as we go 

proceeding to the '90s, as we proceed into the year 2001 and 

on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, education is going to become more 

and more important. 

 

And in fact we'll find that a high school diploma may not take 

you very far.  And we will find that our students are 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

going to be required to learn more, and they're going to require 

more and more students, but will probably be required to take 

further education by going to university or entering into 

technical institutes or other forms of education that are 

available to increase their knowledge so that they could enter 

the work-force that will be . . . the highly technical work-force 

that we will be seeing in our society in the next few years. 

 

So I think, I believe it's important that the department, that the 

government, and that the minister take the time to talk with 

groups and to consult.  And the questions we are raising today 

talk about the consultation process. 

 

And we feel very strongly that for the minister to delete 

anything from our motions takes away from the motions and 

takes away our ability to gather information so that we can 

inform the public we are indeed addressing the concerns that 

they raise with us on a daily matter. 

 

So I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I again ask the 

minister to reconsider his amendment and provide this 

information that we have asked for. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 30 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well this motion is 

relatively straightforward, the same as the ones that we've done 

earlier here today, Mr. Speaker.  The motion is such: 

 

Regarding the decision to retroactively apply regulations 

pursuant to The Saskatchewan Crown Minerals Act from 

January 1, 1974 as if those regulations had been in place 

ever since that date: (1) Whether the Minister of Energy 

and Mines consulted with any groups or persons prior to 

the decision being taken. (2) If so (a) the names of the 

individuals involved in the consultations; (b) the dates and 

locations where the consultations occurred; (c) the content 

of representations made to the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's fairly straightforward.  The 

government opposite has told us since the session began prior 

to the budget that they consulted with groups throughout the 

province.  We are simply asking the government where those 

consultations took place, who they were with, and to provide 

information to us. 

 

The information that we've received from various groups 

around the province with respect to The Saskatchewan Crown 

Minerals Act have suggested to us that there's been very little if 

any consultation.  And we'd like the government to provide us 

with the information so that we can judge for ourselves.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  For reasons 

stated, ad nauseam actually, under previous motions, I'm 

going to skip the comments.  I will move that the motion be 

amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after "decision being taken" be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

"if so, the names of the groups or persons involved in the 

consultations." 

 

The Speaker: -- I'll have to send this back to the . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You gave the wrong one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's exactly what I did; I gave the 

amendment for the motion the previous motion which was 

stood.  I assume the House will treat that as a non sequitur and 

I will move the motion be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after "regarding decision to" be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

amend The Adoption Act and The Child and Family 

Services Act: (1) whether the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could I ask . . . I believe we are 

on no. 6, order for return no. 30? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  Motion to be amended as 

follows: 

 

That the words after "The Saskatchewan Crown Minerals 

Act" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

whether the minister consulted with any groups or 

individuals prior to the decision being taken; if so, the 

names of the groups or individuals involved in the 

consultations. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

(1615) 

Return No. 31 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The motion 

that we have before the House is similar to the other motions 

that we have been presenting today.  But I want to put some 

remarks on the record concerning this motion and the question 

that we're asking.  And it's dealing with The Adoption Act and 

the child services Act as presented by the Minister of Social 

Services. 
 

And the motion asks that various bits of information be 

provided to the House and to the public on whether or not the 

minister had done any consultations, on who she consulted 

with, what dates and times and locations, etc.  And the previous 

motions that have come to the floor of the House, the 

government has changed these motions to delete some of that 

information. 
 

But I would like to read from Hansard of July 2, Mr. Speaker, 

from the member who is the Social Services minister.  And 

basically what we're asking about in this motion that I have 

presented is about the release of information that could be 

released through The Adoption 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

Act and Social Services Act. 

 

And from Hansard of July 2, 1992: 

 

Amendments 5 and 6 are strictly housekeeping 

amendments that were recommended by solicitors at the 

Department of Justice simply to clarify the relationship 

between section 18 of the Department of Social Services 

Act and confidentiality provisions in The Adoption Act 

and The Child and Family Services Act. 

 

The member went on to say further: 

 

The members also talked about the lack of consultation 

with agencies.  Again the members opposite were 

mistaken.  With respect to the two major amendments 

which make changes to the legislation, the following 

groups have been consulted:  the Saskatchewan adoptive 

parents association, Royal University Hospital social 

services and legal department, Christian Counselling 

Services adoption program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister has indeed done some consulting 

with the general public.  And we're asking in the motion that I 

will be reading later, to provide us with the names of all of 

those groups that she had consulted with.  We're also asking 

that the names of the individuals that were involved in those 

consultations be provided us, that the dates and locations be 

provided, and that the contents of the representations made to 

the minister also be provided to the House. 

 

Further on July 2, 1992 from Hansard, the minister read from a 

document, a letter from one of the groups that she had 

previously mentioned she had consulted with.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to read to you a part of that letter that she read 

into Hansard: 

 

. . . we sincerely thank you for consulting with our 

executive on several adoption issues.  We support the 

Department's efforts in the Area of Intercountry adoptions 

and changes to The Adoption Act regarding independent 

adoptions as far as it goes.  We appreciate your response 

in the area of permanency planning and the goals set out in 

search of permanent families.  We continue to emphasize 

that children not be detained in the system either as foster 

children or permanent wards any longer than is absolutely 

necessary.  We are aware of the Department's support of 

our proposal for funding, and look forward to input from 

your office . . . 

 

Signed by the president of the association. 

 

My colleague, the member from Arm River, then asked the 

member a question.  To quote from the member from Arm 

River: 

 

Madam Minister, would you give me a copy of that letter, 

please?  I'll enlarge a little more while I'm getting that 

letter.  I guess what I want to know is the date on that 

letter.  Do you remember what the date on that was letter 

was, Madam Minister? 

The Minister of Social Services' response:  "It was May 13, 

1992." 

 

So that you see, Mr. Speaker, the minister herself has already 

provided us with some of that information.  She has provided 

us with the names of three groups with which she had 

consulted.  She has provided us with a copy of some 

correspondence that she has in dealing with this issue, these 

two Acts.  She has also provided us with the date of that 

correspondence and that it came from the president of one of 

those organizations.  We are asking for very similar 

information on all that consultative effort that she went through 

as to exactly who did she consult with, the individuals, times, 

dates, locations, and what those consultations were all about. 

 

And part of what those consultations were about was about the 

changes that were being made in those Acts concerning 

confidentiality.  But we want to know specifically whether or 

not that consultation did take place and what the 

representations were and what the minister's responses were. 

 

The minister responded again on July 2, 1992, in Hansard, and 

I'll quote: 

 

No, there will be no change at all with respect to adoption 

-- the rules of adoption, the confidentiality of information 

with respect to adoption. 

 

Later in response to another question by the member from Arm 

River, the minister responded: 

 

Yes, Mr. Chairman.  This Bill, Bill 13, will not affect in 

any way whatsoever adoptions that occurred prior to this 

Act. 

 

We would like to know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not questions 

of that sort were part of the consultation process and the 

correspondence back and forth between the parties involved.  

We believe that the House should have access to that 

information. 

 

I would like to read my motion now, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Regarding the decision to give the Minister of Social 

Services the power to unilaterally decide whether or not to 

release personal family information in any form the 

minister chooses under The Adoption Act and The Child 

and Family Services Act: (1) Whether the Minister of 

Social Services consulted with any groups or persons prior 

to the decision being taken. (2) If so, (a) the names of the 

individuals involved in the consultations; (b) the dates and 

locations where the consultations occurred; (c) the 

contents of representations made to the minister. 

 

Thank you.  I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For reasons mentioned under earlier 

motions, I move the motion be amended: 

 

That all the words after "regarding the decision to" 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

amend The Adoption Act and The Child and Family 

Services Act: (1) Whether the minister consulted with any 

groups or individuals prior to the decision being taken. (2) 

If so, the names of the groups or individuals involved in 

the consultations. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm glad that 

the minister is prepared to provide us with the names of the 

groups and the individuals that were consulted with, but I'm 

surprised that he is not willing to give us the dates and the 

locations and some of the contents, when the minister herself 

was prepared to give us part of a letter, she was willing to give 

us the date in which that letter was sent. 

 

It seems that one part of the government is prepared to be 

accommodating, to facilitate the business of the House, 

whereas the House leaders themselves, on the government side, 

are not prepared to do so.  And I believe that's a shame, that 

one small clique within the government circle is prepared to 

dominate their ministers and not allow them to provide the 

information, that I'm sure in the cases of some ministers they 

are more than willing to provide to the House, because they 

have already done so. 

 

On July 2, 1992 in Hansard, the minister did provide us with 

some of the information dealing with the consultation she was 

holding with some groups.  And those groups being the Royal 

University Hospital social services and legal department, the 

Saskatchewan adoptive parents association, and the Christian 

Counselling Services adoption program.  She named those 

three.  The minister has said that he will provide us with the 

names of whatever consultations they took place. 

 

But she also went on further, Mr. Speaker, and provided us 

with part of a letter that was part of that consultation, and with 

the date of that letter.  And I'm surprised that the minister is 

unwilling to provide that kind of information for the other 

consultations that took place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the minister to reconsider his 

amendment to allow us to have access to the information that 

we have requested in this motion and in the other similar 

motions.  Thank you. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 32 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well once again we 

find ourselves rather concerned about the individual rights of 

people in our province.  And just so that I won't be talking 

basically to myself, I will try to inform the people of the 

province as to what's going on by quickly reading the motion 

so that they can understand what I'm talking about: 

Regarding the decision to give government employees power 

to forcibly enter premises without a warrant or other 

approval of the courts, under The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act:  (1) Whether the Minister 

of Environment consulted with any groups or persons prior 

to the decision being taken. (2) If so, (a) the names of the 

individuals involved in the consultations; (b) the dates and 

locations where the consultations occurred; (c) the content of 

representations made to the minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that when a government is going to 

take this kind of absolute power, absolute power to infringe 

upon all of the rights of privacy through a Bill in this 

Assembly, making it law, it is absolutely then imperative that 

the government disclose all of the information about its process 

in coming to the conclusion that it has a need for this kind of 

all-encompassing power. 

 

(1630) 

 

The right to privacy in a democratic country is probably more 

highly valued than anything else.  If we in a democratic 

country don't, for example, have the right to be in our 

businesses and our homes without harassment by a police 

force, then we have the very distinct possibility that we can be 

identified with countries like Russia, or the SS (Schutzstaffel) 

in Europe and those kinds of things.  And I don't think the 

government wants to have itself tied to that kind of view of the 

approach it's taking. 

 

So they must, in order, in order to show the people that they are 

not in fact trying to become a militaristic-style police state, 

they must come clean with the people and tell them exactly 

what consultations they had, who advised them, what they were 

advised on.  That gives the people some idea of why the 

government is taking the action that it is taking. 

 

I don't think personally that there's an argument strong enough 

for giving a government agency this much power.  Surely the 

system that we have in the British parliamentary system, and 

through our evolved democratic process of justice, has 

provided us with the opportunity to get warrants to search 

anything through a court system, a system of rules that protects 

the individual and gives him rights. 

 

Surely the government on the other hand is willing to show 

who they consulted with if they're going to take those rights 

away.  And that's exactly what is happening here.  And we 

have to know who told the government that it was necessary to 

take people's private rights away.  Who would have given that 

kind of advice, and what would that kind of advice had been, 

and when would they have given that kind of advice? 

 

If they can't supply that, then I'm saying to the people of this 

province and to this government that they probably never had 

any of such advice; they only decided that they would seize 

again by the force of legislation in this Assembly the right to 

take away the private rights of individuals.  And the right to 

privacy in one's own business or one's own home in this 

country is almost a 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

corner-stone to our democracy.  It has at least got to have a 

parallel of being one of the major corner-stones in our society 

that keeps our democratic right to freedom available to all 

citizens. 

 

If a militaristic type of police force can be allowed to walk in 

and search your premises or take over your establishment 

without even going through the processes of the court system, 

the people of this province have a right to know where the 

government got that kind of advice, who they consulted with to 

get that kind of advice, and why they think they can justify it.  

And they have to supply us with the dates and the times and the 

communications they had. 

 

Otherwise it's a sham.  Nobody will believe that they did these 

things, that they consulted.  Nobody will believe that there was 

any meetings if there are no minutes.  Nobody is going to 

believe this government ever again if they don't start to show 

where they got their ideas from and who is supporting them 

because it is clear to me that in an issue where the fundamental 

rights of democracy are taken away from people, they have 

probably not got any support in the general public.  No country 

in the free world has this kind of sweeping power without 

justifying it to the people and showing them exactly how 

they're going to use it so that it doesn't take away the 

democratic rights of freedoms, privileges, and the rights of 

individuals to some degree of privacy. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the ministers involved here ought to 

advise their colleagues to not only pass this, but to give the 

information, to support it fully, to give themselves the 

opportunity to save grace and face in the eyes of the public 

again.  They have to do that, Mr. Speaker, very soon, or they'll 

never ever again have the confidence of the people of this 

province. 

 

So I urge you members in the government, consider this 

seriously.  Think about this.  This is a very important decision 

that you're making today.  I know that probably someone's 

going to stand up and move an amendment.  And that 

amendment will strip the guts out of all of the meaning of this 

particular motion.  And when that is done, they will then 

attempt to pass it to make the people think that they've done 

something to try to give a faade to their so-called fair play 

when in reality they won't be doing anything to clear 

themselves of the accusations that are being made out there that 

they are nothing but powermongers that are trying to set up 

within the province of Saskatchewan a socialist police state. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  We have all 

sorts of interesting visitors here. 

 

This is with respect to item no. 8, return no. 30. For the reasons 

stated under earlier amendments, I am going to move the 

motion be amended: 

 

That all the words after "regarding this decision to" be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

amend The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act: (1) whether the minister consulted 

with any groups or individuals prior to the decision being 

taken; (2) if so, the names of the groups or individuals 

involved in the consultations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's not hard to 

be a prophet in this Assembly any more because we just said a 

minute ago that someone in this government would stand up 

and amend this motion and tear the guts out of it and try to 

create a faade that they were then going to vote in favour of it 

to make the people think that they in fact had done something 

positive when in fact they are doing exactly the opposite. 

 

They're taking away, with this government, the rights of 

individuals to privacy.  They are circumventing the entire 

British parliamentary system and the parliamentary system that 

has evolved our justice system in this province.  The court 

system and the court structure that we have developed over 

hundreds of years of evolution is being just kicked in the teeth 

and tossed aside, giving some government agency the power to 

literally walk in and take over individuals' lives.  That will not 

wash in the province of Saskatchewan.  It is tantamount, 

absolutely tantamount to a socialist, communist police-state 

action and it will be used as such.  I absolutely believe that it 

will be abused. 

 

This government has no sense of control in abuse.  They have 

no sense of control within their own ranks.  And they will use 

this as a power tool to seize control of people's lives and to 

force them to comply with socialist doctrine, and fear will be 

put upon this province that no one in their right minds will ever 

come here to do business again.  It just absolutely is not going 

to be in the cards for anybody ever to locate in this province 

with this kind of socialistic, communistic philosophy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Can I speak on the motion, Mr. Speaker . 

. . on the amendment, sorry. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member was a little bit late in rising to his 

feet, but I will recognize him. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thought you 

were going to read the amendment out and so that's why I was 

waiting just to hear it to make sure I had the right one. 

 

But I would like to read a comment by the Minister of the 

Environment that she made on May 27 in Hansard where she 

admitted, Mr. Speaker, that consultations had taken place and 

that meetings with the stakeholders had been part of the 

process leading up to the . . . bringing this Bill before the 

House. 

 

And what we're asking, and what the minister has agreed to 

provide a part of, is the names of those groups and individuals 

with whom the minister had met.  But he is changing the 

motion to eliminate where these people met and what was part 

of their discussions; what the dates were.  And I'd like to read 

from the minister: 

 

Public consultations and meetings with stakeholders have 

convinced us that Saskatchewan people have given this 

government 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard July 14, 1992 

a mandate to improve environmental protection in the areas 

covered in all of the legislation examined here today: air 

quality, the control of ozone-depleting substances and 

environmental management and protection. 

 

Well, all we're asking, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister 

provides us with where those meetings took place and the 

dates.  Were these consultations actually before the Bill was 

introduced to the House or was it after the Bill was introduced 

to the House? 

 

That's very important because if it was after the Bill had been 

introduced to the House, it just shows that the government had 

already had their mind made up on what the legislation was to 

be and then they went out and told those people -- as the 

minister called them, the stakeholders -- told them what they 

were going to do.  Didn't ask them how this was going to affect 

them.  Didn't ask them what concerns they might have about 

the issues. 

 

So if the minister would provide us with those dates and the 

locations and what was being discussed, then the entire public, 

the entire province of Saskatchewan, would know that the 

government is indeed being open and honest; that they are 

consulting with the people that are affected, not just simply 

presenting their legislation and telling the people what they are 

going to do. 

 

We have seen that happen in other areas.  The consultation 

with the bottling industry took place as the Bill came to the 

floor of the House and the minister told them what they were 

going to do. 

 

So that's why we're asking in all of these motions that the dates 

and the locations and the times be given so that the public can 

know that the consultations took place prior to the Bill coming 

to the floor, rather than coming . . . the consultations taking 

place after they came. 

 

Consultations after are very important also, Mr. Speaker, 

because once it hits the floor of the House, it gives the general 

public the opportunity to see the Bill and to think on it and to 

present their concerns.  But there are certain groups in the 

general public who are known to have an interest in certain 

items. 

 

Did the minister consult with the construction industry?  The 

construction industry is very concerned about this legislation. 

 

Did the minister consult with manufacturers?  Manufacturers 

are very, very concerned about the item, the issue of being able 

to enter premises without a warrant.  Because if that is allowed 

to happen, then the minister can designate her department 

employees to enter into a premise.  They can take out whatever 

they want, whether or not it is exactly related to the 

environment or an infringement on the environment Act. 

 

That is a possibility that could happen.  And that is one of the 

things that the general public is concerned about.  Are the 

processes that I have in the manufacturing centre sacred, or can 

the Minister of the Environment take them and release them as 

public knowledge without my having any opportunity to have a 

say so? 

So, Mr. Speaker, we would like that the minister does indeed 

present to us the names, the dates, the location, and the 

contents of those consultations.  Thank you. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 33 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 33 showing: 

 

Regarding the decision to impose user fees on chiropractic patients: 

(1) Whether the Minister of Health consulted with any groups 

or persons prior to the decision being taken. (2) If so, (a) the 

names of the individuals involved in the consultations; (b) the 

dates and locations where the consultations occurred; (c) the 

content of representations made to the minister. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  For reasons 

stated under previous motions, I move the motion be amended 

as follows: 

 

That all the words after "Regarding" be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

changes to chiropractic health care: (1) Whether the Minister of 

Health consulted with any groups or persons with respect to 

these changes.  (2) If so, the names of the groups or persons 

involved in the consultations. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just a few brief comments, Mr. Speaker.  The 

more it goes, the worse it gets.  I mean, we can't even get to the 

10th or 12th word in the motion now.  The minister has to cut it 

off after the first one.  I mean, is there anything in the English 

alphabet, Mr. Minister, that doesn't frighten you?  Is it so bad 

that you are frightened of . . . Regarding the decisions to 

impose user fees.  I mean, a fact of life is, Mr. Minister, that's 

what's happened.  And that frightens you. 

 

I think the comments, Mr. Speaker, that have been made by my 

colleagues all through this debate, my previous comments on 

the diabetics in this province . . . I mean it just goes on and on.  

How can people reasonably, reasonably accept the Minister of 

Health's wellness model for the future, if she will not provide 

the public information on what she has done since becoming 

minister in regarding the way our lives interact with the health 

community? 

 

I mean, when the government is so frightened of providing 

information that they have to change every last word in a 

motion, we have a government that obviously is out of control.  

I have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, that if we shouldn't just 

dispense with this exercise altogether and forget about it.  This 

obviously is something that matters nothing to the government.  

It's something that they 



July 14, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

constantly harped on in opposition, went out and sought the 

votes of the Saskatchewan people to do it differently, and 

they're not doing a darn thing differently.  If anything, Mr. 

Speaker, they're worse than the previous government.  I mean 

the hypocrisy of these people goes beyond belief. 

 

I guess it just goes to the statements that we've been bringing 

up in this legislature on another piece of business.  We've read 

into the record how hypocritical these people are on different 

topics, and health now seems to be one that frightens them 

immeasurably.  We expect the Saskatchewan public to accept a 

wellness model predicated on people having access to services 

to keep them out of heavy care institutions, and we have no 

indication from the government or the minister where we're 

going in consultation with people that fundamentally work at 

keeping people out of heavy care institutions. 

 

Every question we ask is dispensed with.  It's just absolutely 

hypocritical for this minister to stand in the House, bring 

forward these amendments, and not even attempt to let 

Saskatchewan taxpayers know what the health care system is 

doing. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I've been 

listening very carefully to the proceedings this afternoon so far.  

And certainly the frustration that we, as members of the 

opposition are beginning to feel with the inability and the lack 

of desire on part of government members to come clean with 

the people of Saskatchewan and give us the answers that we're 

looking for . . . And we certainly witnessed this afternoon the 

attack on the democratic institution, as we know it, with the 

government using its heavy-handed techniques to force its way 

through, to uproot the democratic principles that this institution 

stands for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to be able to speak more adequately to the 

problem as we see it as far as the democracy within this system 

is concerned, Mr. Speaker, I would now move that we move to 

private members' motions no. 2, Mr. Goulet, to move the 

following resolution: 

 

That this Assembly support all efforts to strengthen parliamentary 

democracy in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and 

that it protect the right of all citizens to have their views 

debated in this Assembly by their democratically elected 

members. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The division bells began to ring at 4:52 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have been informed by the official House 

Leader that they do not intend to return for the vote prior to the 

time of adjournment tonight.  Therefore I will recess the House 

until tonight at 10:25.  The House stands recessed until 10:25 

tonight. 

 

It has been drawn to my attention that it is the opposition 

House Leader who has informed me that they do not intend to 

return tonight for the vote.  Therefore the House stands 

recessed until 10:25. 

The division bells continued to ring until 10:30 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- It being 10:30 p.m. and the time of daily 

adjournment having been reached, the superseding motion now 

lapses.  This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 

 


