




















































Hansard: May 04, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 161 

 May 4, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Sonntag, seconded by Ms. 

Hamilton, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Britton. 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- As I said just before supper, I'll be speaking 

against the amendment and supporting the original motion. 

 

Now just before supper I'd covered the aspect on responding to 

some statements made from the members from the other side, 

mainly from the member from Wilkie and the member from 

Kindersley.  And we were talking about deception and not 

caring and not having the courage.  These types of themes that 

they were using were precisely that which they themselves 

were reflecting, not only in the 10-year history of 

Saskatchewan but still today. 

 

It's very important that when we look at this, that indeed in 

many cases when you have made a mistake, a mistake of this 

proportion, should be looked upon very carefully by them and 

start accepting some of those things that are hurting 

Saskatchewan people today. 

 

I mentioned something about the North; now I want to move 

into aboriginal people.  I think it's very important on Indian and 

Metis issues for me to cover not only the history of land but 

also the aspect of self-government and inherent right, as well 

the justice system and the need for self-reliance as well as the 

importance of our culture, customs, and traditions.  So I will 

start out by making a summary statement in regards to the 

history of the three parties, the Liberals, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party), and the Conservatives. 

 

As I mentioned just before supper, the Liberals when they were 

in power spent about 2 per cent of their budget, approximately 

$8 million, for the North and for aboriginal people.  And I had 

mentioned as well that Progressive Conservatives when they 

were in power had spent a little over 1 per cent, which totalled 

$58 million in the year 1989.  And I'd mentioned in the last 

year the NDP were in power we had spent 4 per cent of the 

budget, over 4 per cent of the budget and about $128 million on 

the North and for Indian and Metis people. 

 

And I was saying that this was about $70 million more than 

what the Conservatives had spent approximately seven years 

later.  So the record in the Public Accounts was very clearly 

that the NDP will be helping not only northern Saskatchewan 

but Indian and Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I mentioned earlier that the Conservatives did not even 

bother in their 10 years in power mentioning the North or 

Indian and Metis people.  I went through the 

aspect of the throne speech and the benefits to the North in 

regards to the areas of jobs and developing housing, sewer and 

water, and so on.  But I was trying to do a comparative analysis 

on it. 

 

Now I want to get into the topic of the issue of 

self-determination and self-government.  I feel that it's very 

important at this stage in history, especially in relation to the 

experience as it related to Meech Lake, that Indian and Metis 

people were an important part of not only Confederation but 

the whole history of what was called, at that time, British North 

America. 

 

And Indian and Metis people have been also an important 

player throughout this development of government which has 

proceeded, you know, not only from the proclamation of 1763 

-- you know, after the Seven Years' War -- but the Quebec Act 

of 1774 and then onwards to the BNA (British North America) 

Act of 1876 which is now of course the Constitution Act of 

1982. 

 

And I think that in regards to self-determination, a lot of the 

people during 1982 to 1987 felt that we had to start giving, you 

know, recognition to Indian and Metis people.  A lot of people 

had felt a certain degree of injustice, which I will reflect back, 

especially in my comments on land, a little bit later.  And in 

regards to the inherent right to self-government, I really feel 

that a lot of the public have moved on support on this issue 

ahead of a lot of politicians in Canada. 

 

But I want to say that as far as the NDP here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we are remaining in the forefront of recognizing 

that inherent right, you know, to self-government.  And we are 

proceeding to move forward with that position in regards to the 

constitution.  And I think that's a very important and qualitative 

improvement over what happened in Meech Lake. 

 

So I would like to also mention that in relation to the 

constitution there is always the issue of justice.  And we see 

what happened -- I mentioned just before supper -- what 

happened in the United States when there is a feeling that the 

justice system may not be fair.  And we have seen that in 

regards to our initial understanding even on the case of Nerland 

and the inquiry, you know, that our government is proceeding 

on with. 

 

But I think what is more important is an overview on justice 

itself.  We are having reviews not only for Indian people but 

also for the Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And we're looking at the very important area of youth.  There's 

a lot of youth out there and there's a lot of issues relating to the 

youth on stresses in life and the hardship that they're going 

through.  As it relates to justice we are looking at that issue and 

particularly as it relates to Indian and Metis people. 

 

We're also looking at the issue of policing and legal 

representation as well as sentencing, court services, and 

corrections.  So we're more or less looking at it at a fairly 

comprehensive overview and we have built on our fine 

tradition of co-operation and are moving forward in these 

areas.  And I was very, very happy when I saw this particular 

topic in the throne speech. 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

When I look at the issue of self-reliance, a lot of the people will 

say yes in the area of politics and the right to be responsible for 

themselves and the right to say yes, we can be self-governing.  

But in any country in the whole world the most important 

question all the time is the issue of self-reliance.  And when 

we're looking at the history, you know, the economic and the 

socio-economic aspect of life has to be part and parcel of any 

form of self-government.  So we're looking at this issue as well 

in regards to self-reliance.  And I was again very pleased to see 

that in the throne speech. 

 

I also saw in the throne speech, combined with the preceding 

statements, the need for the respect, the true respect for the 

culture, the customs, and the traditional values of Indian and 

Metis people.  And with that I think I will say a few words, you 

know, in Cree in a reflection of that.  And I would like to pay 

respects to the listeners who are Cree speakers out there, as 

well as all other cultures that are represented in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Many times many of the Cree speakers will come and thank me 

for having spoken Cree in the legislature and explaining the 

proceedings, and also explaining that which was put forth in 

the throne speech.  And so with that, I will say a few words in 

summarizing the content of the speech that I was making.  So 

with respect to all the languages, you know, in the province of 

Saskatchewan and Canada and the world, I would like to say a 

few words in Cree. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

I was just giving an overview in Cree in regards to the throne 

speech that the member from Moose Jaw says . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And that means of course, you know, our 

regular complimentary comment here in the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- And so I'd like to proceed now on the area of 

land.  And in the issue of land we look in historic terms on 

land.  When we saw a lot of the Europeans moving into North 

America, a lot of them had been displaced from their lands in 

Europe.  And many of them . . . and even in the modern day 

history in Asia or South Africa, and in many places, there was 

a lot of displacement of land.  There was therefore a great 

feeling of concern for the people in regards to, you know, 

coming into North America in over the past couple and 200 

years . . . 300 years and really seeing the vast, you know, 

amount of land here in North America. 

 

And as history proceeded, the Europeans and the First Nations 

of North America started making treaties and dealing with the 

land issue.  And that became to be the essence of international 

treaties during that time. 

 

When the treaties were made though, a lot of the land was not 

properly done.  There were not . . . It was not fully concluded, 

so there was outstanding land entitlements.  And when we 

created . . . when the province became a province in 1905, we 

did not have the rights to the resources.  And when we had that 

Natural Resources 

Transfer Agreement, it was recognized in a particular clause 

here on section 10 that the land entitlement would be respected. 

 

So when we now look at the history of that time, I would like 

to let the people of the province know that a lot of the land 

issues during that time, as far as the settlers were concerned, 

had been settled.  Now let's take a look at the land, especially 

today when a lot of farmers are losing their land, you know, to 

the financial institutions and it makes it very difficult to look 

forward to the future when you are losing that land. 

 

(1915) 

 

But just during . . . by the time the 1930 Resources Transfer 

Agreement had come into place, approximately 31 million 

acres of land had been transferred to the settlers in the province 

of Saskatchewan through the free Homestead Act and on the 

paid Homestead Act that came in, you know.  Just around prior 

to the 1930s approximately 6 million acres had been there, so 

approximately 37 million acres had been there for the settlers, 

which totalled over 900,000 by 1930. 

 

Now when you look at the relationship on the corporate side, 

we saw that the amount of land provided for the railroad 

companies in the province of Saskatchewan was 15 to 16 

million acres of land.  We had 15 to 16 million acres of land for 

the railroads, of which about 6 million was for the CPR 

(Canadian Pacific Rail). 

 

When we looked at that aspect as it relates to the Hudson's Bay 

Company, there was about 7 million acres of land for the 

Hudson's Bay Company in western Canada, of which over 3 

million acres of land were in the province of Saskatchewan 

alone.  So here we are, we had about 37 million acres of land 

on the Homestead Act and then we had about 15 to 16 million 

acres of land in regards to the corporations and about 3 million 

acres of land for the Hudson's Bay Company.  The schools 

themselves got 4 million acres of land at that time, but a lot of 

people don't recognize this. 

 

You see this in Chester Martin's 1935 history, one of the 

famous historians in Canada of which I take these facts and 

figures that I'm throwing out.  He said that the treaty land 

settlement at that time was 1.2 million acres -- 1.2 million acres 

for people who had the original control and authority over this 

land.  So there was approximately a million acres of land in 

regards to aboriginal people, a little over a million acres on 

approximately over 60 million acres of land, you know, for the 

new peoples.  And so when people talk to me about the history 

and when I read Chester Martin's history, then I recognized the 

degree of the history of the fight for fairness that Indians have 

been searching for in the province's history. 

 

So when we're preceding towards in our throne speech, you 

know, the settlement of the outstanding land entitlement, you 

know, I was indeed very pleased that we were indeed looking 

at that. 

 

Today when the government was around, the government on 

the other side was providing 12 million acres of land for 

Weyerhaeuser -- 12 million acres of 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

land for Weyerhaeuser -- but only they would not proceed to do 

a proper settlement although they had the chance for it.  And 

when I looked back on it, I saw that even the Primrose Air 

Weapons Range had 1.5 million acres of land.  I did a little bit 

of research and I found out that the parks in Canada have five 

times more land than Indian land in Canada -- five times more 

park land.  We also found out that there was, even in 

Saskatchewan, three times more park land than there is, you 

know, treaty Indian land. 

 

So when we talk about settling of land, that is exactly what we 

mean, that indeed the land is something that needs to be looked 

for.  So on a concluding comment I would like to say this.  I 

was very pleased with the sense of compassion and the sense of 

fairness of this budget, not only as it related to the North but as 

it related to Indian and Metis people.  As we're looking for, you 

know, the constitutional solutions for self-government and for 

other issues such as land, we have to realize that government 

needs compassion, and that is what I saw in the throne speech. 

 

So with that, I would like to say very clearly that I support, you 

know, the original motion on the throne speech and I go against 

the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

don't believe, Mr. Speaker, I've had an opportunity yet to 

congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker.  And I 

would like to take this opportunity to do so, and as well 

congratulate all the members of the Legislative Assembly who 

were re-elected or elected for the first time. 

 

The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, talks about reform to the 

health system.  And we in Saskatchewan are very proud of our 

history in medicare.  We're proud on this side of the House, and 

also on that side of the House over there, to be New Democrat 

because medicare is without doubt our most honoured 

accomplishment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- For 20 years after the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) came to power in 1944, this 

economically poor, sparsely populated, and isolated prairie 

province led the way for the whole continent in its 

development of publicly administered health care services.  In 

1945 cancer care was made free.  In 1947 Saskatchewan was 

the first jurisdiction in North America to introduce universal 

medical care insurance in accordance with the five fundamental 

principles of medicare: comprehensiveness, universality, 

accessibility, public administration, and portability. 

 

This province pioneered a health care system which became a 

model for the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and for the world.  

And we did it because Saskatchewan people translated 

Saskatchewan values into practical programs to benefit our 

people.  The health system owes its success to the pioneers of 

medicare, to the men and women of Saskatchewan, to Douglas 

and Lloyd and Blakeney, and to many, many others.  And now 

it is time, 

Mr. Speaker, to change, to move to a new generation of 

medicare. 

 

Change is very exciting but it is also very, very difficult.  If we 

are to make changes quickly and effectively we must do so as a 

community, as an entire province pulling together.  And today I 

want to invite the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan to 

join me and our government in a genuine, honest, and open 

discussion of why we have to change and where that change 

might take us. 

 

And let me say, Mr. Speaker, that as I've travelled throughout 

the province in the last few months, communities all across the 

province are ready to embark on that change.  In the health care 

changes we shall preserve the basic principles of medicare -- 

universality, accessibility, comprehensiveness, public 

administration.  But that doesn't mean that every available 

health care service has to be fully funded by the taxpayer. 

 

With new technologies and new procedures, the health industry 

is growing rapidly, Mr. Speaker, and the increases in health 

have been greater than the rate of inflation.  And still, until 

very recently, all governments in all provinces have been 

united in their devotion to the expenditure of a great deal of 

money on health services.  And I still believe that we can and 

we must fund essential health services -- hospitals, doctors, 

nurses, special care homes. 

 

But if we are to maintain universal access to basic health care 

services, we cannot continue to provide unfettered funding 

when, as a province, we face the reality of a crippling debt.  

There must be a long-term strategy to improve services and to 

reform the system.  We simply must do more with less. 

 

There is so much that can be done, Mr. Speaker, in the area of 

reform, that will reduce costs and will improve health care and 

the health of Saskatchewan men, women, and children.  These 

changes are long overdue, and they should be done regardless 

of our dire fiscal situation, although the fiscal situation may 

speed up the rate of change. 

 

In the last 10 years, what we have seen is the status quo in 

health care maintained.  We saw the Murray Commission at an 

expense of $1.8 million, I believe, Mr. Speaker, travelled 

throughout this province and come up with recommendations 

that were not implemented by the former government. 

 

Communities, however, across this province, Mr. Speaker, are 

ready to respond.  And we've witnessed that already as we've 

moved with major health reform in the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon, where we amalgamated the hospital boards and 

Wascana Rehab in Regina, for example, under one interim 

umbrella board to remove the duplication in health care 

services, and to consult with the community to determine the 

extent of the Regina Health Board and the Saskatoon Health 

Board's mandate in the future. 

 

These were major changes.  And those two cities pulled 

together and they have done a fine job in establishing their 

interim board and working towards the objectives of 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

co-ordinating and integrating health care services and 

providing a real continuum of health care services for the 

people in Regina and Saskatoon and area. 

 

And now we are witnessing the same phenomenon, Mr. 

Speaker, in Prince Albert, which just earlier this week or 

towards the end of last week, have signed an MOU 

(memorandum of understanding) to do a very similar thing, but 

they are even going further than Regina and Saskatoon.  And 

I'm telling you, the citizens of Prince Albert and the health care 

providers in Prince Albert are proud of what they've done, Mr. 

Speaker, and they have every right to be so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- These changes are positive, they make 

sense, Mr. Speaker, and they will provide major savings to the 

taxpayers of this province.  But more on the reasons for 

structural reform later. 

 

Now let me briefly review the system as we now have it.  

There are a few important characteristics which I hope give 

people pause for reflection.  First, the system works for most 

people but not all.  People who are relatively well off, well 

educated, and white have as a group very good health status, 

among the best in the world.  But native people, poor people, 

and uneducated people continue to have relatively poor health 

status, even while using a lot of health services. 

 

The World Health Organization, Mr. Speaker, defined health as 

being virtually anything that impacted on physical and mental 

well-being, and that anything that impacted on physical and 

mental well-being should be taken into consideration in the 

provision of health care services. 

 

And as you know, Mr. Speaker, as opposition Health critic, that 

is the definition or the scope of health care services, rather, that 

I brought to the attention of the members opposite when they 

were in government, on numerous occasions. 

 

That means, Mr. Speaker, that things like environment and 

housing and socio-economic status, racism and sexism, and all 

these things, impinge on a person's health.  And therefore, a 

department of health should be concerned about providing 

services to reduce or eliminate those problems. 

 

Second, Canada as a nation and Saskatchewan above all, have 

built the health system around a large network of institutions.  

Our province has the most hospital beds per capita in the 

world.  We have more hospitals than Quebec, with a population 

six and a half times as large as ours.  The special care home 

situation, Mr. Speaker, is similar.  In short, in Saskatchewan 

more than any other jurisdiction in the world, health and health 

care have come to mean beds and more beds. 

 

Third, the relationship between health spending and the health 

status of the population is growing a bit distant.  Canadians are 

healthier than Americans.  But Americans spend 1.5 times as 

much as we do per person.  Our health status is worse than that 

enjoyed by Japan and the 

Scandinavian countries, who spend less than we do.  And the 

citizens of Greece, Spain, and Portugal seem to be as healthy as 

we are despite spending much less than we do on health 

services.  Surely this is food for thought. 

 

(1930) 

 

Fourth, for decades there has been a growing consensus that the 

key to good health is prevention, not cure.  Life-style changes 

achieve more concrete improvements in health than dramatic 

surgical advances.  Wonder drugs are indeed wonderful but 

good nutritional habits may be far more important.  MRI 

(magnetic resonance imager) machines are no doubt dazzling 

achievements but are powerless against fetal alcohol syndrome 

or the hopelessness and illness that come with unemployment 

and poverty. 

 

Fifth, most analysts of the health system agree that not enough 

of the health dollar goes to prevention and health promotion. 

 

And six, the incentives in our funding system have encouraged 

high-cost services and a focus on sickness.  Health care 

workers, and I include doctors, nurses, therapists, and a host of 

other occupations, are paid, Mr. Speaker, for what they do, not 

what they achieve.  In health care the process has been the 

product and this too calls for rethinking. 

 

As Health critic before the last election and now as Minister of 

Health, I have been advocating a shift in the health system 

towards a more wellness-oriented approach.  Health care 

providers and the public at large are understandably anxious to 

have this concept more fully explained. 

 

In the coming weeks I will be releasing a document which will 

set out in some detail what we mean by wellness and today I 

want to outline some of the main principles and objectives and 

their implications for our health system. 

 

The corner-stone of the wellness model is that it is better to 

prevent ill health than to cure it and better to promote healthy 

life-styles than to intervene after the fact.  In embarking on a 

wellness model, we recognize two fundamental facts:  one is 

that the system we have all developed over the past few 

decades is reaching the limits of its effectiveness; the other is 

that health is more than just health care.  In fact for many 

people the key to improved health has nothing to do with 

doctors or hospitals or expensive machines but may have 

everything to do with sewer and water, housing, and the 

environment. 

 

These realities suggest a number of key changes in the way we 

think about health and the way we provide services.  I cannot 

go into detail about these changes today but I can share with 

you the general approach.  The wellness model will be just a 

slogan, Mr. Speaker, unless wellness-oriented programs get 

more emphasis and more funding.  The community-based 

health sector is small.  Home care, public health, and other 

community services account for under 10 per cent of the health 

budget.  Put simply, their share will have to grow. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

I spoke earlier of the enormous number of beds we have in the 

system.  We do not need all of these beds.  We can eliminate 

many special care home admissions with improved home care, 

Mr. Speaker.  We can shorten hospital stays with improved 

home care, day surgery, and more effective hospital discharge 

planning.  We can look at how we prescribe and use drugs, 

order tests, make referrals, and do a thousand other things, Mr. 

Speaker, that add up to $1.6 billion per year. 

 

In going over the key characteristics of the health system, I 

neglected perhaps the most important fact of all.  For the most 

part we really don't know very much about how effective and 

efficient our system really is.  The debates are loud and long 

but there's no clear resolution, and one argument is as good as 

the next.  Health services are largely unexamined and 

unevaluated.  The result is that services come and go because 

of lobbying and interest group advocacy, and change is often 

arbitrary. 

 

Earlier this year the government announced the establishment 

of the Health Services Utilization and Research Commission.  

The new function of the commission is to look at how we use 

health services and recommend how we can do so more 

effectively and more efficiently.  The commission will provide 

solid, scientific evidence on which to base changes.  In addition 

to conjecture and opinion, the debate about services and 

resource allocation will include scientific evidence now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can think of no better way to build a consensus for change to 

the benefit of both the citizens and their wallets.  If the 

commission is successful in its work, it will change more than 

just a service here and a regulation there.  It will have a 

profound effect on how all of us -- government, service 

providers, and the public -- think about health and health 

services.  It will encourage us to think more carefully about 

costs, and outcomes, about whether we're getting value for 

money, and about what really underlies good health. 

 

But government clearly has a responsibility to lead.  And this is 

a challenge we take up with great optimism, and in a spirit of 

renewal.  The changes we make will be to improve the health 

of our citizens.  That is our goal, that is our focus, and that is 

our mandate.  Our mandate is not to spend money and build 

buildings, even though we will do these things as they are 

required.  Our mandate is to do whatever government can to 

make people healthy.  If we can do that without some services 

we have delivered before, we will do it.  If we need to change 

some services, we will do it.  If we need to create new services 

to meet contemporary needs, we will do it. 

 

It will no doubt be tempting, Mr. Speaker, for the hon. 

members opposite to claim that all of this talk about the 

wellness model and the need for change is mere camouflage for 

our urgent fiscal agenda.  Frankly, we could justify changes on 

the grounds of saving money alone.  The people of 

Saskatchewan know the enormous debt burden we carry and 

have elected the New Democrats to return us to fiscal sanity. 

 

The wellness model may indeed save us money, Mr. Speaker.  

After all, if people are healthier and if we can 

deal with problems before they become serious and expensive, 

costs will go down.  But the wellness model is not about 

money; it is about health and the way to achieve it.  We could 

build 50 new hospitals and 5,000 more special care home beds 

today without improving health.  We have an obligation, Mr. 

Speaker, to renew our health system so that people use it to 

help them become well and remain well, not only to fix them 

when they are sick. 

 

Finally, I want to talk about the role of government and its 

services in producing and maintaining health.  Obviously, our 

services and our funding are important.  Much of the system is 

unquestionably necessary and useful, but a little reflection 

leads us to admit that the healthiest people are those who don't 

have to use very many services at all.  Healthy people have a 

combination of good genetic luck, adequate incomes, 

self-esteem, support of families, friends, and communities, and 

good life-styles. 

 

The government can create some of these benefits, but not all.  

It is wrong for any government to promise good health and it's 

wrong for people to believe it is the government's job to deliver 

it.  All the government can do is fund and deliver services that 

create opportunities for good health.  The rest is up to 

individuals, families, and communities, and, alas, to nature and 

to the luck of the draw. 

 

In the coming months -- and I hope years -- we will try to turn 

our sickness system into a wellness system, but it will not be 

easy.  Some things we can change quickly, others will require 

changes in attitudes and values.  There are many, many thorny 

issues to tackle.  And we all know that the status quo always 

has a big following and a strong lobby.  But this government, 

Mr. Speaker, has the political will and the good intentions to 

see this reform through. 

 

I fully admit that change can be slowed down, or even in some 

cases halted, if partisanship destroys all opportunity for 

constructive debate.  If we in the political arena confine our 

agenda to bickering and grandstanding and scoring points, the 

health system and the public will be the big losers. 

 

Certainly we will misstep and certainly there will be issues on 

which reasonable people will disagree.  But I want all of us in 

the legislature to contribute positively to this change.  At a time 

when major change is required, it is hard not to recall the 

atmosphere of 1962, and I do not want to see this province 

relive the level of bitterness and hysteria experienced during 

that period. 

 

Our system is far from ideal and our finances are in a shambles.  

We have no choice, Mr. Speaker, but to change -- and change 

we will.  And the change will affect cities, and it'll affect rural 

areas, and it will affect institutions, and it will affect workers -- 

and it won't be easy, Mr. Speaker.  And it is the right of the 

opposition members to oppose every measure and take up the 

cause of every vested interest.  But I am convinced that people 

all throughout this province are anxious and willing to 

participate in the reform and to work together to improve the 

health system and to change the way we think about and 

approach the delivery of health care services. 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

People are pulling together throughout this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and I've witnessed it over and over again.  In spite of 

the tough times, in spite of the anxieties that surround change, I 

find communities all over this province coming forth with 

proposals as to how they can co-ordinate and integrate their 

board system and how they can move to a more 

wellness-oriented system.  They are optimistic about the new 

direction and want to do their part in participating and helping 

the health care system change.  All of us have had some part in 

creating this health system and all of us have a responsibility to 

promote wellness -- not just in our people but also in our 

balance sheet, in our health care system, and maybe, Mr. 

Speaker, even in our politics.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's a 

thrill and a pleasure to speak in this House on a throne speech.  

I was just thinking tonight it's my 14th year, but I believe it's 

the 16th throne speech that I have spoke in, but I am not 

exactly sure about that, but it's been quite a few. 

 

So I want to say thank you to my constituents of Arm River.  I 

say thank you for electing me and sending me back to represent 

them.  I said this last fall after the election, but I thought I 

should put it on the record again seeing that they might have 

thought we were not even here any more, because we haven't 

even been sitting all winter.  So my constituents have wondered 

where I've been.  They know I've been looking after them out 

in the constituency, Mr. Speaker.  They know I've been looking 

after the constituency, but they'll think the legislature in Regina 

has just closed down.  Because never in my 14 years, Mr. 

Speaker, never, never in my 14 years has this House come in 

this late. 

 

Now I know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm talking about in 

a spring session, Mr. Speaker.  I'm talking about a spring 

session . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- . . . in a normal spring session, cause we 

said last fall in December, everything was supposed to be 

normal and that should have brought us back in here March, no 

later than the 15th of March. 

 

But even having said all this, it's . . . the NDP kept using, the 

government kept using this as an excuse, that they had to put a 

budget together.  They repeatedly used these words, that we 

were only elected in October.  They said, we were only elected 

in October.  The budget process doesn't normally start this late.  

We need time to fully prepare the budget. 

 

It seems odd that their counterparts in British Columbia didn't 

have any trouble did they, Mr. Speaker?  They had no trouble 

putting a budget together. 

 

Well anyway, they finally got up the courage and slowly but 

surely the NDP have let the people who voted them in, the 

people who put them on the government side of the House, the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, have let them down. 

(1945) 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd just like to remind the member that his 

lectern is hiding the mike.  If you could just move the lectern 

over a bit.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that without a mike 

they can hear me.  Mr. Speaker, the people in this assembly 

have always heard me with or without a speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I don't mean that kind of speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP have inflicted more 

pain and more hardship onto the people of Saskatchewan in the 

short six months than a government ever in the history of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The NDP increased taxes and cut back 

funding.  In six short months, Mr. Speaker, the NDP broke 

nearly -- I won't say all, nearly -- every promise they made to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  They just about got them all.  

They raised taxes, engaged in blatant patronage and eroded our 

health care and education systems. 

 

Now let's just go back, Mr. Speaker, to election time when the 

Leader of the Opposition at that time, the member from 

Riversdale, he said it over and over and over again.  And I'm 

going to repeat it over and over again for the next four years so 

we don't forget it.  Then he said:  I will balance the budget; I 

will lower taxes; I will create jobs; I will go to Ottawa and get 

money for farmers, and I will keep all the farmers on the land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, six months later he's having a problem here.  

And I mean I feel sorry for him because he's going to have a 

problem.  The only one that I think he can live up to of all 

those promises is maybe in time balancing the budget.  But I'll 

get it to later on in my speech.  He may be able to do that but 

on the backs of whom?  On the backs of who?  On the backs of 

the sick? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would remind the members when the 

Minister of Health spoke there was no interruption.  Now I 

expect the same courtesy to be extended to the member of Arm 

River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP announced after the 

election -- quite proudly I might add -- that they won the 

election by not having a plan.  Their campaign manager, the 

new president of SaskPower, was quoted in the newspaper 

stating this fact.  I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 And after all of this work, we come out with no platform. 

 

 I know a lot of you were showing a little bit of concern, but 

the discipline and strategy and the logic of that contributed 

largely to us winning this election . . . 

 

Jack Messer said, Prince Albert Daily Herald, November 16, 

1991. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

So it was their plan.  That was their plan.  Jack Messer told this 

to the NDP party faithful.  They had no plan, no policy, 

therefore no mandate.  All they offered the people was empty 

promises.  They won the election really, Mr. Speaker, on 

deception. 
 

Now agriculture is where I'll be probably spending most of my 

time talking about tonight although I've got some comments to 

make on health and education, especially after I heard the 

Minister of Health talk tonight.  I must be making some 

corrections to her remarks tonight. 

 

The NDP promised to support agriculture and the rural way of 

life.  They said they would: 

 

 . . . negotiate with the federal government to stop the 

off-loading onto farmers . . . 

 

They said they would obtain 1.2 billion. 

 

 . . . $1.2 billion the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has identified 

was needed by the agriculture sector . . . 

 

Well it's sure too bad for the sake of the farmers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, that they couldn't have got that $1.2 

billion because that's exactly what our farmers in Saskatchewan 

need.  We need that to survive there right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- They said that GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) had to be changed.  They said they had to 

change GRIP so that it pays the cost of production for farming.  

They're going to change GRIP so at least pay the cost of 

production for the farmers.  Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Cutting out the red tape associated with GRIP and NISA is 

another goal of the NDP. 

 

They're going to cut out all the red tape. 

 

I'm not making these promises up, but took them from a 

newspaper article, and the article came from during the 

election.  The Moose Jaw Herald October 17, 1991, on page 2. 

 

Here's another one, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Banks and credit unions will be asked not to foreclose on 

farmers until a debt-restructuring program is put in place 

under an NDP administration . . . 

 

 If they don't comply . . . (the member from Riversdale) 

hinted, a moratorium on foreclosures . . . (would) be imposed 

upon them through legislation. 

 

Leader-Post, October 1, 1991. 

 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, to these promises?  If you travel 

on No. 11 Highway to Saskatoon, which the members that still 

drive cars and don't fly planes, will see the signs -- and excuse 

me for using his name -- Mr. 

Romanow, where is our moratorium?  It's on the signs all the 

way from Regina to Saskatoon. Where is our moratorium?  It 

was promised. 
 

It's a betrayal.  Have any of our farmers seen any money from 

Ottawa from this government?  There's been money come from 

promised money.  The NISA (net income stabilization account) 

money came, the $10 an acre, $5 came last fall..  And I know 

that the Minister of Agriculture has even tried to take claim to 

that.  But he had no claim. 
 

He went to Ottawa, and made a few flights down there -- in fact 

several flights, flight after flight after flight -- and I was talking 

to him at several occasions when he said, well I got you some 

money -- you're getting that $5 an acre.  Well for goodness' 

sakes, who's he trying to kid, Mr. Speaker?  Who's he trying to 

kid? 
 

That money was . . . You know where that money came from. 

Grant Devine made a flight that was successful.  Excuse me, 

Mr. Speaker, I mean the member from Estevan.  When he was 

the premier of this province, he was very successful in going to 

Ottawa and get money for farmers, but this government has no 

success there. 
 

They saw the NDP taking endless flights.  We saw them.  They 

were taking endless flights to Ottawa.  They were just a-flying 

down there. They were taking people and paying their way. 

They took the Leader of the Liberal Party.  They took other 

people. 
 

I wish they had asked me. I would have gone and I would have 

paid my own money.  I wouldn't ask the taxpayer to take me 

down there.  But you just took groups, planefuls down there. 

And they want money, but to no avail.  All they succeeded in 

doing was spending more money, but not receiving it, and in the 

process proved that their flights were flights of fancy. 
 

And GRIP, Mr. Speaker, what worry about GRIP?  Let's talk 

about GRIP.  That has been changed so dramatically.  Mr. 

Speaker, the GRIP has been changed so dramatically that the 

farmers cannot make any head or tail of it at all.  It's really 

serious. 
 

And if any member of this House thinks they know more about 

crop insurance and about farmers than I do, well I challenge 

them.  They may know as much but not any more.  I'll challenge 

anyone. 
 

And I know how to read what the farmers are thinking.  And 

they are not happy about the new changes and how they got 

fooled into it. 
 

Farmers have been asked to continue to participate in a program 

without the benefit of knowing how much coverage they will 

have for their farms.  They don't know how much they're going 

to have.  It's a just a guess in the wind.  Premiums are going up 

substantially for both GRIP and crop insurance while coverage 

is going down. 
 

Now if that's improved GRIP, improved crop insurance, please 

somebody from that side of the House, when they're up talking, 

explain to me because I cannot explain where this here 

additional coverage for less money is going to be coming from.  

Because it's not there.  It is not 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

there.  Individual coverage is gone; therefore, risk area records 

of seeding and production will affect the outcome of your 

farm's figures. 

 

Speciality crops.  Mr. Speaker, this is serious.  We try to 

encourage people to diversify in the farm and grow something 

other than wheat.  So here they got it, on the new program, 

speciality crops like lentils, canary seed, and canola are under 

pressure because the pay'll be the same as for wheat. 

 

So if something happens and you get hailed out, dried out, and 

you can't spend $100 an acre approximately -- it costs 

approximately $100 per acre to grow lentils, just for the cost -- 

and only collect . . . on the average of this province you'd only 

collect maybe a hundred dollars if something fails.  Even the 

market is higher, Mr. Speaker.  They didn't even insure this any 

wheres near what the market price is.  At least on wheat they've 

covered us now for a few dollars more than what the market is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one will deny that GRIP program needed some 

changes.  I'll stand here and say that it needed some changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No one ever said that the GRIP program 

was perfect.  We want changes, Mr. Speaker, for the better, not 

for nothing.  This program is absolutely . . . well it's just 

nothing there for somebody that gets an average to a poor crop.  

And I want to go through some of the figures and show you. 

 

Why didn't you look, Mr. Speaker, at Alberta and Manitoba?  

They made some minor modifications.  There's a big difference 

between fine tuning a program and cutting a program.  There's 

a big difference. 

 

Farmers feel short-changed and with good reason.  Each and 

every one of these concerns were brought forward to the 

government's so-called information meetings being held 

throughout the province.  Each and every question that 

concerned farmers were evaded.  They had one in Bethune.  

They had one in Craik.  They had one at Davidson.  And they 

were invaded, they were not being . . . they were not answering 

the questions because they didn't know the answers.  They said 

ask the member from Rosetown, he brought it in.  They were 

just brought in real quickly, just like that, brought in.  These 

people were said, go out and sell this to the farmers.  Go out 

and sell it.  Go out and sell it. 

 

The so-called experts, I felt sorry for them.  The ones in the 

know couldn't answer the farmers' questions; I felt sorry for 

them.  I know, Mr. Speaker, I'm quite familiar where the 

member from Elphinstone's farm is, I could go through the 

figures and tell him how much money he's going to be short 

this fall.  That's because he's dry down there and he's going to 

be short a lot of bucks; he's going to be back here in cabinet 

this fall, Mr. Speaker, he's going to say, please Mr. Cabinets 

help save my farm, help save my farm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I know and I think it will happen because 

he's the power-house, the member from Elphinstone is one of 

the main power-houses for the cabinet and still represents, he 

represents the farmers in Saskatchewan because he is the only 

real, true farmer that understands and I give him credit that he 

does understand.  I give him credit that he understands and 

that's why I think we'll see some changes the proper way.  He'll 

start to look into what blew but he'll have to find out when he 

gets that not-so-good a crop down there.  Hey, boy, my own 

cabinet blew it; my Minister of Finance blew it, that's what he's 

going to say, to save money. 

 

Farmers were so upset, Mr. Speaker, and they were so confused 

by the changes that they had to take matters into their own 

hands.  They're holding their own meetings throughout the 

province, trying to figure out what to do.  At these meetings 

they have been asking the government to revert back to the 

1991 GRIP program, the program that we on this side of the 

House developed, Mr. Speaker.  The farmers have said they 

will not stop until the new NDP GRIP is gone . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone 

asks what program did I sign up for.  I had no choice, I had no 

choice, I didn't have . . . the member from Rosetown-Elrose 

made the statement the other day, I am so proud to announce 

that there's 300 new people signed up for GRIP. 

 

You know maybe there's 300 new farmers like me, because I 

didn't have . . . I'm not a new farmer but I never carried crop 

insurance since 1980.  I thought it was a conflict to carry crop 

insurance when I was a minister and I didn't take it.  I could 

have nothing to do with it whatsoever, but I put crop insurance 

on this year so I had to take the 1992, I had to carry the 1992. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No choice. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No choice.  So don't anybody, you know, 

say to me in this House, what did you take, the '91 or the '92?  

As if the member from Arm River had a choice and my 

constituents don't have one.  I mean how ridiculous can we be. 

 

I was in this rally in Regina, Mr. Speaker, there was 

approximately a thousand farmers there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- We didn't do like . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . there was, I was there and I counted every one of them, and 

when I got to 996 I had to count the four NDP MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) who were there to make it the 

even thousand.  Now that's kind of playing with the figures but 

that's what the media said approximately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Approximately, approximately 1,000 

people.  So let's don't fool around with the figures here because 

when you have rallies . . . I've seen you have rallies out here 

and you bring the people, the union people, to gather out here 

to give you your numbers.  We didn't gather them up.  We 

didn't go gather them up to 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

come to farm meetings in this city. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution calling for 

the Government of Saskatchewan to reinstate the 1991 GRIP 

program was passed unanimously, but I can't.  I can't say it was 

because there were a few NDP MLAs at that meeting and they 

wouldn't . . . a couple didn't stand up at all.  I seen them.  They 

didn't stand up and vote, but the rest of them -- the other two or 

four, whatever was there -- they stood up and they voted 

against it. 

 

(2000) 

 

An Hon. Member: --  Are you finished? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, I'm not finished, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member from Elphinstone wants to hear me for a while yet. 

 

The NDP did not consult . . . The biggest mistake they made 

was they didn't consult with farmers to change the GRIP.  Now 

you tell me, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite, when 

they're going to change GRIP.  They talked about it all last 

summer in '91, they talked it in this House, they talked at 

election time -- changes to GRIP, changes to GRIP, and the 

farmers want changes to GRIP. 

 

So what did they do?  Leave it till the end of March-April to 

hold meetings to tell them what they're going to get.  Why 

didn't they have those same meetings, Mr. Speaker, the same 

meetings in December or January and ask those farmers what 

would you like for changes because you're the ones that said 

you wanted to change? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to be very fair.  If someone had asked 

my two sons and some of my neighbours at election time, 

would you like to see some changes to GRIP, they would have 

said, well sure we do.  But I'll tell you what kind of changes 

they want.  Here's what they want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . vote NDP. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The member from Elphinstone is being kind 

of foolish here tonight with his foolish talk because he's not 

being serious.  He's not taking this serious at all.  He is not 

taking me seriously and that means he's not taking the farmers 

of Saskatchewan seriously because I say I'm speaking on behalf 

of more farmers than he is, and that he ever did. 

 

Here's what farmers said they wanted for changes.  Say your 

farm . . . The minister of Crop Insurance is here.  Here's what 

they wanted.  You can go and ask; you'll get 9 out of 10 will 

tell you this.  That if my coverage was say 25 bushels an acre -- 

or 30 or 20, whatever it is -- and if I reach that coverage but I 

happen to grow a much better crop, I want that wheat to be 

mine from 25 and over, something like the program of this year 

if you get a good crop.  If you get over, they wanted that, but 

they wanted the old GRIP up to that point.  Then the second 

thing they wanted was the premiums to be taken off at the 

elevator as they sell their grain. 

 

Now that's what they wanted.  That's the two main things they 

wanted.  And if this government had been elected, 

we would have worked with the federal government because 

we almost got that in last year.  We just about got it.  We were 

running late; we were working on the . . . to helping the 

irrigated farmers in the province that . . .  We helped them. 

 

The member from Morse was in cabinet.  He came down to 

Outlook to speak to all the . . . along with a couple other 

members -- the member from Thunder Creek I believe was 

there -- when they had a real problem and saying, this is not 

suiting us, and they talked to the irrigators there one night and 

said, what do you want?  What will help you? 

 

So they laid out their plan and they came back to cabinet and 

that's what they got.  But are the farmers able to talk to you 

people?  Are they able to talk to the Minister of Agriculture 

and to the minister of Crop Insurance?  Can you go to cabinet 

to give them something they want?  No, sir. 

 

Nobody will tell me . . . I'm going to run the minister of Crop 

Insurance through a little example, if he wants to know how 

good this program is.  I'm going to use his own example.  Mr. 

Hartley Furtan came to meet our caucus here for a part of a 

day, explaining this your GRIP program and moral hazards.  

He kept talking about, we had to deal with moral hazards. 

 

I got two statements I want to say about moral hazards.  In the 

meeting in Davidson a farmer stood up and said: I'm sick and 

tired of the government and you saying about moral hazards.  I 

see five agents here tonight and three or four adjusters.  Now 

will one of them, without giving any names, stand up and say, 

did anybody see somebody farming to take in . . . farming the 

system and calling it a moral hazard? 

 

Another farmer got up and says: yes, you bet I did.  I did not 

put fertilizer on last year because of GRIP.  And the first 

farmer said: oh come on now.  You're not being fair at this 

meeting because you told me you didn't put it on . . . the 

fertilizer on because it's a $2 wheat.  That's why he didn't put 

the fertilizer on.  You wouldn't find a farmer out there that 

wouldn't have spent more money if it had been 4 and $5 wheat, 

so let's face the facts. 

 

This government over here has called farmers a moral hazard.  

When I was minister of Crop Insurance under this government, 

crop insurance takes care of moral hazards.  It's up to them.  If 

there's a moral hazard, blame the minister of Crop Insurance 

because they're not doing their job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- He's not doing his job. 

 

We set up a system that if an individual was farming for crop 

insurance or abusing the system, Mr. Speaker, what they would 

do is they could report it to Crop Insurance or maybe an 

adjuster would see a farmer that's abusing the system and if 

they weren't spraying . . . I'm going to use one name here 

tonight which became very, very well known throughout the 

province and that's Mr. Laird from Davidson.  He didn't believe 

in using chemical, which he 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

had his God-given right not to use chemical.  But they denied 

him crop insurance.  That government denied him crop 

insurance. 

 

So I looked at this thing and we looked at it as fair as we 

possibly could and took it to the board and we said, well this 

man and quite a few more like him feel that they have the right 

not to use chemical but how do we get covered for crop 

insurance?  So we come up with a system that an adjuster 

would go there two or three times, whatever was necessary, to 

do a weed count.  They got their crop insurance coverage under 

that method.  And that was a very fair method and Mr. Laird is 

a very happy man today.  And Mr. Laird, I am proud to say, 

wasn't happy with that government who he supported for many, 

many years.  He was a great help to me in that Davidson area, 

going out and saying, that government, the NDP government 

that I supported -- he knows I am saying this here tonight -- 

that I supported that government and they would not support 

me, and this PC (Progressive Conservative) government were 

fair in crop insurance and looked at my problems right and 

properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a moral hazard in the NDP.  

Their own figures, Crop Insurance's own figures . . . and I 

brought this to the attention of Mr. Furtan.  And we'll use a 

farmer that his coverage is 30 bushels an acre but he gets in this 

specific year, 10 bushels an acre.  And they're saying the 

market is $3.02 a bushel, but we're going to use 3.  So 10 times 

3, he is going to get $30 from the market-place.  Three dollars a 

bushel at 10 bushels an acre.  He is going to get . . . they tell 

him that the revenue insurance is going to be $30 an acre.  

Then he puts a claim in for crop insurance because he only got 

10 bushels an acre, for another $43 an acre.  So he got a total of 

$103 an acre on a 10-bushel crop.  If he gets that so-called 30 

bushels an acre, he gets $90 from the market-place, he gets 

another 30 from revenue, he gets 30 bushels an acre times $3 a 

bushel. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You've got it all wrong. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I have not got it all wrong.  He'll get . . . that 

shows them right there, Mr. Speaker, that they do not 

understand.  It is 30 bushels to the acre times $3 a bushel is $90 

an acre from the market-place.  He gets another 30 from 

revenue.  That is $120 an acre.  He doesn't get crop insurance 

so naturally he has done better at 30 and there is nothing wrong 

with that. 

 

So if he goes to 40 times $3 a bushel he gets a hundred . . . This 

is right off their own figures, right off your papers.  Right off 

your own papers.  And it's correct.  Your own papers are 

correct, Mr. Speaker.  The government's figures are correct 

here.  Forty bushels an acre times $3 a bushel is $120 an acre, 

plus the $30 for revenue is 150.  So it goes on up. 

 

But I said to him, Mr. Speaker, what does zero bushels give 

this man?  What does zero bushels an acre?  If he has a drought 

or the grasshoppers eat it or if he has hail or whatever, what 

does zero?  If you want to talk about moral hazard, zero gives 

him zero from the market.  He still gets his $30 from revenue; 

that's if the price of wheat stays at the $3 a bushel.  He gets his 

$30 but at a 30-bushel coverage he gets $90 an acre from crop 

insurance which 

gives him a total of 120.  So, Mr. Speaker, talking about moral 

hazard, he's going to take a look at his farm and he's going to 

look at his pocket-book, he's going to look at the bank.  And 

he's . . . They're after me and I haven't got the money to go 

borrow more money, and at 10 bushels to the acre, the 

grasshoppers are trimming off the edge, it never came up very 

good, and it's not a cloud in the sky -- and what am I going to 

get if I don't spray at all?  So he looks at zero bushels to the 

acre and he gets $120 an acre; and at 10 bushels to the acre he 

gets 103.  That is exactly the way it is if the price of wheat 

stays at 3. 

 

Now that's your figures, and Mr. Furtan looked at these people 

right here.  They looked at this caucus when I brought this to 

their attention and he didn't say anything for a moment.  He 

says, yes you're right, but when do you get zero bushels to the 

acre?  When do you get it?  Now that's exactly what he said. 

 

Talk about a moral hazard.  You're encouraging people, you're 

encouraging them.  It's not what you said, it's not what you 

said.  It's not what the government said, Mr. Speaker, when 

they said, we're going to stop this moral hazard; we're going to 

get those farmers and we're going to make them do this and 

we're going to make them do that.  We're going to control, and 

they're going to stop abusing the system. 

 

Well I'll tell you, the only system that they didn't abuse here is 

their own treasury.  That's why they done this in the first place.  

That's not hard to figure out what went wrong here. 

 

I must go back.  I missed one thought that was in my mind.  It 

was about an EA that works . . . executive assistant, executive 

assistant that works for the Minister of Agriculture in his 

office.  He comes from my town of Craik.  I know him quite 

well.  Mr. Speaker, this gentleman said to me, Gerald, you 

would get more coverage on my farm last year under the new 

GRIP than you would have under the '91 GRIP.  So he went 

through it and he proved to me that he would have got $15 an 

acre more, and I admitted that.  But I said, what was your total 

yield?  Best crop I ever had in my life -- 40 to 45 bushels the 

acre. 

 

What would have happened in a drought to that man?  Let's go 

back and talk about that.  Let's talk about the normal crop.  

When we come out with GRIP -- this government last year -- 

when we come out with the GRIP added to crop insurance, you 

take one or the other or both, and it was estimated on an 

average crop that you would be paying out $1.3 billion to the 

farmers of this province -- 1.3 billion.  All right?  The crop was 

extra good, excellent crop in the province -- second best in the 

history of this province -- and the price of wheat went up a 

little.  So I think it's going to be, from what figures I'm picking 

up -- this is just approximately -- about 7 or 800 million is 

going to be paid out.  But what would have happened, Mr. 

Speaker, to the treasury, if they had've had a 1988 crop?  What 

would have happened?  They would have been paid out 2.8 to 

close to $3 billion. 

 

That's why I want to make this very clear in this House, Mr. 

Speaker.  That is why we got the changes in GRIP.  The 

minister from Crop Insurance and the new Minister of 

Agriculture could not stand up to the Minister of Finance 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

who says, you've got to control this.  You've got to keep that 

buck from going out to them farmers because this government 

can't balance budgets if we get one poor crop in the next four.  

We won't be able to handle it. 

 

So they knew better.  The member from Elphinstone knows 

that I'm right; he knows that they're going to pay out much less 

money to farmers.  And if they get a real poor crop, they're not 

going to pay out much either because the premiums, the high 

premiums will pretty well cover it. 

 

What's going to happen to the farmers in Saskatchewan if they 

get . . . There's a lot of silence here right now, isn't there, Mr. 

Speaker, because they know I've hit a nerve.  It's the Minister 

of Finance that has said to this Treasury Board, and has said to 

the cabinet, you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, and you, Mr. 

Minister of Crop Insurance, you've got to go out and sell 

something I know you don't believe in; you've got to go out and 

do it.  Well I'll tell you, you're not selling it.  You'll never sell it 

to this side of the House and you can't sell it to your own 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You can't sell it to your own people.  Mr. 

Speaker, they're asking me why did I hop out.  I hopped out in 

1980.  I hopped in this year because I'm farming again this year 

and I had to have something, I had to have something.  And I 

will say it's better than nothing. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think if the members want to 

interfere, they could get together with the member from Arm 

River after he's finished.  In the meantime, let the member from 

Arm River make his speech. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to just 

go through a few pages of their own throne speech here, just 

touch on a few things in here. 
 

"A Mandate For Change," they've got in their throne speech -- 

"A Mandate For Change."  There's a few of them in here that's 

well put together. 
 

 We come together today, in the spring of 1992, a time of 

renewal, to set a new direction for Saskatchewan.  The people 

have given my ministers a mandate for fundamental change. 
 

Well that's correct, Mr. Speaker. They did; they want to see it.  

Then it goes on to say: 

 

 A community that lives beyond its means will not long 

prosper.  People want my government to get their financial 

house in order. 
 

Now let's be honest.  They're saying that we didn't have our 

financial house in order and we did, we did -- there's no two 

ways about it  -- we did create a deficit under the nine years of 

our government.  But why?  We didn't do it on the backs of 

people like they're going to do it.  The premier of ours in those 

days, the member from Estevan, said, my treasure will be on 

the line and it will go for farmers; it will be on the line for 

farmers. 
 

(2015) 

 

 

Now is that what you people are doing?  You just shut her right 

off when I just finished talking about it, Mr. Speaker, they shut 

her right off when the Minister of Finance says to the big boys, 

no money for farmers, cut them off because we've got to do 

what we promised to do, balance these budgets and that's great.  

I hope we can balance the budget and I give all the credit to 

you if you could do it but for goodness' sakes don't do it on the 

backs of thousands of farmers that are going broke out there, 

losing their farms every day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

we'll get in to some of that. 

 

You've got, at the bottom of the page here it says: 

 

 Putting Our Financial House In Order 

 

 My ministers are determined to restore common sense and 

competence to the management of the public treasury.  

Government must learn once again to live within its means. 

 

Okay, promise to manage the financing of the province with 

good management.  Now how are they going to do this?  

There's the problem they're going to have and I'm going to tell 

you the problem you're going to have and I sure hope and I 

pray that for goodness' sakes that they have good luck doing 

this and I would give them the best of wishes to be able to 

balance budget and not cut people back. 

 

What's going to happen when you, the Department of Parks, I 

just mentioned a few here, Highways, Environment, urban 

funding, rural funding, senior citizens drop-in centres and any 

sports complexes . . . you can't tell me that those aren't very 

important departments that I just mentioned.  Two-thirds of the 

budgeting on the average from this province goes to health, 

education and social services, so if you start cutting back and 

cut and cut, it's only a smoke-screen out there, Mr. Speaker, 

that they're saying oh, we're going to cut back $400 a piece. 

 

I heard tonight on the television news that for car expenses, 

that they're going to save a million here and a million there. 

That sounds great and the people out there say, oh boy they're 

going to balance the budget by cutting back on some guy that 

has to take some more money out of his pocket to survive.  

That isn't it at all.  You are going to have to get into it because 

you can't cut out all these departments when . . . say we'll just 

use the example a $3 billion budget, we'll just use for example.  

That means 2 billion goes to health, education and social 

services so where are you going to . . . if you cut back like we 

did, that's what caused the problem. 

 

We had to in 1986, '87, we had to cut back 25 per cent. We 

were told by the same people that you get your money from, 

where your Minister of Finance just went to New York to 

borrow money and he's told the same thing exactly, that you 

have to be within your means.  And they said to us, you must 

cut back 25 per cent and we did.  We cut back 25 per cent in 

1986, '87 and if we had to cut any more it would have been on 

the backs of Parks, Highways, Environment and Agriculture 

and Urban and Rural Affairs and that's pretty serious stuff to 

get into because I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, when these nice  



172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

people over here go to tell all these people, you're going to 

have all these cutbacks, I don't know if they'll be very happy 

with you.  When you got tough times, there's a budget that one 

person wants to see balanced, and that's his own. 

 

The farmers out there and the business men in this province 

would kind of like to balance their own budgets.  That's who 

they want to see balanced budgets.  And I'm not opposing 

balanced budgets.  I think it's very essential, and I'm wishing 

you good luck in balancing budgets.  But we've already found 

out in the last six months, we've already found out how you're 

going to do it.  And you got people wild.  You got them really 

upset when you played around with kind of teasing them there 

for a little while with health premiums. 

 

Let's just . . . Oh yes, I noticed here in "Jobs and Economic 

Opportunities."  There's one here that really I'm going to follow 

through.  And I think our caucus is going to really follow 

through and see if this is going to happen.  They're talking 

about future jobs in this province.  And when I see this one 

here, this is a smoke-screen.  They're saying: 

 

 In total, there are currently more than 700 companies which 

have expressed an interest in either relocating to 

Saskatchewan or expanding their operations here.  If these 

businesses proceed with their plans, they have the potential to 

create or maintain more than sixteen-thousand jobs. 

 

Well I'll tell you, that's a smoke-screen because I wish them 

good luck again.  But it isn't going to happen, and you know it.  

You're just using nice words to be read from the podium here.  

You're just using nice words to make people happy -- this 

government's going to create.  They're not going to do it.  I 

wish you can, but it's not going to happen -- not going to 

happen. 

 

You talked about the population went up under the 

Conservatives.  It's sure going down under the NDP.  It's just 

the lowest it's been since 1930s.  The population in this 

province is the lowest now it's been and they've been going 

steady since the election -- steady.  They're just leaving this 

province.  And that's sad.  That is sad, Mr. Speaker, when 

people are leaving this province.  Well I've got a son that's 

going to leave to go out to British Columbia just for a six-week 

job to try to get a few bucks to help survive the farm.  Now 

that's not a job in Saskatchewan.  Find my son a job in 

Saskatchewan.  Find their sons jobs -- and their daughters.  

Find them one.  Find them one. 

 

So if the government doesn't do it, you got to go and . . . They 

don't have things coming into the province.  You don't have 

things booming.  And there's no jobs, is there?  Yes, 700 

companies talked about.  So why I brought this to your 

attention, Mr. Speaker, why I brought it to your attention, 

because we're going to watch very carefully and see if that's a 

smoke-screen.  We're going to watch if it's a smoke-screen or 

whether it's just forgot about in a few weeks.  We're going to 

watch you very carefully. 

 

Now there's something here that really bothers me here when 

you get this here NDP government talking about free trade.  

They sure got it all straightened out in their 

mind here. 

 

They said here that: 

 

 . . . Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement is a source 

of economic disruption and uncertainty.  Canadian exporters 

continue to be subjected to trade harassment by American 

competitors. 

 

 The GATT negotiations still under way in Europe, will have 

a profound effect on Saskatchewan economic future.  Yet, the 

federal government has done little more than provide 

provinces with after-the-fact briefing on its negotiating 

positions. 

 

 Similarly, the proposed North American Free Trade 

Agreement, with the United States and Mexico, offers 

Saskatchewan few benefits, and much cause for concern.  

Ottawa continues to bargain with limited involvement from 

the provinces. 

 

Now they said . . . they go on to say how they're going to get 

involved and they're going to control the United States and 

Canada . . . or United States and all of Canada and Mexico to 

get a proper agreement for Saskatchewan.  Well good luck, 

little socialist Saskatchewan.  Good luck if you're going to take 

on the United States and Mexico because . . . and all of Europe 

-- to try to get all these things to happen.  It's only a 

smoke-screen.  You know you can't make it happen. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We'll give it away to them. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, the member from Swift Current says 

he's not going to give it away.  Well I agree.  One thing you 

can't take away is the soil from this province.  It's here for ever.  

God put it here and God's going to take it away. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that our biggest problem in this 

country, that our biggest problem is that we had about a third of 

a century . . . we've had . . . the NDP have had control of a lot 

of provinces in Canada and Trudeau had control of Canada for 

17 years and there's what we're suffering for today.  We all 

know that.  When Trudeau went into government in the late 

'60s there were I believe 16 or $17 billion deficit, and when he 

left, a $187 billion deficit. 

 

Well the interest alone on that money will go for ever and ever 

so you'll never get it.  And we took over a deficit from you 

people that created a 300-and-some thousand . . . We took over 

three-some . . . I don't know the figures but's it's . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No.  My member says it's four and a half 

billion.  But I was given the figures.  It came out of the Gass 

report, out of your own report, your own people -- 

three-point-some billion dollars that we took over from you 

people.  But you don't . . . You like to holler and yell when I'm 

at you on that.  Take the deficit on that and take the interest and 

run that around till 1992 and see what you got. 

 

If you had left us in 1982 a clear slate, an honest, clear slate, 

we wouldn't be in this position today.  Now they can laugh all 

they want but that is the facts and they know it.  It's very, very 

clear. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

Just exactly the same, the way they left us in 1982, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly the same as when a farmer tells me, or a 

business man, that where do I go from here? I just missed my 

last fall's payment and I don't know whether I can make my 

next payment or not.  I said, you got no place but out or do 

some negotiating because once you miss, then the interest is 

going to get you. 

 

Well that's exactly what you people did to us.  You left us that 

deficit, hidden deficit.  I mean really a hidden one.  It was 

really hidden and it came out very clear.  It came out very 

clear, and you take and compound that interest right through 

until 1992 and say what you've got.  You got a lot more than 

the total deficit today.  It's exactly came out of his books. 

 

They like to use smoke-screens over there, Mr. Speaker.  I see 

in the throne speech, I marked another little mark beside the 

GRIP program which I hate to go back into but I'm going to.  

They said here, "My ministers recognize that much more needs 

to be done for the 1993 crop . . ."  They're already saying it in 

their throne speech that we've got to improve the GRIP 

program for '93. 

 

I want to tell you what happened in the town of Craik when 

they had their GRIP meeting out there.  The most intelligent 

question that the farmers said that was answered by their 

individual they had there that night, is when a farmer got up 

and said, this hall was rented last year for a GRIP meeting and 

the Department of Agriculture rented again tonight; have you 

got your lease for next year?  And that's exactly what they're 

thinking.  When you know you're going to change it for '93, 

why did you ball them all up in '92 for?  Why did you do this?  

Why didn't you let it go? 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in the throne speech they're talking about a . . 

. they say that the federal government owes us.  They just 

absolutely owe us and they want to hang their hat.  There's 

$500 million is still owing to Canadian farmers to cover grain 

deficiencies for the 1991 crop year.  It was very clear a year 

ago when they come out with GRIP that it was a rich program, 

a mighty rich program.  And that's exactly your third line of 

defence was built right in that program. 

 

And what did you do?  You threw it away and said, Mr. 

Federal Government, give us the money.  You threw what the 

farmers had to have for security, you threw it away.  You threw 

it right away.  And I'm hoping that the federal government will 

try and see fit to give us some more money out here, but so 

help me I don't know how they can even look at you when you 

threw what the good thing we had away.  You threw it away. 

 

When I've got a neighbour that tells me yesterday that, Mr. 

Muirhead, I was covered for $147 an acre on my farm last year.  

I produced 45 bushel average.  I just barely collected enough 

not quite to get my premium back but good enough on a good 

crop.  But he said, on the new program it looks like I'm going 

to be covered for about 112 or 15 if wheat stays at $3.  If it 

goes up I'll . . . 

 

So that's about a 35, $40 cut-back for this farmer.  Now that's a 

tough thing to have to happen and that's the same 

way right across.  The only group of people that are pleased 

with this program, the only group of people that are pleased 

with it, is some areas where they just don't know what drought 

is.  And they get good crops every year and they're . . . they 

have a . . . maybe if they get a 40-50 bushel crop they'll do 

quite well on GRIP.  But in my area and all this big vast area to 

the west, and all below no. 1 highway, that great big grain 

growing area is where they're so disturbed about this GRIP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk just a few minutes about health 

care.  The Minister of Health tonight up and mentioned all the 

so-called people that brought medicare to this province.  And I 

agree with her.  But she left out the most important one that 

introduced medicare to Canada, and that was John 

Diefenbaker, and don't anybody deny that John Diefenbaker 

didn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I got into an argument in this legislature, and it 

went into Hansard and went out into a paper, and I had an 

NDP from my riding write letters to the editor that I was 

wrong.  We did a research and put it back in and he had to 

apologize to me that yes, in 1937 John Diefenbaker is the first 

one to talk about a free medicare program for Canada.  The 

very first one.  So I was kind enough to say that the people she 

mentioned, they had a great part of the health care system of 

this country.  And Saskatchewan has the best.  But don't take it 

away from the one of the greatest prime ministers of this 

country.  The greatest statesman this country's ever seen is John 

Diefenbaker. 

 

I was not surprised, Mr. Speaker, when I see this government 

break their promises to support farmers.  That didn't surprise 

me at all.  I knew they couldn't live up to their promises.  There 

they didn't get their vote there and so they knew that they didn't 

have to. 

 

But when I first heard about the NDP's intention to introduce 

health care premiums, that at first, it kind of surprised me.  

Then I got thinking about it that maybe they had no choice in 

the matter.  Because I'm going to say, maybe this is not . . . the 

statement I'm saying is not on behalf of my party as me as an 

individual. 

 

I'm saying that I believe that that's the right thing to do with 

health care premiums and deterrent fees, but not by you guys.  

You are the wrong ones to even think about it.  You said you 

would never do it.  But I'll tell you right now, if the member 

from Estevan had even thought it in his mind, even thought it, 

every television set in Saskatchewan would have blown up.  

But you people got . . . you thought you got away with it.  But I 

don't even believe for one minute that you're even thinking of 

putting the health care premium on.  It was that trickery, that 

Minister of Finance again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(2030) 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- He says we're going to charge the people 

that go to see the chiropractors, we're going to put deterrent 

fees on, we're going to raise the drug plan up and we're going 

to charge premiums for health care, we're going to charge a 

deterrent fee.  And so their party goes wild and the letters come 

in, and the opposition 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

attacked you a little bit that you're the wrong people doing it.  

But they knew it was only just a front because we're going to 

back off and just soak the middle class with more income tax -- 

personal income tax.  You had that planned in the first place. 

 

Don't think that you're fooling the old member from Arm 

River, because you're not and you're not fooling this here 

people on this side of the House.  Because that's exactly what 

you're doing and I want all people listening tonight to 

understand and to believe that's what the motive of this 

government was, because they knew they would not get away 

with putting deterrent fees on and health premiums.  Not in this 

time, but I believe that maybe they'll find out that maybe they'll 

have to and another . . . they'll probably have the tax and then 

we'll still get the premiums.  They knew that they couldn't get 

away with taxing the sick. 

 

But they've had enough cut-backs already.  They've cut back on 

hospitals, they're taking about closing hospitals.  Goodness 

they're going to . . . when we were sitting over here, I can 

remember when the health critics from here would scream and 

holler if there was one patient and one empty bed some place 

that somebody couldn't get into.  Used to scream and holler and 

call us criminals. 

 

I can remember the Minister of Health sitting here one day in 

about 1986-87, and said that there's somebody died for the lack 

of a hospital bed -- brought the name of the family right to this 

legislature, and just said shame on you Mr. Government over 

there, closing down beds.  And really what it was that the 

hospitals in Saskatoon . . . this happens all over.  I guess they 

have to have holidays, the nurses -- and there was some of the 

wings they had . . . the administrators of the hospitals didn't fill 

those beds.  So this put this here opposition right on high didn't 

it?  They just went wild when they found out. 

 

So don't think you're fooling us.  You'll do anything.  This 

government, Mr. Speaker, will do anything they absolutely 

have to to balance this budget because that's the thing . . . the 

one promise they think if they can do that, deliver on that one, 

people will not notice the other. 

 

Actually, they put a stop to all health care facility projects for 

rural Saskatchewan.  And then they start talking about the 

health care premiums, of course.  Now, it looks like maybe 

they're backing off, but I guess we won't really know until 

Thursday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a big thing in my area that this government 

said we're going to restore the school based dental program.  

What's happened to that promise?  Where did it go?  Are you 

going to do it?  Are they going to do it?  There's no such a 

thing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Quill 

Lake said they're still looking for the equipment.  Well I'll tell 

you, if that's how crazy this government is, that they're not 

going to live up to their promise because they can't find the 

equipment, well I'll tell you, no wonder we got a problem. 

 

I can't believe this, Mr. Speaker, that they're not putting the 

dental program back in because they can't find the equipment.  

They can't find the equipment. Now isn't that something?  

What about the promise to the drug plan, to 

reinstore the drug plan to zero?  What happened to that?  

Where did it go, Mr. Speaker?  Gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, I wonder if she would 

remember a statement she made in this here House.  And it's in 

Hansard, August 21, 1989, and I'm going to read it into the 

record again. 

 

 The opposition is going to fight for health care.  We're going 

to stop any cut-backs and changes to medicare. 

 

 It's going to fight the erosion of the principles of medicare . . 

. I feel rather certain we'll be having a change in government 

next time around and then the public isn't going to have to 

worry about these problems. 

 

Louise Simard, Hansard, August 21, 1989. 

 

What in the world, Mr. Speaker, is her constituents thinking 

tonight?  What in the world would they be thinking tonight? 

 

Mr. Speaker, remember the NDP pledged to devise the finest 

next phase of medicare and hospitalization, which will pioneer 

for the 1990s health care what Douglas did in the 1960s. 

Remember that pledge?  You were the people that made it.  

How can the members across the floor hold their heads up 

when they're in their constituency?  I'll bet you they had a lot of 

trouble the last few weeks and they had a lot of trouble in their 

own caucuses and everything else.  I'll bet you it would have 

been interesting to be a little mouse in the corner of those 

caucus rooms in the last few weeks, to have it on tape. 

 

I feel sorry for the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I think there were too many mice in 

there. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I think there were too many mice 

because too many words were getting out.  Those mice talk.  I 

have a feeling that they were just deceived by the old-guard 

rhetoric as the people of the province were.  They were 

deceived by the front row -- the front row.  I wonder if the 

member from Redberry knew how hollow all of his party's 

promises were.  I'll bet he's gone through quite an initiation 

process. 

 

We on this side of the House, when it comes to health care, we 

can hold our head high, and we're going to hold our head high.  

We didn't make these suggestions.  We done the right thing.  

We put in the drug plan. It was moderate, the people after a 

while accepted it because you've got to have control.  And it 

did; it worked.  It saved the province a lot of money.  But what 

are these people talking about doing?  Doubling it. 

 

We did not raise people's expectations to such a level that they 

now feel completely betrayed.  We didn't do that, Mr. Speaker, 

to the people of this province.  We were honest about the need 

to make changes to the health system and the current Minister 

of Health boldly said, changes were not needed.  She said, 

changes were not needed.  And she stood here tonight for half 

an hour and 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

said all the changes we have to have.  But here she said before 

-- they're not needed. 

 

We over here don't have to be embarrassed that our major 

supporters are now being quoted left, right, or centre about how 

they are deceived by the party of their choice.  You people can't 

blow that over there.  Put your heads down because they should 

be down, every one of you. 

 

And I'm not talking about the Barb Byers, the George 

Rosenaus, either.  I'm talking about the real people of your own 

party, the NDP that said this would never happen.  You 

promised them that you'd protect health care.  You said that 

you would never, ever put premiums on; you'd return all these 

things. But you broke the promise to them.  You must be going 

through horror out there. 

 

What about the elderly, whether in your party or not, just the 

elderly in this province who they were told how the health 

program would be improved?  You told them that at election 

time -- it would be improved. 

 

I'm talking about the poor who were told the drug plan would 

be introduced.  What about them?  What are you doing about 

them?  You're just . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Raising their rates. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, raising their rates.  Your members in 

Saskatchewan, your federal counterparts -- they must be getting 

pretty nervous by now, Mr. Speaker.  They must be getting 

pretty nervous, especially when they've got an election coming 

up here right now.  NDP MPs (Member of Parliament) are 

hopping mad.  They don't agree with or like the direction their 

buddies, like the member from Regina Dewdney, are heading. 

 

I'm certainly very proud and very happy for the people of Arm 

River that just in April of this month, that we opened a health 

facility in Craik and one in Imperial because, I'll tell you, under 

the present government there won't be many of them 

happening, if any, out in rural Saskatchewan.  We opened up 

new health facilities in those two towns and the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood was there.  He's seen the big 

crowds of happy people.  There was over 300 at both towns.  

One was on a Friday, the next was on a Saturday the next day, 

and he was there and was a very nice gentlemen the way he 

handled himself and I thank him for the way he handled 

himself in my constituency.  And I was very proud of him and 

he's seen what a happy group of people we had.  So I thank the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood for coming and 

speaking at the opening of these two facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to talk for just a few minutes before I 

close, on a couple of subjects.  Education -- just a few words on 

education.  These are two departments that I'm really worried 

about over the next four years of the mandate of this 

government -- that's Health and Education. 

 

There's something happening in our school system out there 

and it's not just happening in Saskatchewan, it's the whole 

socialistic agenda moving right across North 

America.  It's attacking our young people, and if we don't, as 

adults, face up to what's happening in our schools . . . and I 

know there's members across there that will know what I'm 

talking about, the member from Swift Current, the member 

from Nipawin, and many more.  I'm just familiar with what 

those people believe.  That there's something happening in 

those schools out there in that school system that is not right 

and proper for our children to be learning in our schools. 

 

So if the Minister of Education thinks for one minute, if she 

stays the Minister of Education, that she's not going to be 

attacked by people like me to keep our schools right and proper 

and our educational system for our young people in this 

province, she's badly mistaken.  Because we're going to be on 

their back, and we're going to be on hard, because I've heard 

statements coming from the Minister of Education and the 

Minister of Health that doesn't sit well with me as an individual 

on my moral beliefs.  And I'll be attacking them in this House 

as hard as I can for everything that I can possibly do to fight for 

the people in this province on some moral standards. 

 

If the Minister of Health thinks that she's fooling the people of 

Saskatchewan with her saying, I want to keep that bad Mr. 

Morgentaler out, well, sir, I'll bet you they talk on the 

telephone as much as any two people Morgentaler talks to, 

putting up a front for the people of Saskatchewan.  You know 

perfectly well where she stands.  The people in this province 

know where she stands.  We know where . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member is getting 

too personal and making a personal attack.  It's all right to 

attack the policies of the minister but in this House we should 

not attack the personal beliefs of an individual and I think he is 

going a little too far. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, I don't attack 

them personally, I just attack the government on their stand on 

abortion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Shame on you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And shame on them.  I don't know why, Mr. 

Speaker, that somebody would have to say to me that from 

what I'm saying morally, that had to say shame on me.  I think 

that somebody should be ashamed of themselves.  I don't know 

who it came from but boy, I'm not very pleased with that 

remark, and I'm talking about our future of this province and 

the future of our young people, the future of this province as a 

whole. 

 

We call ourselves in North America, we call ourselves a 

Christian nation and are we?  I have a friend, a week from 

today leaves for Russia, because I belong to an organization 

called expanded youth ministries and they're handing . . . the 

next two weeks while schools are closing in Russia, they're 

handing out thousands of Bibles, little Bibles.  They're just 

hanging out for them. 

 

But in this province here and in Canada, nearly all of it, our 

system is don't mention the word of God in a school; it's 

against our thoughts in this Christian nation.  So I want you to 

take heed because I'm going to be on you for a long time 

because you've got some good members over there 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

that agree exactly what I'm saying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to say that I'm also very 

happy, I'm very happy, that in the educational system in Arm 

River, as far as schools are concerned, that I was able to deliver 

for the constituents of Arm River over the last eight years a 

new addition to the school in Holdfast; $300,000 addition to 

the school in Imperial; a brand new school in Craik and a new 

school in Davidson, and I'm going to tell you about the new 

school that's just being built in Kenaston now.  This was 

approved in the 1991 budget along with several others.  And 

when the election was on, the contractor from Davidson, Con's 

Construction, got the contract to build the school.  I got to him 

and said, go scratch some dirt because it's the NDP are going to 

win this election and they'll be putting a moratorium on any 

further building of schools.  And I understand that most of 

them have been stopped, but Kenaston is going ahead because 

we got the jump on them. 

 

But I feel sorry for what's going to happen if this here 

government . . . They backed off for now.  They were going to 

close down . . . They even talked about closing the school unit 

office in Davidson and maybe Outlook or Watrous or one or 

the other and eventually move them into Saskatoon.  I can see 

it happening. 

 

It goes back to when the NDP were in power and some of the 

older people will remember in '49, '50 when they brought in the 

school unit then.  And everybody said, oh boy, oh boy this is 

going to be wonderful.  Then they said, well we might as well 

close a couple of schools because it's too much to administrate 

all those old country schools out there. 

 

(2045) 

 

So that's the system, close the schools down, got the school 

units.  Well now they've got the school units and that's been 

working fine.  And now they're going to start closing the school 

units and making bigger school units, and you watch the 

schools close.  This government, I tell you, as long as I'm the 

member from Arm River, better not try closing these schools 

that I'm talking about here tonight, that we built good schools 

for education and I think the plan of this government will be to 

close those schools and move them.  Because the socialistic 

plan of North America with young people is to get them into 

dormitories, away from their parents for five days in a week.  

That's what they're going to want to do.  That's their plan; that's 

the socialistic plan of North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's been a pleasure to speak in this House tonight.  

And I'll definitely be voting for the amendment and thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Before I start my speech, I want to make a few comments about 

the hon. member from Arm River's last statements, or some of 

the last statements that he has made.  I think he was quite 

reckless with some of the facts.  He talked about, in 1982, 

where they inherited this large debt.  I want to indicate to the 

hon. member from Arm River that 

in 1982, what the Conservative government inherited was a 

$129 million surplus on the deficit side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- A $129 million surplus and the long-term 

debt of the province at that time that was in the Crown . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the members on both sides please 

let the member from Athabasca have his say.  If you wish to 

yell, go into your lounge and yell out there and let the member 

speak.  That's his privilege and his right.  I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just 

was indicating that the surplus in 1982 that the Conservative 

government inherited was $129 million and there was a 

long-term debt of approximately 2.8 billion that was in the 

Crown corporations for expansions to the Crowns.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that long-term debt in this province is $14 billion.  

And what has happened is accumulated deficits by the 

Conservative government over the years has created that 

long-term debt.  And what we used to have when we were in 

government was the rating of a AA rating.  It's now 

approaching BBB.  And that was created by the Conservative 

government.  I wanted just to bring that fact out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- I want to also congratulate the mover and 

the seconder, the hon. member from Meadow Lake and the 

hon. member from Wascana Plains for the excellent 

presentation as the mover and the seconder of the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank the constituents of 

Athabasca for showing their faith in re-electing me for another 

term.  And I sincerely look forward to the next three years of 

working on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with pride that I rise in this Assembly to offer 

a few comments in support of this important throne speech.  I 

am proud to be part of a government that has already started to 

put things back together in this great province.  I am proud of 

the principles and ideals of the New Democratic Party.  And I 

use this opportunity to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the 

mandate they gave us on October 21 will be honoured, will be 

delivered, and by working together we will succeed in turning 

this great province around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech delivered a very important 

message to all Saskatchewan people.  It dealt honestly and 

realistically with the very serious problems we all face.  And it 

offered a hope that finally after 10 years of free spending and 

mismanagement the people of Saskatchewan finally have a 

government that is accountable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- A government that is not afraid to face a 

tough challenge, and like a breath of fresh air deliver policies 

and programs for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

people, not just the privileged.  Not just the privileged few who 

happen to be on the good graces, in the good graces of the 

government at that particular time. 

 

Today I am not going to go through the list.  We all know it 

well.  And the people of Saskatchewan have passed judgement 

on the sorry record of the former PC government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are where they are because they did not keep 

the faith.  They did not keep promises.  They did not provide 

honest government.  And in the process they almost drove this 

province into bankruptcy.  That is the record.  Those are the 

facts.  And while it will not be easy, we have rolled up our 

sleeves, and working with the people of Saskatchewan, we will 

get through it together.  And the future will be brighter in the 

long term for our children and for their children.  Make no 

mistake about it.  Count on it.  It is going to happen. 

 

So where do we stand today?  What do we face?  How big are 

the problems and what can be done?  I recall so vividly prior to 

the election when members opposite would howl in derision 

when we'd challenge them on their statements about the size of 

the deficit. 

 

Remember when the then minister of Finance took such 

exception when we accused him of hiding the true size of the 

deficit?  Remember when the minister from Estevan tried to 

assure the people of this province that we have turned the 

corner, the deficit was under control, that it would come in at 

$245 million.  What a cruel joke, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They got away with it in 1986 when they hoodwinked the 

public, but the public was not to be fooled again.  Mr. Speaker, 

the financial crisis we face today is a direct result of close to 10 

years of Tory mismanagement; 10 years of deals, patronage, 

wild spending and incompetence; 10 years the people of this 

province endured some of the most incredibly incompetent 

actions by any government in our history.  But no more. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan expect their new government to 

be different.  And we are.  They expect honesty, integrity and 

fairness, compassion and leadership.  The very things that were 

lacking between 1982 and 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, dealing with this kind of challenge is not new to 

New Democratic Party governments.  Tommy Douglas did it in 

1944.  Allan Blakeney faced the same challenge in 1971.  And 

today we find ourselves face to face with the biggest challenge 

of all. 

 

Getting a handle on and addressing the question of debt and 

deficit to ensure that we are able to get this thing under control 

before it totally controls us and everything we do.  It is truly 

amazing that the former government would allow this situation 

to get so out of hand, but they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did not create this 

mess.  We did not create this mess, but we both know who did.  

We all know who is responsible.  But establishing 

responsibility is only part of it.  We now must 

address it.  And the people of Saskatchewan, working with this 

government, will get through it.  But it is not going to be easy.  

The throne speech is very clear in outlining how we intend to 

address this crisis.  It is very clear that today's tough decisions 

will mean a brighter future tomorrow for the people of this 

province. 

 

We cannot spend ourselves out of debt.  We cannot ignore this 

enormous deficit and we cannot just arbitrarily hack and slash 

with no regard for the consequences of those decisions.  It will 

take the commitment of us all, the fair application of decisions, 

a commonality of purpose, working together, and working 

through to find solutions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no clearer indication 

of proof of the difference between the way the former PCs ran 

this province and the priorities we have set, than what is 

happening in northern Saskatchewan.  Ten years of 

disappointment, 10 years of neglect, 10 years of turning their 

back on the people of northern Saskatchewan -- that is a record 

of the former PC government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government seemed to believe that if 

you ignore a problem long enough, it will go away.  Year after 

year I would stand up in this House, along with my colleague 

from Cumberland, to plead the case of northern people.  And 

year after year the arguments would fall on deaf ears.  They 

were more interested in GigaText and Joytec than they were in 

providing employment, sewer and water systems, jobs, and 

educational opportunities for northern people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very encouraged by the steps already taken 

by this new government to respond to the challenges we face in 

this part of our province.  Our government will reach out to our 

northern communities, and working with them, we will find 

ways to provide jobs, adequate housing, and educational 

opportunities.  No it will not be easy for us.  For sure it will 

take time.  But we are not afraid of challenge.  We are not 

afraid to meet that challenge head on, and we will work hard 

and long to make sure that we do what we can. 

 

Today we are spending over $500 million a year on interest 

payments on the Conservative deficit.  What a waste.  Think of 

how that money could be used in northern Saskatchewan.  The 

former PC premier obviously believed paying bond raters and 

bankers hundreds of millions of dollars was no problem.  But 

when it came to the North, inaction and disdain were his 

guiding principles -- cancellation of the northern food subsidy; 

inaction on housing, roads, education, and improvement to 

health care.  That was the record, and that was the reality. 

 

And that was another reason why the former government is 

now sitting where they are, in opposition.  For 10 years they 

did nothing, Mr. Speaker.  I am very pleased that this 

government understands the challenges of northern 

Saskatchewan and has the commitment to act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

Mr. Thompson: -- The northern works program will make an 

important difference to this part of the province.  Aside from 

the 150 jobs that will be created in many northern 

communities, and the additional resources to provide 

conventional water and sewer services to 17 communities that 

are without those basic amenities, is certainly welcome. 

 

The commitment to work with our northern communities to 

address the serious housing situation where about 40 per cent 

of current housing is in need of repair, it is also something that 

is overdue and this government is to be commended for 

tackling this situation.  New home construction and renovations 

coupled with the job creation is good news for northern 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a decade of neglect, that was the record of the 

members opposite.  This government has a commitment to 

northern Saskatchewan.  The throne speech signals that 

commitment and I fully intend to work very closely with my 

colleagues and the residents of the North to address and move 

on those matters that have been neglected for so long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech signals the arrival of the new 

reality.  The reality is simple.  We simply cannot afford to 

ignore the huge deficit.  It must be dealt with.  It must be 

brought under control.  This government, working with the 

people of Saskatchewan, will get the job done, facing the 

challenge and working through this barrier of debt.  We will 

have a brighter future tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- In closing, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the 

former PC government we face hardships today.  Thanks to this 

government we will face a brighter future tomorrow.  Mr. 

Speaker, I am proud to support this Speech from the Throne 

and I will be voting accordingly.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to have 

the opportunity to rise in this House to add my response to the 

Speech from the Throne and to the motion before this House 

which was moved by the member from Meadow Lake and 

seconded by the member from Regina Wascana Plains, good 

friends and competent members. 

 

It is safe to say that my friends and colleagues have accurately 

represented the feelings that our entire caucus is experiencing 

right now -- that is frustration and anger at what the previous 

government did to this province.  We are all having to deal 

with that anger and then try to move on to positive action. 

 

I am pleased that the throne speech was able to convey a strong 

message of progress in spite of the staggering financial 

situation that we are forced to contend with.  The member from 

Regina Wascana Plains referred to having to spend time 

cleaning up the mess before we can start to rebuild and provide 

hope to the people of this province. 

What we have all been through during the long, mean years of 

Tory rule has been far worse than any natural disaster, worse 

because the destruction was both deliberate and malicious. 

 

I would now like to relate only one personal example of how 

angry it makes me when I see the waste and mismanagement of 

the previous administration in reference to one of their 

megaprojects.  The project I refer to is the Rafferty-Alameda 

project and the new Mainprize Park. 

 

Earlier this spring a concerned constituent of mine asked me 

and a group of MLAs to tour the project.  I saw the partial 

construction of a 21-hole golf course.  Plans were for three 

extra holes being lit for night golfing, computerized sprinkling 

system, electronic boat launch, a shed full of equipment for the 

golf course, a fence they say worth maybe a million dollars, or 

maybe more.  And the list of goodies goes on. 

 

The next day I met with a hospital and nursing home board in 

our constituency who are having trouble making ends meet.  

They have people on a waiting-list and not adequate enough 

home care in their community.  It angers me the way money 

was spent, and now to no fault of our government and to no 

fault of our citizens, we are struggling with tough decisions on 

cut-backs and increased taxes. 

 

Now no one is against having water in southern Saskatchewan 

or a park, but how was the project managed or should I say 

mismanaged?  The Leader of the Opposition, when he was 

premier, constantly tried to tell the people about what a 

wonderful project he and the former deputy premier, now 

Senator, had concocted. 

 

But let's look at the facts.  The Rafferty-Alameda project was 

to have cost the province $42.5 million.  Instead, the province's 

share is now expected to be over 155 million.  Why?  Because 

as the Gass Commission pointed out, there was a lack of 

accountability in managing this project.  The Souris Basin 

Development Authority was given complete control over this 

project.  Yet the directors of this Authority have all had a 

vested interest in seeing the project go ahead at all costs.  None 

of the directors had any responsibility or interest in insuring 

that the project remained within budget.  This was so typical of 

many of the Tories' business deals. 

 

Cut a deal at any costs.  As long as there is a signature on the 

paper, the previous government was happy and considered 

themselves big time wheeler-dealers.  They did not care if the 

province was taken to the cleaners or if proper procedures were 

trampled upon.  The important factor to them was they got a 

deal. 

 

The Rafferty-Alameda project is just one of the messes that 

have to be cleaned up.  Besides being financially disastrous, the 

Tories also ran roughshod over environmental concerns and 

court injunctions.  They felt they were beyond due process and 

regulation, that they could do whatever they wanted.  They 

bullied their way ahead instead of taking the time to have 

appropriate environmental assessments done.  The result has 

been to leave behind a legal mess as well as a financial one. 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

Yet inspite of all their blundering and pushing their way 

around, what do we have to show for their incompetence.  We 

have a physical structure that may be flawed.  We have acres of 

land that have been bulldozed and destroyed just in case the 

mud-flats actually collect some water.  Hardly the shining 

example of success that the former premier tried to convince us 

it would be. 

 

So how long do we wait?  Is it this year, next year, 50, a 100 

years?  Is that when your mess will prove itself to be 

worthwhile?  Like I said, this is just one example from an 

entire legion of waste and mismanagement practices.  And now 

we are having to clean it up. 

 

The people in Bengough-Milestone constituency did not cause 

the 10 straight years of annual operating deficits.  And they 

know perfectly well that our government did not cause the 

massive debt.  Yet they do understand that it is irresponsible to 

continue spending wildly.  That sooner, rather than later, the 

house will come crashing down as long as the financial base is 

allowed to crumble. 

 

Our party did promise to get the province's finances in order 

and we are doing just that.  We know that tough choices will 

have to be made in order to keep our future secure.  But we 

have to regain control of our finances in order to have any 

freedom to allow . . . to follow our own agenda, freedom for 

the future of our children and our grandchildren in this 

province. 

 

And I must say I am appalled when I hear the opposition 

criticize us here tonight for financial management.  They put 

this province into this massive debt and now we pay one and a 

half million dollars a day on interest -- interest alone -- and 

what could we have done with that money in this province for 

the people of this province. 

 

The Gass Commission was the first step.  Before we can begin 

to rebuild, we had to know the total extent of the damage.  We 

had to know the reality.  Knowing just how bad things are is 

critical to be able to plan for the future.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased that in the throne speech we heard last week this 

government proved that no matter how bad things are, it is 

already taking action to make improvements. 

 

The wellness model for health care is the beginning of the 

expanded definition for health care.  Yes, some changes to the 

system will be required.  Because of the financial situation, 

some of those changes will be less than what we would want 

them to be, but we are still moving forward to achieve our goal 

of keeping people well.  Our version of cutting down on the use 

of expensive health care procedures is to implement a program 

that is focused on preventing illness in the first place. 

 

I am looking forward to some of these changes, and I know that 

the people and the health professions in my area are prepared to 

help make the wellness model work.  They know they have a 

lot to offer, and they know that by consulting and co-operating 

with each other that even the most thorny problems can be 

resolved.  My constituents are ready and eager to participate 

and be involved with the decisions that are needed to make a 

better health care system in this province. 

I am confident that fundamental changes to the education 

system will also be brought about by the new Saskatchewan 

Education Council.  This government understands that no one 

person is going to be able to solve our problems, but by putting 

our heads together with people from other organizations, and 

encouraging open and honest debate, we will discover the 

solutions needed.  Education is as basic a need in our society as 

health care.  Only by providing access to quality education 

programs can we begin to address some of the inequity and 

unfairness that is readily apparent within our society today. 

 

As a resident of rural Saskatchewan and as a teacher, I am 

keenly aware that educational opportunities must be available 

to all people in this province regardless of where they live.  I 

was impressed with the active role constituents of 

Bengough-Milestone took in the review of the 

Scharfe/Langlois report.  And just to clarify for the members 

opposite, the Scharfe/Langlois report was commissioned by 

their government, who maybe did have a hidden agenda. 

 

A number of concerns were raised about this report, and our 

government listened to their concerns.  And no action has been 

taken on the Scharfe/Langlois recommendations.  And just to 

clarify in saying that I also realize that developing and 

implementing programs to improve access to education is not 

just a one-shot item.  Fair access to education must be 

constantly encouraged and nurtured.  Changes and innovations 

will have to be ongoing, flexible, to meet changing needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government understands what is required in 

modern society.  The Speech from the Throne showed very 

clearly that this government is prepared to make fundamental 

changes in how our institutions function, but changes only in 

consultation with all stakeholders.  We are not interested in 

showy ribbon-cutting ceremonies.  We are not interested in 

erecting costly monuments of questionable worth.  But we are 

interested in people and in creative responses to increase 

lifelong learning opportunities for all of our citizens.  We are 

interested in programs that meet the changing needs of the 

1990s. 

 

We know that we are all in this together and that the only way 

we can get out of this mess is to work collectively and by 

ending the adversarial approach that so many of us are tired of. 

 

The other day my nine-year-old daughter said to me: You 

know, Mom, I used to think MLAs and cabinet ministers were 

really special people who knew everything.  But you know, 

you're all just people. 

 

Well I take this as a compliment and I'm proud of being "just 

people."  What my daughter has implied was that she used to 

think MLAs and cabinet ministers were somehow above 

everyone else, though I want to stress that that is never the 

case.  No matter what position anyone holds, that person is 

always "just people."  The trouble starts when elected 

representatives start thinking that because of their position they 

are somehow better than the next person. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

I am confident that this government will do an excellent job of 

representing the people of the province because, as members of 

this government, we must consider ourselves one of the people.  

We don't have any delusions.  We are just people like everyone 

else.  But we are people who take our service to this province 

very seriously.  We know that we cannot solve problems on our 

own or by ourselves. 

 

The GRIP program is a good example of what I'm talking 

about.  We know that we certainly can't untangle the mess of 

politics and bureaucracies of this program overnight.  But our 

farmers need help.  After consulting with farmers and farm 

groups, we made steps to improve the program.  We know that 

it is not perfect, but we also know that ongoing consultation 

with some flexibility is essential in order to give farmers the 

protection they need. 

 

But it is just those two ingredients that members opposite 

ignored when they were cohorting with federal government to 

create this program.  No consultation.  No flexibility.  That has 

been the recipe for disaster practised by the Tories when they 

were in government.  The previous government signed into an 

agreement with GRIP that cost our farmers and our taxpayers 

more than any other province in Canada. 

 

It is really a shame that the members of this opposition cannot 

give up their political games even on a topic of such 

importance as agriculture.  At the request of the opposition, this 

House agreed to enter into a special emergency debate to help 

farmers.  We agreed to this debate even though there was a 

chance of risk in delaying the presentation of the budget to the 

House.  The government made accommodation for the 

opposition's seemingly sincere concerns.  And what was the 

outcome of this emergency debate? 

 

Incredibly, we witnessed all nine leaderless opposition 

members vote against a motion, a motion urging the federal 

government to work with us to assist farmers; a motion that 

called on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible -- and to deliver on its commitment for a third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the recent first 

ministers' conference.  And they voted no. 

 

They voted no to extend the federal government's consent to 

the deadline, the deadline to be extended which is mutually 

agreeable for farmers, the provincial government and the 

federal government. 

 

And they voted no to accept the request of farmers to establish 

a review commission to design a long-term farm income 

stability program, based on the needs of farm families and the 

actual cost of production. 

 

They initiated this motion.  But when it came right down for 

them to put their money where their mouth is, they proved that 

they were only interested in playing politics to begin with.  The 

people of Saskatchewan are fed up with those kind of political 

games and with good reason. 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new member of the legislature, I was 

surprised and shocked by question period on Friday.  I could 

hardly believe that the opposition would focus their questions 

around the fact that we knew how badly they mismanaged this 

province.  That we knew they bankrupt this province.  That we 

knew they cooked the books.  And that we should have known 

not to trust their documentation or their Minister of Finance. I 

honestly wondered if I was sitting in the legislature or if this 

was a tale from Alice in Wonderland, or should I say Tories in 

blunderland? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, the throne speech sends a clear 

message that we will change the face of politics because we do 

believe in democratic principles and we are not afraid to work 

together with other people.  That is why we will have a code of 

ethical conduct and a conflict of interest Acts this session. 

 

This government will extend the opportunity of meaningful 

participation to opposition members through the use of 

all-party committees.  This government and its members do 

understand the importance and the need for co-operation.  It 

remains to be seen whether the members from the opposition 

are capable of learning that basic lesson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am looking forward to the upcoming session.  I 

feel our success as a government will hinge on the basic 

principles and premises of honesty, accountability, and fairness 

in putting our financial house in order; of restoring public faith 

in the ability of politicians to serve the public interest; of giving 

hope to the less fortunate and bringing the people of this 

province together. 

 

Yes, there will be challenges, but I am confident that those 

challenges will be met in the spirit of co-operation and 

consultation that Saskatchewan people expect.  And I am 

pleased to support the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure to enter the throne speech debate.  Let me first echo 

some of my colleagues in congratulating the mover and 

seconder, the members from Meadow Lake and Regina 

Wascana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank 

the constituents of Shellbrook-Torch River for allowing me the 

honour of representing them.  I will do everything within my 

ability to maintain their trust and continued support. 

 

I rise today to speak in favour of the Speech from the Throne.  

This throne speech is clearly the best, at least in the last 10 

years.  Mr. Speaker, a decade of Devine rules has brought the 

province to its knees. 

 

We have inherited a total debt of nearly $14 billion dollars.  

That's about $14,000 for every man, woman and 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

child of this province.  Needless to say, the financial state of 

this affair is unacceptable. 

 

How did we get into this mess?  The answer: nine and a half 

years of PC waste and mismanagement.  On the one hand, they 

gave breaks to their corporate friends -- Cargill, Weyerhaeuser, 

Pocklington.  On the other hand, they spent money like 

drunken sailors, demonstrating a no to public accountability.  

For example, the Tories spent over 357,000 for spaces in the 

Regina Renaissance centre that it was not even using.  

Although alcohol worth $15,000 was delivered from the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board to the legislative office of the PC 

minister responsible for the Liquor Board store.  And just last 

week, we discovered that $439,000 was spent by nine 

government departments or agencies for advertising services 

they never received.  These are just a few hundred cases of PC 

waste and mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my government, through the throne speech, has 

committed itself to the monumental task of deficit 

restructuring.  With the highest per capita debt in the nation, we 

must learn to once again live within our means. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Interest payments on the debt alone are the 

third largest expenditure in the province's budget, a staggering 

amount of over a half a billion dollars.  If we fail to act 

promptly, the people of Saskatchewan will lose their freedom 

to financial and viable public services and to the plan for the 

future. 

 

This government is determined to control government spending 

and thereby reduce the deficit.  To this end, recommendations 

of the Gass Commission will be implemented and amends to 

The Provincial Auditor Act and The Financial Administration 

Act will ensure early release of the Provincial Auditor's annual 

report and the Public Accounts.  Furthermore, the Provincial 

Auditor will be given greater access to the books of all Crown 

agencies.  My government, Mr. Speaker, has already taken 

many steps to reduce the deficit:  Fair Share was cancelled; 

unnecessary trade offices were closed; spending and 

advertising and travel were cut; the smallest cabinet in 20 years 

was appointed; and SaskPower and SaskEnergy bills are now 

mailed in the same envelope. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Be rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that this New 

Democratic government will successfully retire the current debt 

just as we have done in the past after taking over from bankrupt 

Liberal regimes, at the same time, in the grand tradition of 

previous CCF and NDP governments.  We will hold the values 

of fairness and compassion close to our hearts.  If we all pitch 

in together, keeping in mind the spirit of community and 

co-operation, the Saskatchewan people will be able to 

overcome the financial crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn my focus towards agriculture 

. . . (inaudible) . . . and international grain trade war.  Our farm 

families are under severe strain 

including support program.  Saskatchewan's 60,000 farmers are 

forecasted to lose an average of $15,000 each this year.  

Provincial farm debt is now more than $5 billion.  Much of the 

blame for the current farm crisis can be directed at the PC Party 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Though they paid plenty of lip service to the plight of the 

farmer, their concern was largely confirmed to election time.  

In reality they eliminated the weed control program, the pest 

control program, grants for soil, and feed testing and funding 

for agriculture fairs.  Furthermore they reduced grants for 

veterinary travel and clinics, and cut back on fundings to 4-H 

clubs and the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. 

 

Tory support of their federal counterpart, Canada-U.S. Free 

Trade initiative, further undermines any real commitment to 

farmers.  This agreement has eliminated the two-price system 

for wheat, costing Saskatchewan farmers 127 million annual.  

The Free Trade Agreement also threatened the continued 

existence of supply management and marketing boards. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the PCs introduced a hastily put together 

and very flawed program called GRIP.  It was just in time for 

an election campaign.  New Democrats sincerely believe that 

protection of our province's farm family is fundamental to 

economic revival.  We have already made a number of 

significant improvements to GRIP, making it more responsible 

and regional based.  Still negotiations are continuing so as to 

move GRIP towards a cost-of-production formula.  A 

deficiency payment of one-half billion dollars is still owing to 

Canadian farmers for the 1990-91 crop year, and my 

government will continue to make sure that Ottawa pays its fair 

share towards sustaining a viable farm community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats recognize the seriousness of 

farm debt crisis.  Accordingly we will make amendments to the 

Saskatchewan farm security Act so as to implement 

recommendations of the Farm Debt Advisory Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Farmers can be rest assured with the New 

Democrats as government.  After all, our movement grew out 

of the farmers' protest movement back in 1932. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn my attention to an issue 

of special concerns to my constituents, and that is forestry.  In 

1986 the Prince Albert Pulp Company was sold to the U.S. 

multicultural Weyerhaeuser.  It was a sweetheart deal, if there 

ever was one left.  Let me remind the members of the term of 

this agreement.  Weyerhaeuser got the P.A. Pulp for $236 

million, but the pulp mill . . . Weyerhaeuser made no down 

payment.  Instead the deal was financed by a 30-year 

government debenture at 8.5 per cent.  Weyerhaeuser did not 

have to make any payments to the government unless profit on 

the pulp mill exceeded 12 per cent.  Weyerhaeuser also gained 

control over 5 million acres of forestry and the Tory 

government promised to build 32 kilometres of road per year 

for Weyerhaeuser. 

 

To this date, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser has not paid any 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

of the principal, this in spite of the fact that this corporation 

made 1.5 billion in profit world-wide from 1985 to 1989.  The 

PCs said cash flow problems were to blame, but I remind you 

of a commitment made a couple of years ago by my colleague, 

the member from Athabasca, and I quote: how many 

Saskatchewan farmers were excused for dealing with their 

financial commitments because they had a financial cash flow 

problem?  Or business people in the province: how many 

Saskatchewan workers were excused from paying income tax 

because they had a cash flow problem? 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have gone from pulp cutters to harvesters.  

The result has been lost jobs.  This in turn caused out-migration 

of people and led to school and hospital closures -- Canwood, 

Paddockwood, Smeaton, Meath Park, Shellbrook, Choiceland 

are just a few of the towns that have suffered the consequences. 

 

Tourism -- an important industry in my constituency -- places 

like Christopher Lake and Candle Lake came to mind 

especially.  Mr. Speaker, my government believes that our 

province's forests should be farmed wisely, not mined.  To this 

end we will amend The Parks Act to increase the amount of 

land committed to the provincial parks and protected areas, 

adding over 215,000 hectares to the Saskatchewan provincial 

park system.  The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act will 

also be amended to add 607,000 hectares of Crown land to the 

protection of this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me bring this address to a closure by again 

expressing my support for the throne speech.  Saskatchewan is 

definitely facing difficult times but if we all work together, we 

shall overcome.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's a 

pleasure to rise and make a few comments tonight with respect 

to the throne speech.  I intend, Mr. Speaker, to speak today in 

rather broad terms about the direction that the government is 

going and I want to compare the direction of this government 

and that it's taking with some of the directions taken by the 

previous government.  I want to talk a little bit about the 

philosophical differences between the government led by the 

member from Riversdale, Saskatoon Riversdale, and compare 

it with the philosophical underpinnings that was led by the 

government previous and which was modelled more after the 

Mulroney and the Thatcher and the Reagan governments 

abroad. 

 

I will then talk very briefly, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 

directions we're taking in education and in health and in social 

services, and I will be making a comment about the antics of 

the member from Thunder Creek Friday last. 

 

But before I do any of that, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate 

you for the dedication that you have shown to your work to 

date and for the attempt that you are making, and I believe 

rather successfully, in setting a tone, a new tone, a positive tone 

for this legislature. 

I know that to preserve the democratic principles and the 

methods that we are trying to do in this legislature is very 

important because it's really preserving those . . . preserves the 

British parliamentary system.  And there are many places in the 

world that look at us with envy and awe, and wonder how we 

are able to make changes in this country and this province 

without taking to arms and without bloodshed. 

 

And one of the reasons is because of the sanctity that we put on 

our system of government and the system that we use to make 

changes in our society.  It's a very valuable and very treasure to 

be able to use the X on the ballot to effect changes as opposed 

to having to use arms or insurrection. 

 

I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on the work that you 

are doing to enhance a role of the private members with your 

Committee on Rules changes.  And I expect something to come 

from that before too long.  And I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

your tenure will add dignity to this legislature. 

 

I know it takes patience and it takes co-operation on the part of 

all members here.  We will try to do some new things, and 

some things might not work, but I hope we have the flexibility 

to go back and change those things which are not working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech, particularly the first throne 

speech of any government, sets a general direction for the 

course of the government.  The throne speech has to take into 

account the realities of where we find ourselves and then it 

points us in the direction that we want to go.  My Premier and 

his cabinet colleagues have been working very hard since the 

day after the October election.  And they have assessed, they 

have consulted, they have analysed, and they have innovated.  

And this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, represents the 

essence of the direction that they are showing through this 

government to the people of Saskatchewan.  And as part of the 

New Democratic caucus, I'm proud to be able to support the 

contents of this throne speech and I do so on behalf of the 

people of Prince Albert who elected me to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents worked long and hard in 

the October election of 1991.  They worked hard to help elect a 

new government and they worked because they saw a need for 

a change.  They often told me that it hurt them to see our 

province, a province so rich in resources and people with 

abilities, it hurt them to see the province going backward.  It 

hurt them to see services cut and it hurt them to see our 

province's finances suffer such devastation. 

 

Many people had to move from Saskatchewan for financial 

reasons, Mr. Speaker.  Many more in our province now depend 

on social assistance and on food banks for their existence.  

People feel, and did feel over several years, that they were 

losing control over their livelihoods.  They were losing control 

over their livelihoods as the previous government was losing 

control of the finances of the province. 

 

My constituents and people across the province worked 



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

for a change and they voted for a change.  And it is with a deep 

sense of responsibility that I support this Speech from the 

Throne as the blueprint for that change.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  

Because, Mr. Speaker, this blueprint, this throne speech, 

accepts our reality.  It accepts the problems that face us.  It 

accepts the fact that we are deeper in debt than we have ever 

been.  It accepts the rising social problems.  It accepts things 

like a loss of population, particularly in the rural area.  And it 

accepts the cynicism that is facing politicians across Canada 

today. 

 

But more than that, it shows a way out.  It shows a way out of 

the tunnel of financial despair.  It shows us through the throne 

speech and through the actions already taken by my leader, the 

member from Riversdale, and by my cabinet colleagues, in 

things like setting up the Gass Commission to show a direction 

to get the financial mess back in order.  This follows up on it.  

We look at actions like the Premier's decision to go with a 

small cabinet to make the necessary adjustments quickly and as 

efficiently as possible.  It shows us the direction out of the 

tunnel.  And if we look down the tunnel, Mr. Speaker, we can 

see that there is a flame down the end of the tunnel.  It's a little 

too far away yet to feel the warmth, but I assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, if we follow the leadership of our Premier and our 

cabinet colleagues, we will feel the warmth of that flame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- It's all about change, Mr. Speaker, and I 

recall a statement about change that I must attribute to Dr. 

Stirling McDowell, a friend of yours and mine, a former chief 

executive officer of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation) and of the Canadian Teachers' Federation.  I recall 

Dr. Stirling McDowell speaking to a convention saying words 

of this essence.  He said the only sure thing that any one of us 

can change is ourselves.  The only sure thing that any one of us 

can change is ourselves.  How true.  And when we change 

ourselves we also change that which we have influence over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan changed themselves; 

they changed the way they voted; they changed their 

expectations of the role of government; and we in the 

government of Saskatchewan are changing the way 

governments will act.  Our motivations are different than the 

motivations of the government previous.  Our actions are 

different than the actions of the government previous and the 

results will be different than the results from the government 

previous. 

 

To answer how it will be different, I want to take a little time to 

talk about the purpose of government and to talk a bit about 

political processes.  I've always adopted the belief, Mr. 

Speaker, that politics can serve a lofty purpose.  I've always 

had the belief that government was a way for people to work 

together to do the things they valued as being desirable.  Good 

government and good politicians work as a team on behalf of 

constituents to provide for things like education and health, 

transportation and, in the case of social services, to care for 

those marginalized by events or by circumstances. 

 

I've always believed that it was up to the people elected to 

government to construct, and to preside over the administration 

of, the means by which to accomplish these desirable things.  

Mr. Speaker, that belief is something I've held for a long time.  

But I must admit that I was somewhat shaken during the last 

few years when I saw the political scene in the western world 

dominated by people like Reagan and Bush and Thatcher and 

Mulroney and our former premier.  Because these 

neo-conservatives had a different philosophy.  They espoused 

values which on the surface appear to have some appeal.  And 

I'm talking about values like individual responsibility and 

individual ownership and individual initiative. 

 

To get . . . to realize these values they embarked on 

deregulation and privatization and free trade.  The unfortunate 

part about it is an over-emphasis of those values, leaving out 

the values of community and co-operation, ends up in an 

emphasis that came . . . with which came the practice of using 

government money and taxpayers' money for individual 

benefit.  And that, Mr. Speaker, has been very disconcerting to 

me and very disconcerting to many members and, indeed, very 

disconcerting to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What we saw was an emphasis on using government money for 

private profit rather than for the common good, Mr. Speaker.  

There was two ways that that happened.  First of all there was 

wasteful spending in government, and I will deal very 

specifically with some of that in a moment.  And secondly, 

there was the abdication of government responsibility to 

corporate dominance across North America or across Canada, 

specifically in Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me deal with the first one and give you one example.  Only 

two weeks ago, within the last two weeks, Mr. Speaker, we had 

an auditor's report tabled in this House.  That auditor's report -- 

a special auditor's report -- that auditor's report was about I 

would think close to three or four centimetres thick.  It was the 

thickest auditor's report I've ever seen.  It was . . . I think it set a 

record for the amount and the number of things that it dealt 

with. 

 

(2145) 

 

In addition to that auditor's report, last January the Public 

Accounts Committee asked the Provincial Auditor to review all 

government organizations and to report on instances where 

they made payments to . . . where they did several things.  First 

of all was to make payments to employees not working for 

them; and where they made payments to advertising agencies 

for goods and services not received; and where they provided 

goods and services to ministers of the Crown without charge 

and where they provided goods and services to other 

government organizations without charge.  Well, this special 

auditor's report is now public.  Some of it is now public and it's 

rather shocking. 

 

And what I'm doing, Mr. Speaker, is I'm bringing to your 

attention and to the attention of the House, one of the ways that 

the government previous wasted the money of the taxpayer, 

wasted the money of the taxpayer.  And if it hadn't have been 

wasted to the extent that was wasted, we wouldn't be in the 

debt situation and in the desperate 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1992 

debt situation that we are now. 

 

So what was it that the auditor found?  Well to answer the 

question, were there any payments made to individuals not 

working for employer organizations, what the auditor found is, 

when he looked, was that there were 32 people hired by 

government corporations that were paid a total of $1.198 

million, when they actually worked as ministerial assistants and 

not for the corporations. 

 

What was happening is that government was finding a way of 

kiting money inside government.  They were using Crown 

corporations to pay for the political aides of the ministers.   

Now this included payments from the Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan.  This included payments from 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, in this case 

over $300,000 for four people.  This included payments from 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance.  The cost of our licences 

to our cars, part of the cost was being used to subsidize costs 

for ministerial aides -- political aides for the minister. 

 

The Saskatchewan Liquor Board supplied money for 

ministerial aides -- four people, over 100,000.  Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation paid for seven people -- $180,000.  SaskTel 

-- $90,000.  The Water Corporation -- over $200,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a government off-loading 

onto the Crown Investments Corporation.  Now it used to be 

that there was money and profits made by the Crowns, and then 

this would be transferred into general revenues, and that would 

reduce our tax load.  That was the way . . . that was the whole 

theory behind some of the Crowns.  The Crowns were used to 

bail out government. 

 

Now in this particular case, after you get Crowns being drained 

of money in this manner that I just mentioned, plus other 

means, we have a situation where the Crowns are no longer 

solvent.  And we have a situation where the taxpayers' money 

now has to go back to bail out the Crowns. 

 

Now why?  Here's one of the reasons.  Because of the way they 

were mismanaged.  The Crowns were misused.  And it's . . . the 

public is . . . well I think the public would be just as appalled as 

I am when I learned of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I talked very briefly about government 

corporations being used to hire people.  What else did the 

auditor's report come up with?  In addition to that, there were 

several organizations which reported that they paid over $3 

million to 79 employees that did not work for them.  They paid 

people who did not work for them. 

 

And this included the Crown Investments Corporation for 

113,000.  It included the Department of Agriculture and Food 

who paid for nine people that didn't work for them; they 

worked for somebody else -- $537,000.  This included the 

Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment -- 

and I'm just selecting from the list, Mr. Speaker; there's a 

whole page of them -- 226.  This included the SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) again for $186,000. 

And there's one here, the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation had 29 people on their payroll that didn't work for 

them.  Twenty-nine people cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

$629,000.  Well where was it that these people worked, Mr. 

Speaker, all these people, all these 79 employees?  Well it turns 

out that 49 of them worked for Executive Council.  That is the 

group of aides that works directly under the premier, the former 

premier, the member from Estevan. 

 

You see he wanted to make it look as if he was running a lean 

government.  So he had 49 people hidden down in his 

Executive Council who were being paid by the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation that did not come out of 

their funds.  And what kind of work were they doing?  Do you 

think they were working for the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation and managing the affairs?  No.  They 

were there; they were PC hacks.  Their main job was to try to 

get the member from Estevan re-elected.  I guess they didn't do 

a very good job.  Mind you, they did get paid enough.  

Forty-nine people on Executive Council costing a total of $1.88 

million.  That was 49 people of the 79 who were paid for by 

other departments. 

 

Now there were some also that were given work in the Future 

Corporation.  Some were asked to work for United Way.  

Strange that the minister, that the government opposite, 

wouldn't, if they thought the United Way should be subsidized 

-- and perhaps it should be -- but why not be honest about it?  

Why not do it up front and clean? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's not enough.  There are several organizations 

that paid over 600 . . . seven organizations in government that 

paid over $600,000 to 19 people and nobody really knows 

where they worked. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ghosts. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- My colleague, the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser, calls them ghosts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health hired a ghost who they 

paid $99,702 for.  How do you lose a $99,000 ghost?  That's 

the record of the government opposite, the government 

previous who now sit opposite. 

 

There were five people who were paid by the Saskatchewan 

Liquor Board a total of $138,000 and nobody knows who they 

are or where they are.  More ghosts. 

 

And there was one that the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation paid, -- that's in addition to the 

people they paid for in the Executive Council -- that cost 

$67,000, and nobody knows who that person is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's small wonder that the auditor was frustrated 

over the years when he may have had a suspicion or an inkling 

that these kind of things were going on, but he had no way of 

accessing the information, and when in his previous reports he 

mentioned repeatedly and repeatedly that his work was stifled 

because he did not have the access to the information he  



May 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not just that they were making bad deals while 

they were in government, but in many cases they paid out 

money and got nothing back for the money. 

 

And I want to refer now to payments to advertising agencies 

for goods and services which were never received, paid for but 

never received.  This is a report of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's where these figures are taken from, a special 

report of the Provincial Auditor in response to a request by the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

And why is it mentioned here now?  Because this is the place 

that these things have to be brought up.  This is the Assembly 

in which governments previous and governments current are to 

be made accountable for their actions.  It's no point raising this 

some place in a dark room or in a corner of the building.  It's 

got to be done in a public way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think when the people of Saskatchewan hear the full 

story of what the members opposite did -- they already have a 

pretty good feeling of what they did -- but when they hear the 

full story, they will tell their children and they will tell their 

grandchildren, and the Conservative Party will never be elected 

in this province again for the next 50 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I want to detail a couple of the places where 

the money was paid out but nothing was paid back, but no 

services were received, Mr. Speaker.  And most of these were 

advertising agencies.  And it's interesting that there is one firm 

here that seems to be quite dominant.  Now would anybody 

care to guess which firm that would be? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Roberts Poole. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Do I hear the word, Roberts Poole?  And do 

I hear the word Dome?  Dome, the advertising company of 

record.  Community Services, Department of Community 

Services paid Dome $4,000.  We don't know quite what for, but 

they did pay it to them.  They didn't get anything for it.  And 

then later on they paid Dome Media Buying Services another 

$5,000. 

 

Department of Education paid $24,000 to Roberts & Poole.  

There may be some services that they . . . Roberts & Poole 

might want to provide to the Department of Education for 

$24,000 at this stage. 

 

There was money paid to the Department of Energy and Mines 

. . . by the Department of Energy and Mines to Dome 

Advertising for $2,000.  And right through, this list is littered 

with that company of record -- Dome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two or three other things that the auditor 

uncovered in this special report.  One of things that he 

uncovered was that the Saskatchewan Liquor Board paid 

expenses totalling $16,000 for ministers of the previous 

government to attend Big Valley Jamborees.  You'd think that 

somebody with a ministerial salary might 

be able to afford to go to the grounds, to pay his own -- his or 

her own -- way into the grounds, to pay for the food, to pay for 

the trailer rental, alcohol, and miscellaneous expenses.  But 

there was some help there from the Saskatchewan Liquor 

Board. 

 

Wasn't just to go to the Big Valley Jamboree that the Liquor 

Board helped the ministers, according to this report.  Liquor 

Board also provided about $19,000 worth of liquor to ministers' 

offices without any written request to do so, Mr. Speaker.  Now 

the Liquor Board does not have any policies authorizing this, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's rather mysterious how this would all come 

about. 

 

But the important thing at this stage I suppose, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the knowledge be made public and that the ministers, and 

particularly the back-benchers opposite, think awhile before 

they start pointing fingers, and that they point the fingers 

inwards a bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these things which I have mentioned, I will . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10 o'clock this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 

 


