




















































Hansard: August 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2277 

 August 11, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 42 -- Government Betrayal of Election 

Promises 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 

speaking before the recess for the supper hour, talking on a 

number of areas of promises that had been broken, or have 

been, and are being broken by the government. 

 

But while I've been sitting here, some of the members opposite 

have brought to my attention a column.  And it seems that they 

like to dwell upon the fact of individuals who may have been 

hired by the former government.  But let me just let the people 

of Saskatchewan know what the columnist also says: 

 

 However, let's be honest:  NDP Premier Allan Blakeney's 

government was up to its armpits in patronage, too.  That's 

the nature of politics.  When you get into power, you pay off 

your friends. 

 

And then he says: 

 

 Yet I don't think Blakeney was as oblivious to outright theft 

and thievery as was Devine. 

 

But he also says: 

 

 But to conclude, Grant Devine himself is one of the most 

honest men in Canadian politics. 

 

What about the new chairman of the Liquor Board?  Isn't that 

the brother-in-law of the member from Quill Lakes?  Isn't?  It 

seems that got a reaction.  It seems that some of the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, certainly don't like to be reminded of 

the individuals.  Well whether or not it was, but I think, Mr. 

Speaker if we wanted to dig out our forms we could find out 

that certainly the member from Quill Lakes, a number of other 

members, have over the years had a number of family members 

involved in government.  And where did they get the jobs?  

Strictly through patronage.  The same jobs that Mr. Jackson 

talks of here that Mr. Blakeney was aware of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we were talking about government broken 

promises, we must take a look.  And I was talking before about 

the fact that the opposition of the day, the present government, 

indicated that harmonization of the sales tax was not the 

appropriate thing to do.  Mr. Speaker, many people on that side 

of the House at the present time, when they were on this side of 

the House, indicated that there were other ways of finding tax 

revenue to generate, or ways of generating revenue in this 

province in order to meet the financial needs of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just quote a few comments by members 

opposite.  The member for Regina Elphinstone, in The Prairie 

Progress, October 16, 1990: Lingenfelter advocated an 

increase in personal income tax, an adjustment to corporate tax, 

collection of corporate back taxes, and an end to deferral of 

corporate tax. 

And yet all along, Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, 

they argued, no new taxes; we won't need any more new taxes.  

We will find the money we need.  And they always talked 

about this pie-in-the-sky comment of waste and 

mismanagement.  They're going to bring waste and 

mismanagement under control and they'll find all the revenue 

they need to operate the services. 

 

It's interesting when you talk about harmonization, that in the 

Star-Phoenix, February 27, 1991, the member for Regina 

Churchill Downs suggested that the NDP supports a single 

sales tax.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what harmonization would 

have done in the province of Saskatchewan.  It would have 

harmonized the provincial E&H (education and health) with 

the GST (goods and services tax). 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, no one likes increases in taxes.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the fact that the former government was 

up front and suggested the harmonization of the provincial 

sales tax, or the E&H, with the GST was the appropriate way to 

go. I believe today many members on the government side of 

the House are beginning to wonder if they made a mistake in 

suggesting harmonization, they shouldn't harmonize. 

 

There were members on that side of the House that admitted 

that harmonization may be an appropriate form of addressing 

taxation.  Listen to what the present leader of . . . the Premier 

of this province said as an opposition leader, April 12, 1991, 

from the Star-Phoenix.  He, referring to Romanow, admits that 

tax harmonization may be the easiest way for business to adjust 

to the GST. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we talked about that before, the 

fact that harmonization would have been a very positive step 

forward for people across Saskatchewan, for the government, 

and certainly for businesses, as harmonization would have 

created a more level playing-field for businesses across our 

province, would have given the business community some 

incentive and a greater ability to be able to provide the services 

at cost, and they would have had a refund on some of their 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, in line of what the GST gave them the 

refund on, on their power bills, on their telephone bills, on their 

heat consumption. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we've seen since the election and 

through the minister's budget, we have seen that taxes have 

increased in every one of these areas, so not only did the 

business community lose out by the inability or the 

unwillingness of the government to harmonize; they also faced 

even higher taxes than what they were facing before.  And no 

wonder we find business men and women across this province 

very indignant and unhappy with the performance to date of the 

present government. 

 

Back on April 12, 1991, an article in the Star-Phoenix. It says: 

The NDP (New Democratic Party) claims the province has no 

legal authority to a level a tax because the provincial budget 

has yet to be introduced. 

 

And it also said on CHAB radio, Moose Jaw, May 9, 1991:  

The NDP says harmonization of the GST with PST 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

(provincial sales tax) isn't bad; it just needs adjusting. 

 

So it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that many members on 

that side of the House, including front-bench members, felt that 

harmonization in the long run would have been an appropriate 

form of taxation in this province, would have been a lot fairer 

or more fair for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet we find on CKCK TV news, May 7, 1991, the Finance 

critic.  It says:  Ned Shillington today told an all-party debate 

that the tax would be rolled back in favour of higher income 

taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I find many people continually complaining 

about is the fact of this little cloud or the feeling that there are 

people across this province and across this country who feel 

that there are so many so-called rich people who are not paying 

their fair share of the taxes across our nation.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, what I find . . . it's interesting to just go around and try 

and find the so-called rich that the government member would 

be talking about.  Who are the rich people?  Maybe some of 

them are in this Assembly.  Who knows?  Mr. Speaker, it all 

depends what your perception of richness is.  And I think for a 

lot of the voting public out there, they might perceive 

politicians as being overly paid, although I would suggest that 

many times we've heard a lot of people mention they wouldn't . 

. . people have said to me they wouldn't do this job.  They 

wouldn't even spend five minutes doing the job for what salary 

politicians get. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Star-Phoenix on May 22, 1991, Mr. 

Romanow said he recognizes the loss of business tax rebates 

under the PST will hurt and promised to find other ways to 

help business. 

 

Now recently in this Assembly we raised some questions with 

regards to the government . . . regarding business and we're 

asking the government to lay out their plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  What is their plan?  Do they have a plan for 

businesses?  Do they have a plan for economic activity, 

economic development, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And yes, the Government House Leader is right about the only 

plan they had was just to get rid of the former government of 

Tories.  I don't think that's the type of plan that people in 

Saskatchewan were looking for.  People were looking for a 

government and a leader to create some new initiative, to lay 

out some ideas so that they could see their province and see 

their province continue to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the so-called plan, if there is a 

plan of economic activity, one has to question where it is as we 

take a look at the recent statistics, Mr. Speaker, regarding 

unemployment in the province, and regarding employment and 

jobs and job creation across this province, Mr. Speaker.  We 

find that since the number of jobs have decreased, the number 

of people employed have increased since June to July of 1992.  

Then at the same time, when you look at the same figures, they 

also indicate there's been a substantial increase of unemployed 

people across this province since July of 1991, prior to the 

election.  We also find there's been a very significant increase 

in the number of jobs that aren't 

available and the number of people who have left the work 

force and the number of people who have left Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a sound and solid indication that people 

across this province have become very disillusioned with the 

present government. 

 

And as I was indicating earlier, talking about the members 

opposite and many members who have false illusions of who 

the rich are and who should and shouldn't be paying taxes . . . I 

just look back to some of the comments made by the member 

for Regina Churchill Downs before the cabinet of this province 

was sworn in.  Before they were sworn in, they wiped off the 

books of some hundreds of millions of dollars of tax revenue.  

Well that's what this present government did when they were 

elected on October 21, 1991.  They just said no to income 

revenue that they could have used to help generate some 

economic activity in this province, that they could have used to 

strengthen our education and health system across the province. 

 

What about the member from Saskatoon Broadway as 

indicated in June 1991, that: this government has money for 

some people (referring to the former government).  They have 

money for Cargill Grain; they have money for all the bigwig 

friends; but they don't have money for education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where's the money for education today?  

We find that not only in my constituency, but constituencies 

across this province and even in our universities and even in 

our major centres, Mr. Speaker . . . yes, 2 and 3 and 4 per cent 

of an increase maybe wasn't a lot of money and didn't seem to 

be very high or much of an increase.  But to many of the 

educational boards across this province, Mr. Speaker, it was an 

increase, something that they could work with.  And we all 

realize, Mr. Speaker, that we have to become more 

accountable.  We have to make our system more accountable, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the government or the members opposite 

talked about economic activity, what were some of the 

promises they made to the people of Saskatchewan?  One of 

the promises they made was the fact that they would get rid of 

food banks. 

 

If elected, quoting from the Star-Phoenix, October 3, 1991: if 

elected, the New Democratic Party will work to get rid of food 

banks, said Atkinson.  It will fund hot lunch programs in 

schools.  The NDP will re-establish the school-based dental 

plan and the training program for dental therapists needed to 

staff local clinics. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder where all these promises 

are.  What about the elimination of food banks, Mr. Speaker?  

It seems to me from what we've seen over the past months 

there are even more people going to the food bank.  And I say 

in a province that has so much to offer, the ability to produce 

well above its ability to consume, it's shameful that we have 

food banks and people having to depend on food banks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many young people this summer looking 

for work, many young people who didn't have 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

job opportunities open up for them because the government's 

commitment to young people and to jobs wasn't there.  We just 

take a look at the Partnerships '92 program, Mr. Speaker, at 

what kind of commitment the government came out with very 

late in the day.  I believe it was towards the end of April they 

indicated that they would have another program to help the 

employers hire young people to work for them and to create 

jobs.  Mr. Speaker, when at the end of the day when everything 

was said and done, we find the program was only funded to the 

tune of $1.6 million when last year it was in the $6 million 

range. 

 

(1915) 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you will wonder why it is that so many 

young people will be looking or have to look at other 

alternatives to fund their education this coming year, as they 

further their education either through the university or some of 

the regional colleges across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've been talking about the fact that this 

government promised that they wouldn't increase taxes, that 

they wouldn't ask the people of Saskatchewan for any more, 

that the people had had enough.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest today that yes, today people would say the same thing.  

If they said it yesterday, they will say it even a lot more loudly 

and loudly and a lot more clearer that yes, they have had 

enough of increases in taxes. 

 

What about our phone rates?  Not only did the phone rates 

increase, Mr. Speaker, but we find while the government didn't 

harmonize the tax system, when the Minister of Finance 

brought down his budget, Mr. Speaker, what did he do?  He 

increased the education and health tax by 1 per cent; 1 per cent 

hits every man, woman, and child, every business, every 

service that we in this province use and pay for, every product 

we purchase -- 1 per cent. 

 

To many people that was a substantial amount taken from their 

income.  Not only 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, on the tax portion, 

but the fact is that that 1 per cent also translated into more of an 

increase in your phone rates than just the normal . . . or not the 

normal, but the increase that was brought forward by the 

government because the tax portion increased as well on that 

amount. 

 

What about power rates in this province?  And, Mr. Speaker, 

we were promised no new taxes.  Aren't power rates a tax?  

Aren't power rates a tax on the people of Saskatchewan?  And 

when you look at power rates and you look back at what the 

former government did and the initiative that was taken to -- 

first of all, Mr. Speaker -- put telephone lines underground and 

placed telephone lines right through this province, Mr. Speaker 

-- a commitment to strengthen our rural economy and our rural 

communities. 

 

And then the former government also established a program to 

put power lines underground which was not only a benefit to 

rural communities but also would assist in being a larger safety 

factor.  And yet what does the government say?  No new taxes.  

They're not going to increase taxes but we have an increase in 

our phone rates, 

in our power rates, in our natural gas rates. 

 

It seems that everything we touched, Mr. Speaker, since the 

Minister of Finance presented his budget, we have increases in 

our tax system, increases.  Money coming out of our pocket.  It 

seems that Big Brother government has again dipped into our 

pocket.  Taken, offered us some money on one hand and then 

reached in with the other while we weren't looking and taking 

something out of it. 

 

What about increases in SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) vehicle insurance?  As I've indicated, Mr. Speaker, a 

1 per cent increase from the 7 to 8 per cent means a substantial 

sum of money and dollars that have been taken from 

individuals across this province.  And where is the money 

going? 

 

What has happened to the educational system?  What has 

happened?  What kind of a commitment has the government 

made to education?  What kind of a commitment have they 

made to health, Mr. Speaker.  In fact many communities across 

our province are very worried about their health services and 

about their hospitals and their care homes.  They're wondering 

does this government really care?  Does this government really 

care for rural Saskatchewan or even people in the large urban 

centres? 

 

Did they take the surtax that they added to personal income 

tax?  Are they going to put that into health care in our province, 

Mr. Speaker?  I think it's appropriate, Mr. Speaker, when we 

look at the fact that the government and the Minister of Finance 

would continue to argue that it's now time to hold the line when 

two years ago and three years ago while the minister of Finance 

of the day was trying to do that very thing, every time you 

turned around, it wasn't enough. 

 

There wasn't enough of a commitment to health care.  There 

wasn't enough of a commitment to education in our province.  

What about an increase on fuel tax?  Or an increase on tobacco 

tax?  Or an increase of 1 per cent in the corporate income tax?  

Or the corporate capital tax?  Or 25 per cent on the corporate 

capital tax? 

 

What about the increase on chiropractic and optometric 

services, Mr. Speaker?  And, Mr. Speaker, I believe over the 

last number of days you have seen that there are many people 

across this province have and continue to speak out very loudly 

by sending petitions to our offices.  And I must say to you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, that the petitions that we've been 

presenting to this Assembly have been petitions that we haven't 

run around trying to drag and pull out of people like trying to 

pull teeth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people have been doing it on their own.  They've 

been putting the petitions out.  They've been in the offices of 

the optometrists and the chiropractors.  They've been beside the 

tills in your local businesses.  People themselves have taken up 

the initiative because they are very dissatisfied with what the 

government has done to date and certainly with what the 

Minister of Finance is intending to do, and the Minister of 

Health is intending to do, with health services. 

 

We've brought to the attention of the Assembly the fact 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

that chiropractic services can be a very integral part in a health 

wellness model -- or optometric services.  And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, many of the people who use the chiropractic services 

aren't using the services because they want to.  But many 

people end up using the services because, Mr. Speaker, that 

was the most appropriate form of health care that is necessary 

for them at that time.  And so, Mr. Speaker, we feel that by 

increasing chiropractic and optometric services, the 

government has again just gone a little too far as they are 

putting the burden of these services on the backs of the lower 

income people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about broken promises and chiropractic 

services.  We talk about broken promises and no more taxes for 

the province.  We talk about a commitment to health care and 

so far what we've received from the Minister of Health is a 

commitment to a so-called wellness model.  And even though 

we've posed a number of questions over the past number of 

weeks, Mr. Speaker, we still have yet to see what the wellness 

model really means. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we have seen is we've 

received a leaked copy of this wellness model which includes 

plans to close up to 66 rural hospitals and to consolidate health 

regions to only 7 in number.  It says: local boards to be fired 

and individuals reappointed by minister alone.  Mr. Speaker, 

that has created a fair bit of concern in my constituency, in a 

number of communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at it very closely and over the past 

number of years, I must also indicate that in the communities 

of Whitewood and Wawota, Mr. Speaker, the former 

government made a commitment to care homes in those 

communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also at that . . . the former government 

also went to the communities.  And I've talked with the hospital 

boards and I've talked to people involved in the health field, 

and my community, the communities over the past number of 

years, indicating to them that it would be appropriate for the 

boards to start looking at possibly amalgamating and forming 

one board rather than two or three or four boards as we see 

across this province, as I feel, Mr. Speaker, that many times the 

services and the boards are performing the same service.  And 

when you have three or four boards, Mr. Speaker, many times I 

don't believe we're getting the appropriate value for our dollar, 

as the boards are out protecting their own individual entity and 

purpose rather than working towards the betterment and the 

wholeness of their community. 

 

And I would like to indicate that over the past four or five 

years, Mr. Speaker, in some of the communities I represent a 

number of boards have, on their own, taken up the initiative 

that was suggested by the then Health minister, Mr. Graham 

Taylor, that they amalgamate.  And a number of communities, 

most of the boards, health boards in the communities are now 

under one board.  They took the initiative themselves. 

 

So I would suggest that if the government really felt strongly 

about rural hospital boards and care home 

boards and home care boards getting together, that I think if 

they would have continued the consultative process, they 

would have had ready acceptance of that program, Mr. 

Speaker.  Because many communities were already in the 

process of, and had the gears in motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an area that has really created a concern, a grave 

concern for many people across the province of Saskatchewan, 

is the elimination of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  However, 

we find the government did later reverse or has reversed the 

decision.  But people across this province still really don't 

know what the government means by the reversal, other than 

the Minister of Finance indicates that he will not be putting any 

more money . . . will not be offering any matchable grants to 

the pension plan holders across this province. 

 

And I would suggest, as I have over the past number of days, 

Mr. Speaker . . . past number of weeks, that the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan was a very good plan, that it was a very sound 

plan.  It was a plan that gave men and women, and specifically 

women, the ability to plan for their future.  And I know there 

were many women who got involved in the plan that were in 

just a very short time before they started collecting, and yet the 

government today will argue that that automatic monthly 

pay-out of $15 was just a little too much to accept, that we 

couldn't afford it. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, I think if we took the long-run view, the 

overall view of what the pension plan could do for us, and the 

fact that government costs, as people get older, are going to 

increase the demand for more government services; if people 

were able to plan today for their retirement tomorrow, and 

especially women have a pension plan that they could be 

involved in, Mr. Speaker, I think it would bode well for each 

and every one of us as it would take a greater . . . the load 

would become less on the government as many people would 

have monies invested and put away themselves. 

 

So I would ask the Minister of Finance to reconsider the fact, 

as many people across this province have, as 48,000 women 

have, and 56,000 men and women involved in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan have indicated, I would ask the 

Minister of Finance to reconsider and to not just reverse his 

decision on discontinuing and eliminating the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, but strengthening the plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it may not mean a matching grant of $300.  It may, as 

many people have indicated, even if the government put up 100 

or $200, and it may also mean, Mr. Speaker, cutting down the 

amount that a person would be able to make in order to be 

eligible -- maybe dropping the ceiling, Mr. Speaker, so that 

we're indeed placing the pension plan where it should be, in the 

hands of those who can least afford to have a pension plan or 

don't have any access to a pension plan, so that we're helping 

those individuals who truly should receive the finances and 

then allowing the pension plan to build.  And I would ask the 

Minister of Finance to reconsider it.  I would also ask the 

Minister of Justice to give consideration to placing the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan under the pension Act that he has 

before the Assembly. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard a comment from across the floor 

indicating that consultations are taking place and I trust indeed 

that a very serious consultation is taking place, that they are 

indeed talking to people and looking at ways in which they can 

strengthen rather than eliminate or just let a plan sit in limbo to 

the point that people finally say, well there's really nothing in it 

for us so I guess we'll get out of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about frozen or eliminated health facility 

capital projects in rural areas.  I have a community that was 

promised a new hospital and they were wondering today where 

their hospital stands.  Is the government of the day even 

interested and considering proceeding with this facility or is it 

just going to die?  As a number of people have indicated, that 

because they didn't elect an NDP member to represent them in 

the House, their hospital proposal is now dead in the waters. 

 

(1930) 

 

I trust, Mr. Speaker, that this facility will indeed get due 

diligence, that it will be . . . that if the government is talking of 

reviewing it, certainly they will look at it very seriously as the 

Moosomin community is a major centre in the area, not just 

serving people in south-eastern Saskatchewan, not just serving 

people in the Kelso and Maryfield and Fairlight areas and 

Rocanville areas, Mr. Speaker, but certainly serving people 

right across western Manitoba as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we happen to live in an area where a lot of 

the trade that comes into some of our communities, Mr. 

Speaker, comes from Manitoba communities and people who 

live along the border because they find it more convenient and 

closer for them to come and use the services that we have in 

our eastern communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that many people are becoming very 

disturbed at and really beginning to raise more concern every 

day is the fact that this government promised when they were 

on the campaign trail that they would strengthen the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) insurance program.  They 

said that they would make it even stronger, fairer and more 

equitable.  However what have we seen, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We have seen the government take a program which was 

giving the farm community the ability to at least carry 

insurance that would give them a bottom line . . . that they 

could put the required funds into the needed inputs such as 

fertilizer and chemicals, Mr. Speaker, that they could put them 

and make it do a very diligent effort or make a very deliberate 

attempt to produce a crop. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've indicated from day one that people 

across Saskatchewan, the farm community were not happy with 

GRIP '91, Mr. Speaker.  They recognized and they suggested 

that changes were needed and we recognized that.  In fact as 

we were meeting with people across the province through 

public meetings in the spring of 1991 a lot of questions were 

raised, Mr. Speaker, and the ministers of the day, the federal 

ministers and the federal people, Mr. Speaker, did take the time 

to listen to those concerns. 

However, Mr. Speaker, we found that there wasn't enough time 

to institute many of the concerns that were being raised and 

they were being put on the back burner to be brought forward 

at a later date to strengthen and improve the GRIP program.  

Certainly when the election took place on October 21, 1991, 

Mr. Speaker, we felt and believed, and I believe many people 

believed that the government of the day was going to take some 

of the suggestions that were presented -- not only by people in 

the field, not only by the farm community, not only by farm 

organizations, but even by the agents, the crop insurance agents 

-- take a lot of the proposals that were put forward, bring them 

forward into the plan.  That would strengthen the plan and that 

would create a plan that would help people when they needed it 

most. 

 

There isn't a farmer out there who is looking for a government 

hand-out if he's got his bins full and the price of grain is 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker.  Well we find that, Mr. Speaker, 

what the 1991 GRIP program had available, it created a format 

whereby people, farmers themselves, supported and 

strengthened their communities, supported their local 

businesses, paid their bills, Mr. Speaker, paid their taxes, were 

able to start making payments on some of the loans that were 

dragging or that were falling into arrears. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, by the time everything was said and done, 

there were many people who began to realize that 1991 GRIP 

had a lot of potential with some minor changes to it.  And as 

we've been debating in this House for the past number of 

months, we've been asking the government to reconsider the 

fact that they just took this program that they were going to 

strengthen and have gutted it -- just taken away the very fibre 

of the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They've taken a program that would have protected individual 

producers, and, Mr. Speaker, they've basically made it into a 

universal program that does nothing for the individual out there 

who has a crop loss such as many farmers are facing today, a 

crop loss due to weather conditions beyond their control.  

Whether it's drought, Mr. Speaker, or whether it's a hail-storm 

that comes through, you're looking for an . . . you've got an 

excellent crop coming up and the hail-storm wipes you out, Mr. 

Speaker, this new program does nothing for you because what 

it does . . . yes, you can collect your crop insurance, and the 

revenue portion you will collect at some date in the future 

when the government finally decides to establish what the per 

acre may be.  And, Mr. Speaker, when that decision is made, 

every producer, whether they've got grain in the bins or 

whether they don't have any grain, receive the same payment.  

There isn't . . . the fairness isn't there as there was in the 1991 

program. 

 

We also see the . . . Mr. Speaker, when we talk about rural 

Saskatchewan, we talk about the government's commitment to 

strengthening rural Saskatchewan.  The indication that the 

government and the Minister of Rural Development is talking 

about the possibility of reducing the number of rural 

municipalities -- and that is of grave concern to SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) members 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all realize that municipalities and the 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

funding that is needed to help municipalities run, their added 

funding is needed to maintain the services in municipalities as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to mention is every time we 

turn around in this Assembly and we talk about a commitment 

by the province or a commitment to the GRIP program, it's 

strengthening agriculture in the province.  Mr. Speaker, 

whether it's the Minister of Finance, whether it's the Minister of 

Agriculture or the Government House Leader, what do the 

members continually fall back on?  Their favourite saying has 

gone from waste and mismanagement to blame it on the federal 

government.  They blame it on the federal government for 

cutting back on revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet at the same time they turn around and they reduce the 

revenue sharing to local governments across this province -- 

not just rural governments, Mr. Speaker, but municipal 

governments.  And then one of the major concerns that 

municipal governments have indicated, and it's in the news 

today, is the fact that this government is now going to 

unilaterally impose the ward system on the two largest centres 

in our province again, Mr. Speaker.  And from what I hear, Mr. 

Speaker, many of these urban municipalities, the large 

municipalities, want to have the choice themselves to decide 

whether they want the ward or the at-large system. 

 

And I believe if the government is very intent on consulting, if 

the government is intent on listening to people, if the 

government is intent on showing that it isn't the bully that they 

have shown they are over the last number of weeks -- in the 

fact that they've introduced closure motions such as they have, 

used their majority to the degree they have, Mr. Speaker -- I 

think they would give urban municipalities the ability to choose 

the electoral system that they would like to have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we find that the government have also increased 

fees right across this province -- in agriculture, increased fees 

to land surface-right fees. They've increased breeder fees in our 

community pastures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They're talking about also not just reducing municipal revenue 

sharing, but eliminating . . . redrawing the electoral boundaries 

to reduce the number of rural constituencies as well.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think with the programs that have been introduced 

by the government, programs that take away the services from 

rural Saskatchewan, the lack of commitment, I think the 

government's going to say, well we should take a look at 

redrawing the boundaries of the rural boundaries because of the 

fact that people are going to look and, rather than staying in 

their smaller urban communities, because the jobs aren't there 

because the government has taken away any avenue that people 

had of finding of employment by allowing schools to close or 

taking away hospital facilities . . . 

 

And certainly in my communities, hospital and care home 

facilities are one of the major contractors or major employers 

in the community.  They create jobs for not just families, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly young people as well 

during the summer-time.  And we see that if the jobs aren't 

there, if our hospital's closed, it may mean anywhere from 15 to 

30 people -- jobs that are lost in the community; jobs which 

may have a very significant impact on a family's income.  And 

if it isn't there, Mr. Speaker, they probably will take the . . . 

look very seriously at moving to communities where jobs are 

possibly more plentiful.  But as I indicated earlier, it would 

appear that the job opportunities in this province just aren't 

there, as the people of Saskatchewan may have thought they 

would be by voting for the NDP on October 21, 1991. 

 

And when I talk about a commitment to rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, I look at the Fair Share program, a program 

announced by the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look back to the discussion and the debate that 

took place regarding the Fair Share program.  And I want to 

leave some quotes with the House.  Certainly you can expect a 

gentleman by the name of Doug Archer, the mayor of Regina, 

to be very concerned about the decentralization program, the 

Fair Share program. 

 

On STV (SaskWest Television) Viewpoints in April 7, 1991, 

Mr. Archer said: Well certainly I want to protect our 

community.  At the same time I can't go out and argue that all 

the civil servants' jobs have to be in the city of Regina.  That in 

and of itself doesn't make sense. 

 

Now the minister . . . or the mayor of Regina indicated that he 

wasn't in favour of decentralization but he also, it appears, must 

have come from a rural community and indicated that maybe 

some of the jobs could serve Saskatchewan well by being in 

other communities outside of the major city. 

 

In the Leader-Post, May 30, 1991, the quote was: The 

opposition says it won't reverse the agricultural department's 

move to the Humboldt area if it forms government.  And yet 

every time we've met in this House last spring, Mr. Speaker, 

every time the opportunity came, the opposition of the day 

derided the government of the day for its Fair Share program.  

And yet I find, while saying one thing in this Assembly, when 

they're out in their constituencies they found it was okay. 

 

What about on CKCK Radio?  It says the member for 

Humboldt, Eric Upshall, and this is what he said: We will 

continue the process of decentralization.  Or the member for 

Quill Lakes, what did he say about decentralization?  While he 

was complaining about decentralization and Fair Share in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, he said: The NDP isn't opposed to 

decentralization. 

 

Even the Premier today, of the day, and back in June 10, 1991, 

the Tisdale Recorder said: For the PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) to say we would cancel Fair Share . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have been observing the 

interference with the member from Moosomin for some time 

now and I've been trying by some signals up here to get 

members to calm down, but that doesn't seem to work. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

So I'm asking members, if they have something to say to each 

other, not to yell across the Chamber but to get together and 

talk about it that way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I 

noticed you did. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to go back to a quote that I was into, talking about Fair 

Share, and a quote by the then opposition leader, the present 

Premier of the province in the Tisdale Recorder in June 10, 

1991: For the PCs to say that we would cancel Fair Share is an 

outright lie. 

 

And I think any of the members who are sitting here today that 

were here prior to last fall's election would indicate that the 

debate in this House . . . many of the members who, while they 

were out in rural Saskatchewan while they were out 

campaigning, indicated that they weren't diametrically opposed 

to Fair Share, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly very lividly spoke 

out against the Fair Share program promised by the former 

government. 

 

And when you look at what's happening in rural Saskatchewan 

today, Mr. Speaker, you find that there are many communities . 

. . maybe some of them weren't as receptive as maybe the 

government would have liked, or many of the people in their 

communities would have liked regarding the Fair Share 

program, but I suggest today, Mr. Speaker, that that Fair Share 

program would receive a lot better reception in rural 

Saskatchewan in light of what we see is taking place due to the 

commitment by the Finance minister to tax Saskatchewan 

people and tax rural Saskatchewan people, discontinue services 

to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier also indicated back in June 13, 1991 -- the then 

opposition leader -- the NDP will freeze the Fair Share 

program and then evaluate each program moved against six 

criteria if elected.  It says:  Romanow did not rule out moving 

departments back to Regina.  And that was out of the Star-

Phoenix of June 13, 1991. 

 

(1945) 

 

So while the then opposition leader was indicating that they 

would look fairly at the Fair Share program and the 

commitment to move civil service jobs out of the city to a 

number of communities around the province, he also indicated 

that he would not think twice about possibly moving some of 

the jobs that were already in rural Saskatchewan into larger 

centres like Regina. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the debate that has taken 

place in the town of Humboldt regarding the removal of the 

court-house from the town of Humboldt.  And the fact that I 

believe through the co-operative effort of the mayor and the 

community, I believe the commitment has been made to leave 

the court-house in that community. 

 

And I wonder who the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) is for the Quill Lakes.  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that 

same commitment would have been made in an opposition 

member's riding.  We may see in the near future. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the present Finance minister in The 

Western Producer on June 6, 1991, speaking about Fair Share 

said:  An NDP government would not move employees back to 

Regina if they had already been relocated.  And it says:  

Tchorzewski says the NDP isn't against decentralization.  This 

is from The Western Producer, June 6, 1991. 

 

And also I wanted to indicate the fact that many of the 

members on their side of the House as well . . . and I want to 

mention the NDP candidate in Yorkton on radio on June 10, 

1991, said after the announcement was made in Yorkton, his 

announcement, his comments regarding the announcement of 

decentralizing some services to Yorkton were: the 

announcement here in Yorkton is a welcome announcement.  

Any time we have the opportunity of getting new jobs, new 

opportunities, new employment in our community, we look 

forward to that.  And certainly today's announcement on behalf 

of our city and our chamber of commerce, our economic 

development committee, were welcome for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the NDP MLA when he was a candidate in 

Yorkton.  He was talking about the fact that decentralization of 

a service to his community would be very welcome, that people 

would welcome it.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, over the past 

number of months we find that there are many people 

lamenting the fact that the government decided to totally forget 

about that promise that they would re-evaluate the Fair Share 

program, that they would look at it fairly, and that that they 

would sit down with communities and discuss the program and 

make it a better program.  What was their answer, Mr. 

Speaker?  To totally cancel it. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, while the mayor of Regina may have 

indicated that some jobs could work out of Regina, he also 

indicated that he wouldn't want to see government services 

move out of the city.  But he also was more than welcome and 

was part of that welcoming committee that flew to Toronto to 

talk to Crown Life employees trying to sell the community of 

Regina to the employees of Crown Life as they moved the head 

office here to Regina. 

 

And even Farm Credit, Mr. Speaker -- it seems that while 

people spoke against the program on one hand, on the other 

hand they were very happy that the government was thinking 

of their community and looking at ways in which they could 

bring more activity into the community through jobs, through 

bringing companies and employment to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about its commitment to agriculture?  I 

talked about the  GRIP program.  What has the government 

done?  Last night one of my colleagues, or a couple of my 

colleagues were in Humboldt for a meeting with the hog 

producers.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think when we look back at the 

debate prior to the October 21, 1991 election, we find the 

government was indicating that they were committed to rural 

Saskatchewan, they were committed to agriculture. 

 

And I don't think there is anyone in this province will not admit 

and not argue that agriculture plays a very vital role, a very 

important role in the economic engine of this 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

province.  In fact it is the number one economic activity in this 

province is agriculture, and one of the largest employers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly what do we have, as I indicated earlier, when you 

see the breeding fee increases?  No one will argue increases, 

but 31 per cent?  That is unreal; that is unfair.  What about the 

feed grain adjustment program?  What does that do to the 

feeding industry in this province that we worked so hard to 

establish, Mr. Speaker?  A feeding industry in the hogs and in 

livestock -- finishing livestock across our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the feed grain adjustment program, many people 

would argue, isn't necessary and wouldn't be necessary if the 

producers in Saskatchewan didn't have to compete with the 

programs that we have in Alberta and Manitoba and other areas 

across this country.  The fact is the feed grain program was just 

creating a more level playing-field for the producers across our 

province who were into the hog industry and who were into the 

meat industry, feeding livestock.  Mr. Speaker, it gave them a 

more level playing-field. 

 

And because of that feed grain adjustment program, assistance 

program, what did we find?  We find that there was increased 

construction and renovations and enlargement of our packing 

facilities in our province which meant jobs for people in 

centres, urban Saskatchewan. 

 

However we find today, Mr. Speaker, the feed grain adjustment 

program is eliminated.  Many feedlots are now being closed 

down because, Mr. Speaker, many people felt and found that at 

the end of the day about the only dollar they really made came 

from that feed grain adjustment, the fact that they were helped 

by a percentage of their feed grains and a tonne payment. 

 

And I think of a farmer right in our area, Mr. Speaker, who 

really didn't support me as far as his political views, Mr. 

Speaker, and worked very hard for the government of the day.  

But, Mr. Speaker, because of the programs and initiatives 

created by the former government, decided to start feeding 

cattle to diversify his farming operation. 

 

And he even indicated to a very close friend of mine, as they 

were talking about the farming and talking about the crop 

situation and talking about what he was doing and how he was 

making out feeding his cattle, he indicated that the feed grain 

adjustment program was one of the main reasons that he 

continued to feed cattle.  Not to make money, but he didn't lose 

money and it gave him a few dollars to work with at the end of 

the day by the time everything was said and done. 

 

And his indication was he would have to reconsider what he is 

really going to do because you can't afford to do work for 

nothing.  You can't afford to do something for nothing.  You 

ask a contractor or you ask a labourer, a person out in the 

labour field, if they'd be willing to work for nothing.  And I 

dare say there isn't a person around who would go out and 

work for nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they cancelled the cash advance programs, 

programs, the cash advance system, which placed cash 

into the hands of farmers on the basis of the number of 

livestock they had available such as the cash advance to the 

grain producers.  It was a program that gave farmers access to 

cash until they could move their product to market so that they 

could pay their bills rather than the bills piling up on them, Mr. 

Speaker, the interest building up on those accounts and 

becoming even a heavier burden. 

 

They've capped the fuel rebate program for farmers.  And we 

even see today, as I indicated earlier, they're trying to pass 

legislation to force farmers to accept GRIP '92 even though it 

would appear to us, Mr. Speaker, that the government is 

breaking the law by doing so.  And certainly that's an area that 

we will continue to debate in this Assembly and to bring to the 

attention of the government and anyone who's interested the 

fact that we feel that it is very unfair for the government to use 

their majority and to use their position to rewrite the rules to 

change a contract or even to say that that contract never did 

exist and hide under their legislation even though it may go -- 

and we believe it is going -- totally against the principles of the 

rights of individuals as entrenched in the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms, section 7. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that we see . . . where we see the 

government reneging on its promise to Saskatchewan people 

was the Minister of Highways talking about allowing so many 

thousands of kilometres of highways in this province to go 

back to gravel.  And I think here again, Mr. Speaker, we find 

that as people spoke up on the issues and the fact that -- it may 

or may not have had a major impact -- but the fact that the 

majority of the highways that would were laid out as possibly 

going back to gravel roads, Mr. Speaker, happened to be right 

in the constituency that the Minister of Highways represented.  

I know that may have influenced the minister to reconsider his 

decision.  We don't know for sure, but certainly there are many 

communities and many people across rural Saskatchewan who 

are thankful that at least the government has reconsidered. 

 

And in light of that I think, Mr. Speaker, there are many other 

areas that we feel the government could reconsider.  And as we 

indicated today, we've asked the Minister of Justice if he would 

even use his influence to take the Bill that his colleagues are 

bringing before this Assembly to the courts and allow the 

courts to make a speedy decision on this decision.  And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice is an honest 

and basically a good individual and that he really stands for the 

rights of individuals.  And we believe, Mr. Speaker, in light of 

some of the changes that the government has made today that 

the Minister of Justice will indeed . . . soundness will take over, 

Mr. Speaker, and he will reconsider his lack of commitment to 

take this legislation to the courts and allow the courts to make 

that decision very shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also wonder what the government is doing 

regarding the plebiscite results.  And as many people are aware 

of the fact, there were three plebiscites placed on the ballot last 

fall.  And every one of the plebiscites had a resounding vote in 

favour of those plebiscites: a vote in favour of deficit 

financing; a vote in favour of cutting funding on abortions, Mr. 

Speaker; a vote in favour of being able to voice their opinion 

on the 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going . . . we will continue to ask the 

government what they intend to do with the results of the 

plebiscite.  Are they going to listen?  Are they going to accept 

the fact that the people on October 21, 1991 spoke out very 

strongly and expressed their views and opinions regarding 

these questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area of major concern to the people of 

Saskatchewan and I think to all people in Saskatchewan is, and 

as I talked about it a while back, is the economic plan that the 

government has for this province.  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the areas of economic activity and I believe an area that we 

in this province have and should have and should take a hold 

of, grab a hold of to develop, is the uranium industry.  We saw 

prior to 1982 the government of the day said that there would 

be no more uranium mining in this province.  We see the 

former government entering into an agreement regarding the 

Atomic Energy of Canada to create economic activity by 

getting into an agreement which had the approval of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association); which had 

the approval of SARM; which had the approval of the 

Canadian Federation of Labour; which had the approval of the 

Saskatchewan chambers of commerce; the North Saskatoon 

Business Association; the Saskatchewan Real Estate board, 

Synergy today -- and certainly Synergy has raised . . . and 

talked to a number of people and has had a number of petitions; 

Students Advocating Nuclear Energy; municipal councils 

throughout Saskatchewan; Great West Rural Development 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these organizations, representing thousands 

of people across this province:  the mayor of Saskatoon; the 

city of Saskatoon; a number of the mayors in the northern areas 

of the province.  Mr. Speaker, to them it would mean economic 

activity.  And all we see of the government of the day is 

leading people to believe that the only aspect to that agreement 

was the construction and the building of a CANDU reactor in 

this province, when, Mr. Speaker, it would have given the 

government, working together with Atomic Energy, the ability 

to explore alternative sources of energy across this province. 

 

And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that our water resources are 

becoming more scarce.  SaskPower continues to remind us of 

the fact that at the consumption rate of increases that we've had 

over the past number of years, we will not have the ability to 

meet the needs in this province of providing energy, providing 

the electricity and the heat that will be needed to light, power, 

and heat our homes and run our businesses and run our 

manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a tremendous resource in this 

province.  And I believe it would be appropriate that we look at 

ways of developing the resource rather than just becoming . . . 

or continuing to be hewers of wood and drawers of water, Mr. 

Speaker, continually taking our raw product and moving it out 

of the province and allowing other people to develop the 

product, develop the resource, and then we turn around and we 

purchase . . . repurchase the products and repurchase the 

resources. 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see a government that promised . . . or gave a 

verbal promise to open and honest government.  And we can 

take a look at the Gass Commission, commission a number of 

-- what was it -- four individuals commissioned to look into the 

books.  As the Premier will continue to argue, we said when we 

went to the people that we will look at the books.  We will 

open the books.  But, Mr. Speaker, even the Provincial Auditor 

is questioning and quizzing the government and some of their 

activities just following the election, prior to the end of the 

government fiscal year. 

 

The Provincial Auditor is wondering where the government 

took . . . or why the government would have taken millions of 

dollars in amortized long-term debt, transferred it from the 

Crowns to the Consolidated Fund, and then all of a sudden 

forgiven the debt which then, Mr. Speaker, built up the overall 

debt in this province for the year, the calendar year of 1991-92, 

by some $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker.  No wonder the government 

today is now standing here and telling us they don't have any 

money. 

 

But it may be interesting to see where they are two years from 

now.  Are they going to be standing in this Assembly and 

bragging of how well they did, the fact that the Crowns are 

now making money because they took all the amortized 

long-term debt and they removed it out of the Crown so that 

they didn't have to pay for that debt, wrote it off?  Are they 

going to be standing here and telling the people of 

Saskatchewan, look what we did for you, when in fact all they 

did was transfer their accounting practices . . . or change their 

accounting practices? 

 

And certainly the Gass Commission had some good comments, 

the positive comments, some comments where they made 

comments about the former government and about the fact that 

the books were open all along, Mr. Speaker, that anyone who 

wanted to had access to the books.  They could take and they 

could reopen the books, Mr. Speaker, and see for themselves 

that the government was being forthright, open, and honest. 

 

We also find, Mr. Speaker, if we look back to the time . . . the 

six months following the election, what kind of agreement did 

the government work out with high-ranking, long-term officials 

in this province?  Men and women, many people across this 

province, many people in the public service who had been in 

the service for years, for 15 and 20 and 30 years, Mr. Speaker, 

all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, even though they came in under 

Liberal governments, were hired under NDP governments, 

because they happened to continue to work and be able to work 

in the public service and were elevated to higher positions, they 

might be Tories, so their jobs were cut and their contracts were 

not even honoured.  Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that is 

becoming of an open and honest government. 

 

What about -- and members today indicate -- what about 

patronage?  They talk about the former government.  And as I 

indicated earlier, that's something that certainly we could get 

into, and the government indicated there 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

would be no more.  In fact very early in this session one of the 

ministers indicated that there wouldn't be any more political 

hirings.  People would be hired on merit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of questions before this 

Assembly, a number of questions where we are asking the 

government.  We are certainly going to follow up and see if the 

government adhered to that promise made to this Assembly and 

to members on the opposition side of the floor by the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Another area of grave concern is some of the legislation that is 

being brought forward.  And when we talk about honesty and 

openness, Mr. Speaker, and the government reneging on their 

promises of being more open, I think of an area that needs 

more debate.  And, Mr. Speaker, both parties or a number of 

parties have already indicated that they have no problem with 

some of the concerns.  It's the critical wildlife habitat Act.  It's 

an Act, Mr. Speaker, that would delegate a number of areas of 

land in this province to critical wildlife habitat. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that that consultative 

process that has been spoken about by the government hasn't 

exactly taken place, as we see the stock growers on one side 

very concerned.  And as I look at the legislation and as I talk to 

a number of individuals in my community and constituency 

who have been very heavily involved in the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, individuals who really want to see this Act 

passed . . . But they also realize and share some of the concerns 

that have been raised by the Saskatchewan Stock Growers' 

Association because they feel that the process of consultation 

and working together wasn't exactly followed through. 

 

And so I believe, Mr. Speaker, that as we enter into greater 

debate on that we will see whether the government is as open 

and as honest as they indicate they are.  And we trust that the 

minister and that the Executive Council will take note of a 

number of the amendments we plan to bring forward to indeed 

give the critical wildlife habitat Act, the Act its ability to not 

only put lands under the Act but also to recognize the rights of 

individuals or ranchers in the south-west and to also give the 

men and women involved in the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation the fact that they have greater access to hunting 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could talk about a number of areas, and many 

other areas that the government has shown a lack of leadership, 

a lack of ability to lead in the economic field.  We could talk 

about the Piper Aircraft deal.  We wonder where it sits today.  

What about the Husky oil upgrader, Mr. Speaker?  What about 

the government?  What have they done to promote the 

possibility of Promavia international manufacturing aircraft in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

What about Saska Pasta in Swift Current, and certainly the 

Minister of Energy and Mines -- I am sure -- is very concerned 

about the Saska Pasta plant in Swift Current as it will mean 

jobs to his community.  What about Westank-Willock in 

Regina, Mr. Speaker?  What commitment has the government 

made?  And we noted yesterday, Mr. Speaker, a number of the 

employees were on the steps of the legislature voicing their 

concerns with the closing down of their plant.  What about 

Echo Valley 

Conference Centre? 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes there are a number of areas where the 

government must answer for what they have done in light of 

what the people of Saskatchewan believed they would do if 

they voted for them in the 21st election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated there are many other areas that 

we could speak to, that we could bring forward in our 

discussion tonight, but I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are some 

of my colleagues as well who would like to speak to the motion 

and to raise a number of points and concerns that I have failed 

to raise tonight or not as well aware of that they would like to 

bring forward in this debate as well.  So at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm going to move a motion, seconded by the member 

from Rosthern: 

 

 That this Assembly condemns the government for its massive 

betrayal of Saskatchewan voters by introducing a budget and 

legislation that contradicts promises made during the election 

campaign, including, imposing no new taxes, supporting rural 

Saskatchewan, increasing support to health, education, and 

agriculture, conducting an open and honest government, and 

listening to the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

want to say that it's my pleasure to second the motion.  And I 

want to also at this time thank the member from Moosomin for 

coming up with such a rather all-encompassing, creative 

motion such as we have before us this evening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, normally I pride myself on being an individual that 

when he gets up to speak has a reasonably orderly mind so that 

we go through the speech step by step.  But when I take a look 

at the parameters of the motion that is before us this evening, 

Mr. Speaker, it really is all-encompassing and also 

all-condemning, I would suggest to you, of the government 

opposite.  The latitude of the motion is such that encompasses 

pretty well every action that the government has done and 

should not have done, and has not done but should have done.  

And that is the type of logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I want 

to pursue for just a little bit of time tonight.  I do not intend to 

take a lot of time, but I wanted to bring some thoughts to the 

people's minds in Saskatchewan tonight for their consideration. 

 

The normal procedure on a debate like this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that we will have a member get up to move the 

motion and then we have a seconder as I am doing now.  And 

then of course the opposition -- and I'm assuming that they will 

do this -- that the member from Saskatoon Broadview will be 

getting up following me . . . Broadway, pardon me -- 

Broadway, Fairway, we've got to be careful on the names of the 

constituencies here -- and she will be making an amendment. 

 

Normally of course we are saying that this Assembly condemns 

the government for its massive betrayal.  And normally then 

the opposite side will say commends.  And I would certainly 

hope that the member then will get up 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

and read her amendment which says that this Assembly 

commends the government for its massive betrayal and 

continuing on just to keep in tradition.  Because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what I intend to do is take a look for a brief moment 

the massive betrayal of Saskatchewan voters as this motion 

indicates, by introducing a budget and legislation that 

contradicts promises -- that contradicts promises made during 

the election campaign, including imposing no new taxes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was a promise made during the 

election campaign upon which the folks opposite got elected by 

promising no new taxes, that they would support rural 

Saskatchewan, that they would increase support to health, that 

they would increase support to education, that they would 

increase support to agriculture.  And in addition to all of this 

support for the various sectors of our society, they would be 

conducting an open and honest government and listening to the 

people. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is such a litany of promises that 

it boggles the minds why any group of men or women would 

go forward to make promises like that knowing full well, 

knowing full well that it would be nigh to an impossibility to 

keep those promises.  And of course that has been borne out.  

That has been borne out in the last eight months or nine months 

or so of this government being in power, where they are now so 

busily trying to regroup and telling the people of the province 

that, sorry folks, the situation was worse than we pretended and 

that you're going to have to be patient for five or six or seven 

years until we get the situation under control.  And then, and 

then maybe we will be able to keep our promises. 

 

One member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know from the opposite 

side said about taxes, said about taxes:  enough is enough.  

Now members opposite may remember who that member was 

when she said, enough is enough, when it referred to taxes in 

Hansard of June 7, 1991. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who was that? 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The member from Saskatoon Broadway is 

concerned whether I'm talking about her.  I assure you I am 

not; I'm talking about the current Minister of Health. 

 

But I think one of the underlying, fundamental betrayals of this 

government revolves around the Premier, the Premier.  

Because the Premier on September 20, 1991, just prior to the 

election, the Premier said at a news conference, in his news 

conference statement, the Premier said: We will make no 

promise we cannot keep.  I say, and I remember, members 

opposite, of that, the Premier in '91, September of '91, said:  

We will make no promise we cannot keep. 

 

Now the member from Moosomin has already taken a fair 

amount of time this evening to describe the litany of broken 

promises, the litany of things that members opposite said they 

would do and then we find out that they did not do that.  The 

Premier also said -- this was prior to the September one that I 

just said -- on March 24, 1990, the Premier said:  I say the 

people of this province 

are fed up with taxes, and we're going to change that.  That was 

another statement he did. 

 

And you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the point that I'm trying to 

make here is that prior to the election there was a series of 

promises made to the people of Saskatchewan to get them to 

believe that if they voted in a New Democratic government that 

things would be different; that there would be more money 

being spent, but fewer taxes to the people. 

 

The Minister of Finance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is on record as 

saying the problem is on the expenditure side.  We have a 

structural deficit.  And he says revenues cannot fix this deficit; 

it has to be dealt with at the expenditure side in order to get 

control.  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is an element of 

honesty in that statement.  There is an element of honesty at 

that statement, and the Minister of Finance recognized that one 

of the areas in which you should be able to control the deficit is 

to cut on the expenditure side.  And I think that behoves any 

government under the circumstances that we have today to 

attempt to do exactly that. 

 

However his major, major shortcoming is, first of all on the 

expenditure side, the way in which they're trying to cut 

expenditures, the counter-productive methods that are being 

employed by the government at this time.  And the folks that 

have been listening to proceedings in this House will be well 

aware of how we had the Minister of Health, and that a 

discussion that I had with the Minister of Health in many of the 

ways in which they're trying to cut spending. 

 

But it's counter-productive.  Because in trying to cut spending 

by optometrists, you send people to ophthalmologists.  By 

trying to cut spending on the chiropractic side, you're sending 

people to physiotherapists.  And at the same time creating a 

two-tier health system where people are going to have to make 

choices whether they want to maintain their health or spend 

their money on other things, be they necessities of life or 

amenities of life. 

 

Those will be decisions that people will be making and 

hopefully, by and large, the citizens of this province are going 

to be level-headed about it and they will take it seriously, and 

they will make decisions for their health.  But we know that 

many, many people will not do that.  Many, many people will 

be able to succumb to the temptations to use the money for 

whatever reason they see fit.  In other words, their priorization 

will be different and they're going to suffer as a result of that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we have here a government that is making all kinds of 

promises prior to the election, where we had the minister of 

Economic Diversification, he said . . . the minister of Economic 

Diversification, he said, we've indicated many, many sources 

where we would see the government saving the kind of money 

that would make these massive tax increases unnecessary. 

 

I'm going to repeat that and then I'm going to raise the profile 

of the members opposite to what they were all . . . You know, 

what was the buzz-word, Mr. Deputy 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Speaker?  What was the buzz-word before the election that 

members opposite coined?  And used quite effectively, I might 

add.  Quite effectively. 

 

Waste and mismanagement.  Do you remember that, folks?  

Waste and mismanagement.  And he has indicated, the Minister 

of Economic Development has indicated that, we've indicated 

many, many sources where we would see the government 

saving the kind of money that would make these massive tax 

increases unnecessary. 

 

Well if they were telling the truth prior to the election, if it was 

true what they were condemning us for, that there was this 

massive amount of waste and mismanagement, where is it?  I 

mean your minister himself said that there's enough waste and 

mismanagement that no tax increases are necessary. 

 

What have we seen on the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

The long litany of tax increases that the member from 

Moosomin has just gone through.  And I'm going to be taking 

some time on that too because it's so relevant to the discussion 

this evening that we have to reinforce to the members opposite. 

 

I don't think we have to reinforce this to the citizens of this 

province.  They're quite well aware, thank you, about the tax 

increases that have been levied against them.  They're very well 

aware of that and they resent it.  But I think members opposite 

are becoming blas about the whole situation.  I think members 

opposite have this rolling off their backs like water off a duck. 

 

And we have to make sure that we impress time and time again 

upon members opposite of the folly of what they are doing and 

the price ultimately that they are going to pay for this action 

and for this deception that they have perpetrated upon the 

people of Saskatchewan in that false campaign of the fall of '91 

to get elected.  That is what we are trying to do with this 

particular motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- I know I've gone 

through a few of the quotes -- I want to just turn our attention 

to an individual that was fairly popular during question period 

this afternoon but found that he could not stand in his place and 

answer the questions that were being asked of him.  And that is 

the Minister of Justice who in Hansard is quoted on April 24, 

'91 saying, the problem isn't government revenues.  The 

problem is not government revenues.  In other words, of 

course, what he was saying, is saying that we don't need more 

revenues. 

 

In fact what he was doing, I would suppose, is supporting his 

boss at the time, the now Premier.  Because the Premier went 

on record in the fall of '91 saying the same thing.  The problem 

isn't in revenues; $4.5 billion is enough for any government to 

operate.  You should be able to work within that framework.  

Those were his words. 

 

So then we had the now Minister of Justice on April 24, '91 

saying, the problem isn't government revenues.  We're getting 

in enough money.  I repeat again, government revenues have 

increased by 70 per cent in the last nine years, and the 

government that can't operate 

with those kinds of numbers is a government that doesn't 

deserve to be a government. 

 

Folks, that's your own Minister of Justice, not ours.  He is 

saying that 4.5 is enough, and if we can't operate under that, we 

shouldn't be in a government.  And I ask members opposite, the 

Estimates that have been finally tabled, what is the amount in 

those Estimates?  What is that amount?  Is it 4.5?  I suggest to 

you that it is not 4.5, ladies and gentlemen across the way, but 

literally over $5 billion.  And the member from Humboldt 

chirps up, and you would think that after his meeting with his 

folks yesterday in the Humboldt area and the farm producers, 

he would be shameful and be sitting there even more red faced 

than he is, so that he would be cognizant of what the people in 

Humboldt are thinking right now about him and the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

And I have to give the Minister of Agriculture credit and I'll do 

that publicly right now.  You, sir, came into a hornet's nest in 

Humboldt.  The folks treated you well, but at least you had the 

nerve to come out this time and face them and try to explain 

your program.  And I'm referring of course now to the 

opposition, to the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) 

and the cash advance program.  And I'm not going to go into 

detail about that, but it's something that is very, very important 

to me as well as a hog producer. 

 

But you at least came out, and I know what their request was 

from you for now to have another look at that whole program 

and see if you cannot sustain it. Or if you're going to be taking 

the bit in your mouth and going down to the road of destruction 

of the hog industry, do it at least gradually.  So that was a 

request, and we've been listening very intently and with a great 

deal of anticipation to your ultimate answer to their request. 

 

But now coming back to the Minister of Justice, where he says 

a government that doesn't live within those means doesn't 

deserve to be a government.  And you're not living within those 

means because you have upped that 4.5 quite substantially, but 

that's not the only condemnation.  The biggest condemnation is 

going exactly the opposite of what you said you would never 

do, and that is the massive tax increases that you have 

implemented upon the people of this province. 

 

Because the Associate Minister of Finance, the toy minister 

from Churchill Downs, is on record and I know that this has 

been quoted many, many times because you people across the 

way were elected on the premise that you would be different, 

that you would do things for the people of Saskatchewan the 

way that they had anticipated.  And you have failed them 

utterly.  You have failed them utterly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I want to say to members opposite that I 

appreciate your acknowledgement.  I appreciate your 

acknowledgement of how you have failed the people of the 

province.  When you said one thing, you got elected on that.  

And immediately, the day after, you turn around and you knife 

the people of Saskatchewan in the back.  You break your 

promises.  You jack taxes up. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

Now I want to come back to that.  The Minister of Justice said 

on April 24, 1991: a government that cannot live within those 

revenues doesn't deserve to be a government.  Now you came 

up from 4.5 to over 5 billion in your budget.  But that's not the 

only condemnation.  The other condemnation is that 

concomitantly you raised the taxes to unprecedented heights.  

There is the condemnation in you folks.  And do you know 

what?  Do you know what?  You did that knowingly. 

 

Now I'm getting a lot of heckling from the opposite side, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  And that happens, as we know in this House, 

every time you start to hit a discordant note.  And the notes that 

I am creating are very discordant for members opposite . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . .  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I assume 

you heard what the member said. 

 

The member from Quill Lakes, chirping from his seat, is 

making unparliamentary remarks which I guess we will have to 

ignore at this time.  But he has not got the nerve to get up in 

this Assembly and speak.  I know he's not only not got the 

nerve; I know that the member from Elphinstone is the one that 

is muzzling members opposite.  But it is the ones who have the 

courage to go against his rulings, to speak up . . . and I've 

already indicated that the member from Saskatoon Broadway is 

waiting anxiously in her seat to respond to some of my 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Associate Minister of Finance -- as I 

was trying to say about three minutes ago before we were so 

rudely interrupted by members opposite -- the Associate 

Minister of Finance said on May 21, 1991: the NDP won't raise 

any personal taxes for four years.  That was a solid 

commitment made by the member from Churchill Downs while 

he was sitting across, approximately where I'm standing right 

now, as Finance critic. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan respected the position that he 

held.  And when he said that, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what the people of Saskatchewan did?  They believed him.  

They believed him.  And when they compared our plan as we 

projected it in the fall of '91, which included harmonization, we 

said to the people of Saskatchewan, there is a tremendous 

burden, a millstone hanging around the necks of us and future 

generations, and our children . . . We recognized that.  We said 

there was a $14 billion deficit. 

 

Your leader today, your Premier, the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, said in the fall of 1991, there is a deficit of 

$14.2 billion.  He said that; he recognized it; he knew it.  You 

all knew it.  And yet, what did you do?  He said that.  And what 

did you do?  You purposely went out and made outrageous 

promises, knowing full well that you would never be able to 

keep those.  But the important thing at that time was to get 

elected.  And, you know, what amazes me all the time is that . . 

. I'm a practical man; I'm a fairly pragmatic man.  And seeing 

that it's hindsight . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order, order.  

All members will have an opportunity to enter into the debate 

after the member who is now speaking has 

finished.  And I ask them to wait until he is finished.  And I ask 

the member from Humboldt to observe order, and ask members 

to all observe order.  I recognize the member for Rosthern. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

have no problems with the member from Humboldt speaking 

out.  We all understand why he's not able to control himself 

tonight, so we'll make allowance for his condition.  So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if I could allow to be able to make my 

presentation without this type of extraordinary interruption, I 

want to make the point again, and emphasize, and underscore 

the point, that members opposite were elected under a false 

premise.  The false premise that members opposite were 

elected on, they full well knew the conditions of the province, 

the economic conditions of the province, and yet they decided 

that they were going to make promises such as spending more 

on education, spending more on health, spending more for 

universities, but at the same time they also promised that taxes 

would not go up. 

 

And I'm not creating these things.  The quotes that I'm using 

are to underscore and to legitimize what I'm saying because 

these are the words taken right out of the mouths of members 

opposite during the election and prior to the election.  So these 

are the kinds of things that I think that we have to take a look 

at.  And when we start taking a look at the tax increases, for 

example, and I think that is the thing that a lot of the people in 

this province object to.  They are already tottering.  They're 

already under tremendous stress. 

 

Not just the farming community.  We talk a lot about the 

farming community, but we also have to take a look at the 

other segments of our society that are under stress, and not 

necessarily only those on social welfare.  We have that 

intermediate group, I think, that is so significant, and that is the 

working poor. 

 

I know we have SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) and SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) and FIP (Family Income Plan) 

programs, and they're necessary, but there are substantial 

number of people besides those 90,000 people that fall into that 

category that are protected -- the working poor.  And what we 

have seen now is a litany of tax increases that they are forced to 

bear.  And we can talk about senior citizens, and we can talk 

about the medical costs that have been raised.  We can talk 

about the $380 for the drug prescription plan.  We can talk 

about the increase in the plans for people living in second and 

third level in nursing homes, levels 1 and level 2 in nursing 

homes, those kinds of increases.  We can talk about the power 

rate increases.  We can talk about the telephone rate increases.  

We can talk about the increases in SGI, for example, telephone. 

Now when you take a look at the telephone company, they're 

making about $5 million clear a year. Why would you increase 

the telephone rates up to 30 per cent? 

 

Why don't we take a look at power rates?  SaskPower has made 

lots of money over the last years. 

 

If we take a look at Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

so we talk about SGI and the $60 million that SGI made over 

the last five years.  They cleared $60 million in five years.  But 

what happened as far as the increase to the SGI rates was 

concerned?  We had a 4 per cent increase.  We had a 4 per cent 

increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in SGI rates.  But not only that. 

Because the minister of SGI had to take a lot of heat for it . . . I 

know what reasoning went on in Treasury Board.  They say, 

we're going to have to take a lot of heat for this.  We may as 

well get two whammies for one, so we'll say right now that 

there will also be a 4 per cent increase next year because it ain't 

going to get any hotter.  So that's what you've done.  A 

company that in five years has cleared $60 million profit, has a 

contingency fund of $60 million, you've increased it 4 per cent 

this year, and you've already said it's automatically going to be 

increased 4 per cent next year.  That's all built in, in a company 

that's making money. 

 

Why is that?  Why is that?  To show what a wonderful job you 

folks are doing next year when you rob it out of the Crowns 

and put it into Consolidated Fund and say, oh, look what we 

were able to do with the deficit.  Or is it going to be kept there 

until such time as the slush fund is called for, until such time as 

you need the fund?  And in the mean time, the people of 

Saskatchewan are going through a lot of disillusionment, let me 

assure you, a lot of disillusionment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a little bit about a member from 

Moose Jaw.  I think it's the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, I believe.  It's not the deputy chairman anyway; it's 

the other fellow.  I wouldn't want to attribute this to the wrong 

member from Moose Jaw, but it's not the one who acts as our 

deputy chairman.  When he says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 . . . when a political party says one thing before an election, 

and then having won the election on the basis of those 

policies and platforms and statements, when that party then is 

given power and turns around and does just the opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that makes a sham of the parliamentary democracy. 

 

That's not me talking.  I'm quoting the member from Moose 

Jaw.  I'm quoting from Hansard, July 25, 1989, page 2887: 

 

 . . . when a political party says one thing before an election, 

having won that election on the basis of those (promises) . . . 

turns around does (exactly) the opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 

makes a sham of the parliamentary (process). 

 

And that ladies and gentlemen is basically the point that I've 

been trying to make tonight because in my estimation that is 

exactly what has happened.  That is exactly why you were 

elected, and we find out that that has happened that way. 

 

There's another quote here from the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway.  You see . . . and I know that she's going to be 

getting up immediately after me, so I want her to address this 

point. 

 

And this, Madam Member, you said on October 3, 1991. 

And this is quoted from the Star-Phoenix: if elected, the New 

Democratic Party will work to get rid of food banks.  It will 

fund hot lunch programs in schools.  The NDP will re-establish 

the school-based dental plan and the training programs for 

dental therapists needed to staff local clinics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So from that I'm glad to hear that they are still 

depending on doing that.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having hit 

a cord with members opposite, I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that what we see in the future, as far as the members opposite 

are concerned, that these kinds of things will come to pass.  

Now I know the member is going to get up and say, we've done 

certain parts of it and we intend to do more.  We intend to do 

more as the fiscal situation in the province improves because 

when we were elected we didn't know what the conditions in 

the province were. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's what you'll say.  Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that one-handed, empty clapping is . . . and I remind 

members opposite, the Premier said, the now Premier said in 

the fall of '91, there's a $14.2 billion deficit.  Could I repeat 

that?  The Premier said there's a $14.2 billion deficit.  That's 

what he said prior to the election.  So you folks knew. 

 

Now I can get into the Donald Gass Commission report and I 

can show you there where he says that the books of the Tories 

were always open.  The books of the Tories were always open 

for anyone who could read an economic book.  So you either, 

for one of two reasons, for one of two reasons, you either 

couldn't read an accounting book or you chose not to. 

 

So we are now saying to you, you knew and yet you made 

those promises and we're expecting you to keep up and live up 

to those promises.  You are not doing that this far.  That's all 

I'm saying. 

 

To me and to the people of Saskatchewan, as they look at this 

horrendous situation that we find ourselves in . . . I know, 

you're going to blame the Tories.  They did it.  They did it.  

You've been in government for nine months folks.  For nine 

months. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not nine years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Not nine years.  You never will be.  I assure 

you, hon. member, you never will be.  You're in here.  We've 

got a one-term Premier, we've got a one-term government.  It 

doesn't happen very often in Saskatchewan, but we've got a 

one-term government.  I don't know who's going to form the 

next government but it won't be you folks . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You say it won't be us, fair game.  But it will 

not be you because . . . Why?  Because of the massive betrayal 

that the people of this province are experiencing so shortly 

after they had such high expectations of you. 

 

Maybe it's not all your fault.  Maybe the expectations were 

something that you couldn't live up to.  Partly, to give you 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

a certain amount of credit here, maybe the expectations were so 

high that it was impossible for you to live up to them.  But I 

suggest to you, nowhere close to what the people of this 

province are experiencing right now. 

 

And it's not just . . . it's not just pure economics, folks.  The 

Minister of Justice finally said something today.  He finally 

said something.  He couldn't resist it.  But I say to the Minister 

of Justice, most sincerely, part of the condemnation . . . and I've 

been stressing -- and I recognize that, because we have to take 

kind of turns here -- I've been stressing the economic things. 

 

But the other thing, the other parameter which is enclosing 

around you, is the open, honest, self-, self- . . . Well forget that 

self.  I don't know what I was going to say.  But the open, 

forthright approach that you were going to be taking.  And I 

draw attention to the Minister of Agriculture; I draw your 

attention to the GRIP Bill.  I draw your attention to the 

demeaning of the rights of the people of Saskatchewan to have 

their day in court.  You're just taking it right away from them.  

No consultation.  And I could go through the consultative 

approach.  I won't get into that, but we could do that. 

 

But Minister of Justice, you are not responding to our request.  

We believe firmly, and our lawyers are telling us . . . and I 

think your own lawyers and you as a lawyer are extremely 

uncomfortable, Mr. Minister of Justice. You are extremely 

uncomfortable with this because you know ultimately it's going 

to go to the Supreme Court of Canada.  This is a challenge 

under the charter of rights.  The Constitution of Canada is 

being broken by this one self Act here under the GRIP, and it's 

very, very serious. And the Minister of Justice says, no, no. 

 

Ultimately what you're doing is you're taking away the rights of 

this people, of the province of Saskatchewan, to have their day 

in court.  You are saying . . . You as a government recognize 

that you made a mistake.  Your preamble on that Bill is . . . 

how many . . . there's 14 preamble's, whereas's.  And every 

lawyer that I talk to says that is proof positive that the 

government is very concerned that they are breaking the charter 

of rights, that they're breaking the constitution.  Because every 

Bill that does that has those whereas's. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Why do you put that in there, Mr. Minister of 

Justice?  Why is it in there?  Then you're putting yourself, as a 

government, recognizing that you have made an error . . . to 

correct that error you're saying now to the folks and to the 

farmers of this province -- not just to the farmers; anyone else 

who's going to get this retroactivity slapped on them -- you're 

telling them now, never, ever, will you be able to take the 

Government of Saskatchewan to court because we're above the 

law.  That's what you're doing. 

 

So it's not just a matter of the economics that I've been 

stressing in my speech, but I want to draw attention to the 

open, honest, forthright government that you claim to be.  And 

the people of Saskatchewan, in my riding, are telling me they 

don't like that.  And they are telling me to come up to motions 

like this because they believe in what we're 

saying.  And they want us to draw it to your attention any way 

we can.  And we do that with the petitions.  We do that with the 

petitions.  And we've got petitions here, 5,000, 6,000, 7,000.  

And they're growing.  They're saying, we don't like what you 

guys are doing.  From the economic, the wellness program, 

whatever you want to call it, there's a lot of discontent. 

 

(2045) 

 

And my only objective, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in getting up 

today, was not to rile members of the opposite side up, 

although I seem to have done that.  But my objective was to get 

up, point out to the people of Saskatchewan who happened to 

be listening, and to the members opposite, some of the 

concerns that we are experiencing, some of the concerns that 

we are hearing, and hopefully pass that on to you so that you 

can take it into consideration as you deliberate as to how you're 

going to be going into the future. 

 

We recognize on this side it's tough.  It's tough to be in 

government.  I remember when I first got elected back in '86, 

one of the first times in the House, and like all you young -- 

young, politically young -- back-benchers, it's an exciting time 

in your life and you're looking forward to it. 

 

And I happened to be eating at the Imperial 400, breakfast.  

And who was sitting there eating by himself?  No, no, not the 

Minister of Justice, but rather the Premier himself.  The now 

Premier.  And I sat with him and we had breakfast and we had 

casual conversation.  And during the course of the conversation 

I remember one comment that I made to him.  And that was, 

Mr. Premier, if you would have been elected in 1986, it would 

have served you right. 

 

Because back in 1986 we knew the toughness that it was going 

to be to govern.  And we knew that we were in rough shape and 

that it was going to be tough.  And he recognized that. 

 

And I just want to say to you folks right now that we on this 

side recognize that it's tough to govern.  It's not easy.  It serves 

you right for getting elected now.  That's basically, I guess, 

what I'm saying.  But the people are looking toward you.  

They're looking to you for leadership.  They're looking to you 

as a group of men and women that are going to accept the 

responsibility that comes with being in government.  And it's 

tough. 

 

Now if you would do things that in our estimation were more 

reasonable than what we're seeing right now . . . And the 

contentious issue is undoubtedly GRIP right now, and I think 

that kind of overshadows all of the other things.  But if those 

kinds of issues were not there, I would make my commitment 

as a member opposite here, as the House Leader, that things in 

this House would be better.  Things in this House would be 

better. 

 

But as long as that is hanging over us as a dark burden and a 

shadow over us, it is going to be a contentious period of time.  

Because one thing affects the other.  And then we're all human 

here; we're all emotional.  It's a high-strung, high-packed 

activity that goes on here from 9 o'clock in 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

the morning till 11 o'clock at night.  And I think upon 

reflection, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under cooler moments I may 

not have said some of the things that I have said tonight.  I'm 

not sure. 

 

But this is the way this House operates.  And we have to, we 

have to be accountable for what we do and our actions and so 

on.  And now all I'm asking for from members opposite is that 

there has to be some kind of a reasonableness coming forth and 

we will respond in like way.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks 

I will move an amendment to the motion that reads as follows: 

 

 That all of the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 praises the government for carrying out its first campaign 

pledge to bring the finances of this province under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for several months now the members opposite 

have spent their time and effort condemning the new 

government that was elected on October 21, 1991.  In our 

efforts to try to get a grip on this province's finances, we have 

had to make some tough decisions.  And I note that the member 

from Rosthern talked about leadership and talked about 

toughness.  I would contend that the government that was 

elected on October 21, 1991 has provided leadership and has 

made some tough decisions. 

 

When we came to office on November 1, 1991, the cabinet 

made the commitment to try and understand where this 

province had been in the last nine years fiscally and the Gass 

Commission was struck.  The Gass Commission reported to the 

government in February of 1992 and at that time it became 

clear to us that the province's finances had not been adequately 

represented to the people of this province by the former 

administration.  We learned that over $14 billion in the 

combined debt had been accumulated under the leadership of 

the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also knew after being elected, that the people of this 

province no longer wanted waste and mismanagement, that 

they wanted an open and honest and accountable government.  

Well what we did, Mr. Speaker, was introduce some new 

principles.  What we introduced was the principle of 

independent accounting to make our government's spending 

more accountable to the people.  What we said to the auditor 

was that our books would be open for all to see. 

 

We also wrote off $1 billion in bad loans and bad debts that 

had been undertaken by the previous administration.  And we 

also wrote off $875 million in non-recoverable debt in the 

Crown corporations.  And the financial statements were audited 

and they were presented to the public for scrutiny. 

 

Now as a result of that, we had to make some very difficult 

budget decisions.  And I recall saying, prior to October 1991, 

that this province had $4.5 billion of revenues and surely we 

could live within our means.  All of the 

members of the government side said that because we thought 

we could.  We thought that we wouldn't have to increase taxes 

unnecessarily. 

 

But when we came to government we learned of this 

horrendous deficit, this horrendous debt that meant that over 

$760 million, this year alone, would be spent on interest in 

servicing that debt.  We also learned that the government had 

badly misrepresented or miscalculated the debt that would be 

accumulated in their last year of office.  They told us that some 

$245 million would be the debt and we learned that it was over 

$1 billion.  We had a choice.  We could continue to spend the 

way the Tories had done in previous years.  We could raise 

taxes.  We could cut services.  Or we could do a combination 

of raising taxes, cutting services, and still running a debt. 

 

And we had the debate within our caucus on what we would 

do.  And we had some . . . It was a difficult debate.  Of course 

there were people who wanted to balance the budget.  There 

were people that were prepared to have a larger deficit than 

what we came in with in April.  And then there were people 

who thought we could do a combination of raising revenues, 

cutting services, and still having a debt. 

 

To have balanced the budget would have meant that there 

would have been a tremendous economic impact upon the 

citizens of this province.  There would have been horrendous 

job losses.  As it was, we had to undergo a balancing act. 

 

Now the members opposite will say that we betrayed the 

public's trust.  I would say that we had no alternative.  If we are 

going to get the debt of this province under control, if we are 

going to continue to provide the kinds of services that people 

have come to expect, then we can't continue to spend the way 

we have in the past.  That there could be no argument. 

 

There were people who will say that we shouldn't have cut 

chiropractic services, that we shouldn't have cut the optometric 

services, that we shouldn't have done all these things.  And I 

would say to them that those decisions were very, very 

difficult.  But if we are to maintain the basic social structures in 

this province, we must get the debt under control and our 

government is committed to doing that. 

 

Now the members opposite have spent a great deal of time 

criticizing us.  We witness daily the harangues.  We have spent 

close to four months in this House listening to the members 

opposite condemn our efforts.  And I have to tell the members 

opposite that the public is becoming increasingly sceptical and 

cynical, not only about yourselves, not only about us, but about 

all politicians.  I'd like to remind you that we are four years 

away from an election.  You will have plenty of time to 

criticize the government and get your political party in order.  

But at this stage we are 10 months into a new mandate.  The 

people of this province defeated you and day in and day out I 

hear people say to me:  we defeated those people.  Why are 

they continuing to try and control and run this province? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How many times have you talked to 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

them about anything? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Lots of times.  I talk to my constituents 

regularly.  I talk to people all across Saskatchewan.  And they 

thought that they defeated you on October 21, 1991, and quite 

frankly they really don't want to hear from you any more.  They 

are tired of Tories. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- They are absolutely fed up with you.  And 

you can read the newspaper.  There was a gentleman that wrote 

a letter to the editor in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix today.  And 

he said that he thought it was time for us to lock you out.  Now 

that would be totally undemocratic, totally undemocratic, and 

we're not interested in doing that. 

 

We also have an article in Monday's Star-Phoenix where Paul 

Jackson, who used to be a speech writer for your former leader, 

tells us that there's more corruption to come; there's more 

corruption that went on under the Tories.  Paul Jackson is even 

sick of you people. 

 

Now we are providing leadership.  We have introduced several 

dozen pieces of legislation.  We have a budget.  We have a 

direction.  We have a new wellness plan that is going to be 

released momentarily.  We will determine our future.  We will 

determine our future.  That is leadership.  Of course, your job is 

to critique the government.  That is your job.  But your job is 

not to obstruct the goings-on in this legislature.  That is not 

your job.  Your job is to critique the government in a 

reasonable, responsible way. 

 

Now I listened very carefully to the minister . . . or to the 

member from Rosthern.  And I have been reading Hansard.  

And day in and day out you people stand up and you make 

allegations in this legislature that are totally untrue.  And I refer 

to the August 3 Hansard where the member from Rosthern 

talked about one physiotherapist being from the Yorkton area. 

 

And that's simply not true.  There are three full-time physical 

therapists in the Yorkton hospital.  There are two part-time 

physical therapists in the Yorkton hospital.  And a new 

physical therapist is coming on stream.  So there will soon be 

basically five positions.  But the member opposite said there 

was only one. And it's not true. 

 

Today I listened to the member talk about some other items, 

misinformation.  It goes on and on and on.  If we are going to 

have a reasonable debate in this legislature, I think what we 

should be doing is putting forward positive ideas for the future 

of this province. 

 

All of us were elected on October 21, 1991 and we came here 

with ideas.  We should not be here to criticize only.  This 

forum should be a place for people to put forward ideas that 

will advance the future of this province.  But we never get to 

do that in this House.  And I think it's time for real democratic 

reform where members of this House can talk about the future 

and can talk in positive ways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I know that every member in this House 

 has good ideas about how we can reform the health care 

system.  Why not have a debate on real reform to the health 

system where all of us could join the government, the Minister 

of Health, in advancing positive initiatives?  We never get to 

do that. 

 

All of us have ideas for economic development.  All of us.  But 

we never get a chance to put forward our ideas in a public 

forum.  What we do is sit here and listen day in and day out 

and day in and day out to absolute nonsense that is rhetorical, 

that is political, and does not advance the cause of democracy 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Quite frankly, I am tired of private members' 

motions that either praise the government for this or condemn 

the government for that.  Let's have private members' motions 

that talk about the future, that talk about positive economic, 

social, political, cultural advances. 

 

I think that's what the people of this province want to hear from 

us.  They are tired of hearing negative rhetoric where the 

Tories bash us and the NDP gets up and bashes the Tories for 

nine years of waste and mismanagement. 

 

This has been a long, long summer session.  There's no 

question about that.  And I think most people don't even pay 

attention any more to us because they've decided that we're 

totally irrelevant and maybe we are. 

 

But we can become relevant to the citizens of this province if 

we decide to change our behaviour.  I am tired, like Mr. 

Speaker is, of the hooting and yelling that goes on across the 

floor day in and day out.  We have to be more civilized than 

that.  Surely we are more civilized than that.  I am tired of 

listening to people debate, spend 2 or 3 or 4 hours debating 

something.  If you can't say it in 15 minutes, I don't think you 

should bother saying it.  You shouldn't stand in this House for 

two or three hours just to hear yourself talk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues that want to 

be able to talk.  I'm not going to spend two hours or three hours 

like the former members did, speaking to this amendment.  I've 

said my piece.  I hopefully have said it in 15 minutes, and I will 

sit down and let my colleague second my motion.  So I will 

move the following amendment: 

 

 That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 praises the government for carrying out its first campaign 

pledge to bring the finances of this province under control. 

 

And this is seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

me to rise this evening, Mr. Speaker, to second the amendment 

proposed by my colleague from Saskatoon Broadway. 

 

I've listened to the member from Moosomin and the member 

from Rosthern speak tonight about open and honest 

government, and it struck me, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps this 

was not the best subject for those members to raise in this 

House given the record of the previous government that they 

were a part of.  And I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I've been 

talking to a lot of people in my constituency and around the 

province.  And many people have said to me that instead of 

harping and complaining on and on, that perhaps the members 

opposite would do well and place themselves in better stead 

with the public if they would issue a public apology to the 

people of the province for what they have done, because the 

people know, Mr. Speaker, that the present government 

unfortunately inherited a very difficult financial mess from the 

previous administration.  And the people know that steps have 

been taken to get the situation under control.  The first step was 

the creation of the Gass Commission, an independent 

commission of some very knowledgeable and distinguished 

people in our province who opened the books and studied the 

finances of our province, made some findings, and made some 

recommendations. 

 

And what the Gass Commission found, Mr. Speaker, was that 

there was a lot of waste and mismanagement under the 

previous administration that had not been revealed to the 

people of the province and only became clear after the election.  

This occurred throughout the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, and the Gass 

Commission, the government, and the people are going to 

make sure that it does not occur again.  And I predict, Mr. 

Speaker, that despite the protestations of the opposition, it will 

be a very long time indeed before the people of this province 

will place their trust and the financial purse strings of this 

province in the hands of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- The government has moved, Mr. Speaker, in the 

budget, in a very realistic way to try to restore some kind of 

financial stability to our finances, just as any family must do.  

Any family in our province has to live within its means.  And if 

it finds that its debts are way out of control, and many times 

more than its annual income, then it has to take some measures 

to deal with that, Mr. Speaker, and this government is doing it. 

It's doing it openly, and it's doing it honestly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Because we, Mr. Speaker, are the trustees of the 

people's money.  It is not our money; it is their money.  We 

cannot spend it foolishly; we have to spend it wisely.  We 

cannot squander our resources and we cannot mortgage the 

future of generations to come. 

 

The government has made some decisions which I think in 

isolation are very tough decisions, and they are decisions which 

I find regrettable.  I find it regrettable that we are in a position 

where we have made some of the decisions we've made.  The 

decisions have been tough, 

but I think they've been honest, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

they've been reasonable. 

 

The approach of the government in the creation of the Gass 

Commission and looking at the finances of the province and 

opening the books to the public, and the approach of the 

government in involving the Provincial Auditor instead of 

fighting with the Provincial Auditor as the previous 

government did, stands in stark contrast to the record of the 

previous government.  And I would quote, Mr. Speaker, from 

the Special Report of the Provincial Auditor, which was 

issued April 21, 1992. 

 

The Provincial Auditor, referring to the Conservatives' record 

in the last few fiscal years, had this to say at pages 14 and 15, 

Mr. Speaker.  He said, "The Estimates are inaccurate."  He 

said, "The organizations (that is government organizations) 

spend money for purposes not authorized."  He said, "The 

organizations' internal control systems are violated."  He said, 

"The organizations' financial statements are inaccurate."  He 

said, Mr. Speaker, "The Public Accounts are inaccurate." 

 

That is what the Provincial Auditor said in his special report, 

Mr. Speaker, and he repeated it again and again throughout that 

report.  And the Provincial Auditor is a servant of this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, and all of the members of this 

legislature, and that is what he said.  And it seems to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that that does not give us a very good example of 

open and honest government that the members opposite are 

now preaching to us about. 

 

Their record, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself.  What it has done 

is to leave this province in a situation where the government 

this year will spend $760 million to pay the interest on the debt 

accumulated by the previous Conservative government.  If we 

did not have to pay that interest, Mr. Speaker, we would in this 

fiscal year be operating at a surplus.  Mr. Speaker, $4.5 billion 

in revenue should be enough to govern this province, but it is 

not, for the very simple reason that the government has to pay 

$760 million in interest on the debt created by the members 

opposite. 

 

If we did not have those interest charges, Mr. Speaker, we 

would not only have a surplus budget, but we would have more 

money for the much-needed health and social programs that we 

have always prided ourselves on in this province.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, the money is gone and many people in the public have 

been asking, where did the money go? 

 

Well the members from Moosomin and Rosthern talk about 

open and honest government. I'm going to try to be open and 

honest with them in terms of what has been revealed through 

the legislature and the Provincial Auditor since we took power.  

Both members who spoke about open and honest government 

were part of the previous administration. They should be aware 

of their own record.  According to the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker, under the previous government 130 employees were 

paid but did no work for the government organizations which 

paid them at a cost of $5.166 million. 

 

Nine government organizations made payments to 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

advertising agencies but received nothing in return.  And the 

amount of $439,000, Mr. Speaker, was paid by government 

organizations to advertising agencies that did nothing for that 

money.  Two advertising agencies, Mr. Speaker, Dome 

Advertising and Roberts & Poole, were paid $10,250 per 

month for more than two years but rendered no services.  That 

amounts to more than half a million dollars to two companies 

which provided no services to the Property Management 

Corporation which was paying them.  And I think most people 

in Saskatchewan would have the attitude, Mr. Speaker, that that 

would not be a bad contractual arrangement if you could get it.  

But unfortunately that kind of arrangement was only available 

to a select few under the previous administration. 

 

Over $300,000 was improperly paid, Mr. Speaker, to Charlton 

Communications to do advertising paid for by the Property 

Management Corporation at the request of members of the 

cabinet of the member from Estevan.  The cabinet ministers 

were provided with private viewing suites at the Centre of the 

Arts; SGI picked up the taxi bills of PC ministers and their 

staffs; $16,000 was spent by the Liquor Board to entertain the 

cabinet at the Big Valley Jamboree; $19,285 worth of liquor 

was delivered by the Liquor Board to PC offices; seasons 

tickets to the Roughriders at taxpayers' expense, not to mention 

an account, Mr. Speaker, at the Green and White Lounge; 

cellular phones in vehicles provided to cabinet ministers -- I'm 

sorry, to MLAs -- we may hear more about that later. 

 

These are, I think, Mr. Speaker, only some of the horror stories 

that have come out with respect to the record of the previous 

government.  Others include the Liquor Board paying defeated 

Tory MP (Member of Parliament), John Gormley, $1,000 a 

month while he went to law school.  Mr. Gormley received as 

much as $48,000 of taxpayers' money despite the fact there's no 

record of what work he might have performed.  The former 

chairman of the Liquor Board charged the board $11,845 for 

real estate fees never paid to a real estate agent and authorized 

by the chairman himself.  The Liquor Board paid the salaries of 

11 Tory loyalists but has no record of any work they might 

have done. 

 

The Property Management Corporation, Mr. Speaker, 

purchased a luxury van for $30,000 to be used by the premier 

on tours.  This van was not used because the premier's 

entourage was too large in fact to use it.  But it included such 

necessities as a TV and VCR (video cassette recorder), power 

window and door locks, running boards, a roof rack and four 

captain's chairs.  Since the van was not satisfactory for the 

former premier's purposes, other vehicles were rented at public 

expense. 

 

One individual, Mr. Speaker, was paid by the Property 

Management Corporation the sum of $53,000 to organize a 

summer tour for the former premier.  That individual was paid 

$230 per day and at that rate would have worked for 49 weeks 

which is quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, since the individual 

was supposedly organizing the premier's summer tour -- all the 

more interesting when one considers that yet other people were 

paid at a high rate to act as the premier's full-time tour 

directors. 

(2115) 

 

The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation paid the 

salaries for nine people who did no work for the corporation 

but worked for cabinet ministers.  It also paid the salary of an 

individual who worked in the partisan caucus office of the 

Conservative party. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we found out that the Property 

Management Corporation had paid to the publishers of the 

Sask Report Magazine the sum of $324,000 essentially so that 

it could run government propaganda in the magazine under the 

guise of news.  And what was particularly disturbing about that 

revelation, Mr. Speaker, was that there was no indication in the 

magazine that the 16 pages of glowing stories about the 

government and wonderful things happening in Saskatchewan 

were paid for by the government.  Rather the fact that the 

government had anything to do with the information in the 

magazine was kept secret, which it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 

is not quite consistent with people who now get up and speak 

about the need for more open and honest government. 

 

The other very troubling aspect of this particular deal, Mr. 

Speaker, was that the contract the then government entered into 

with the publishers required that the government would 

approve the editorial content of the magazine, which I think is 

surely an unprecedented and very unwarranted intrusion into 

free speech and freedom of the press in our province, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I would be surprised if any government has ever 

entered into that kind of arrangement with the press before.  

And I would be surprised if any government would enter into 

that kind of arrangement with the press ever again. 

 

The opposition stands here, Mr. Speaker, day after day and 

berates this government about a perceived need -- perceived by 

them -- for more openness and honesty.  And it seems to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government is not perfect  

_- no government is -- but compared to the administration the 

difference is very dramatic.  I'm very pleased that the 

government has taken steps to open the books and let the 

people know how we got ourselves into the financial mess 

we're in, and to try to deal with that mess in a very sincere, and 

honest, and reasonable way. 

 

Now what are the supporters, or former supporters, or so-called 

supporters of the opposition saying about this, Mr. Speaker?  

Well, Paul Jackson, the former assistant to the former premier, 

now the Leader of the Opposition, had this to say in the Star-

Phoenix of yesterday, August 10.  It's very interesting. 

 

Even the headline is interesting, Mr. Speaker, because it says: 

"Many in Tory hierarchy corrupt to the rotten core."  He 

doesn't say, corrupt to the core.  That's not good enough.  He 

says: ". . . corrupt to the rotten core."  That's what people in the 

Conservative Party are saying. 

 

And then he says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 AH, THE SCANDALS that come out of Grant Devine's 

erstwhile government! 

 

 Fellows who apparently ripped off the taxpayers 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

with ease, gals who drew a paycheque but seemingly did no 

work whatsoever. 

 

 Who says (who says) there is no free ride in life? 

 

Then he asks: 

 

 Am I surprised about the revelations and allegations 

concerning my former boss's enterprise? 

 

 No, not at all. 

 

 Indeed, during my stint with Grant, Eric Berntson and Lorne 

Hepworth, I made an observation to them that many of those 

in the Tory hierarchy were either corrupt or incompetent, and 

some were both. 

 

 I suspected many of Devine's movers and shakers had their 

fingers in the till, which was one reason I was never really 

part of the inner circle.  Many of the Tory high-flyers 

suspected I knew what they were up to and they also knew I 

was not about to be corrupted myself. 

 

And then he explains that he had to get out of this operation 

because, even for someone as committed to the Conservative 

cause as Paul Jackson, what was going on in the previous 

administration was too much for him to take. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . I don't think Blakeney was as oblivious to outright theft 

and thievery as was Devine. 

 

 So the frauds involving the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company, and the allegations regarding the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation, Saskatchewan Liquor 

Commission and Sask Report magazine and other rumors and 

rumblings surprise me not at all. 

 

And then he says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 There's More.  Believe me, there's more. 

 

Now I thought, Mr. Speaker, that I had heard it all, but Paul 

Jackson tells us we haven't heard it all and that there is more. 

 

Then he concludes: 

 

 Sadly, he (referring to the member from Estevan) was 

surrounded by some of the most dishonest men and women 

who ever wore a party button or unfurled a political banner. 

 

 Let's hope they will finally be brought to justice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am very, very happy to rise in support of the 

amendment proposed by the member from Broadway, that the 

new government should be praised for carrying out its first 

campaign pledge to bring the finances of this province under 

control.  I'm proud of the fact that the government has opened 

the books to the 

public and reveals to the public how its money is spent, 

because we are the trustees for the public. 

 

So I support the amendment and I will oppose the original 

motion.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I don't 

intend to be long this evening, but I do want to say right off the 

bat that I will be speaking against and voting against the 

government's amendment. 

 

As usual, Mr. Speaker, we are treated to a substantial amount 

of arrogance from these people.  I see the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway standing up and saying that, you people 

should be going home; you shouldn't say anything.  This is 

very typical of this new NDP government, you know.  They are 

the . . . sort of the high lord executioner of Saskatchewan now.  

I mean, we tell people what to wear in bars.  I wonder what's 

next.  You know, we're getting really close to sort of the old 

invasion of the bedroom stuff again that they were into in their 

former years. 

 

These are the people that are so afraid of farmers taking them 

to court, Mr. Speaker, that they have to take all of their legal 

rights under the constitution away from them in this legislature.  

They're the people that are so afraid of a 10-man opposition 

that they have to unilaterally change the rules. 

 

So it doesn't surprise me at all, Mr. Speaker, that we have this 

pair stand up in the House and tell us to be quiet, that we 

shouldn't be heard, that because we're New Democrats we have 

the divine right to rule in this province, that we know more 

than everybody else, that we're smarter than everybody else.  

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it gets a little bit tiring when 

one hears this day after day after day. 

 

I took a ride with the member from Morse last night.  We drove 

up to Humboldt to attend a pork producers' meeting because we 

wanted to see sort of the results of 10 months of New 

Democratic rule on the agriculture sector.  And I can tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, there'd be probably a lot of people in that room 

that Mr. Speaker was probably familiar with in the Humboldt 

area, that took a great deal of issue, Mr. Speaker, with this sort 

of high-handed tactics of the new government.  This heavy 

touch of arrogance didn't go down well with the pork producers 

in Humboldt and area I can tell you very much. 

 

And it doesn't surprise me at all, Mr. Speaker, when the New 

Democrats sort of stand up to do their standard procedure with 

one of these motions that the theme that seems to run through 

over and over again is that you've got to blame somebody else. 

 

You see you've got this big majority that you went out and got 

because you promised Saskatchewan the world.  And you were 

so hungry for political power that you would stand up in front 

of everyone in Saskatchewan . . . What's that phrase that 

George Bush coined, you know.  No new taxes.  You know, 

read my lips.  Read my lips; no new taxes.  As a matter of fact, 

we're going to take away some 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

of the taxes.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we've certainly learned about 

taxes in the last few months haven't we?  I won't bore the 

Assembly with the list because it grows daily, Mr. Speaker, but 

I've got several pages here now of: read my lips; how would 

you like some more new taxes?  Because that's all we've gotten 

from these people. 

 

So it's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition finds it 

necessary to bring forward motions on private members' day to 

sort of bring these people back down to earth, you know.  We 

don't quite have divine right to rule yet in this province.  There 

still is an opposition; there will be an election in three or four 

years, we hope.  I don't know what'll happen to the rules of this 

place because it seems when you get under these people's skin, 

they get very vindictive, and they like to take things away from 

people that sort of take them on. 

 

And that was very evident tonight when we see the members 

stand up and say, you shouldn't have the right to speak in this 

Assembly, you should go home, you should be quiet, you 

should let us do what we want.  We should have interim supply 

and we shouldn't ask the Minister of Finance questions.  It's 

called supply before grievance instead of the other way around, 

you know.  Something that we worked out on a plain in 

England about a thousand years ago, but now with New 

Democrats, it's called supply before grievance. 

 

And the way you do that is is that the minister stands up and 

says, I would like $435 million and I'm going to spend it sort of 

this way, and then the House Leader stands up and he says, by 

the way, I think we'll have a little closure along with the supply 

motion.  You see and that way the Minister of Finance gets to 

spend what he wants, and we don't have to listen to the 

opposition except for 20 minutes.  It's kind of convenient, don't 

you think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then the member from Saskatoon Broadway stands up and 

says, even 20 minutes is too much, you people should be quiet 

and go home because you lost the election.  You see you 

shouldn't ask the Minister of Finance about spending 430-some 

million dollars.  You see that's the attitude that we're dealing 

with here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I see the member from Saskatoon stand up, and this new 

member who seems to know it all.  This is the member that 

makes the very same allegations in Public Accounts and then 

asks the committee to send letters to people so that they can 

reply and defend themselves.  Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that he didn't bother reading any of the replies.  There was none 

of the responses from citizens of the province, the Public 

Accounts, said by the member from Saskatoon.  It's one thing to 

stand in here and make the allegation; but we certainly 

wouldn't want any responses in here because that might ruin 

the story.  I mean we are expected in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, to say it is gospel because a New Democrat said it. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the last time we had a New Democrat 

government  in this province, in this province, there was a 

judge -- there was a judge -- that passed some judgements, and 

he talked about a thing called DNS (Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan), and he 

said, quite frankly we have something here that has run amok.  

We weren't talking about a few employees in this building; we 

were talking about half of this province.  Half of the province 

of Saskatchewan had run amok was the judgement from the 

judge.  And from the palace in La Ronge, they administered the 

amok. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that before the 

sanctimonious people opposite stand and tell the opposition 

that they have no place in this legislature, that they don't have 

the right to speak and be heard, that they should clean up and 

admit to some of their past performances as a government and 

as a party. 

 

(2130) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Centre I 

believe it is, if that's . . . Idylwyld now.  The new member that 

obviously knows so much about the finances of the province 

should refer back to what his Premier and his then leader said 

during the election campaign some eight days before the 

election, when he talked about a $14.2 billion total debt. 

 

And I'm sure he has listened with interest to the questioning by 

the member from Arm River with the now Finance minister in 

the second interim supply that we had in this House some two 

months ago when they were talking about the debt in 1982. 

 

And after several hours -- we didn't have closure that time, you 

see, Mr. Speaker, so we were allowed to ask the minister 

questions -- after several hours the member from Regina 

Dewdney said, well I think, if my memory strikes me right, 

with everything in it was about $4.8 billion, 1982. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, simple arithmetic with most people tells 

you that under normal banking circumstances you will get 

about a hundred per cent increase over a 10-year period of 

time.  Now some people with a sharp pencil tell me they can . . 

. that they can do it in seven and a half years.  But we'll give 

the minister credit; we'll only allow a doubling. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we had 4.8 billion in 1982 and the 

member from Riversdale says we have 14.2 eight days before 

the election campaign after he's promised everybody in the 

world, read my lips, no new taxes, my arithmetic leaves me 

with about six and a half billion dollars.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that you probably can find six and a half billion 

dollars of projects spread around this province employing 

people by the former government.  I'm sure that you can. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's that kind of hypocrisy that absolutely 

necessitates motions like this being brought forward in this 

House every once in a while.  Because if we don't remind these 

people about those promises -- you know, read my lips, no new 

taxes, read my lips, we will have agriculture spending like 

we've never had in this province before -- you know that . . . 

what's the phrase they use all the time?  Cost of production.  

That's the one I really liked all the time during the election 

campaign -- cost of production to rural people. 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

And what have we got today?  Well we don't have cost of 

production, Mr. Speaker.  What we have is called take your 

rights away so that you will never ever question an NDP 

cabinet again.  That's what we've got.  We got a piece of 

legislation that says the minister can change the crops insured 

in the middle of the crop year.  We got a piece of legislation 

that says I've got a nice field of canola growing out there and 

come August the minister says, oh the member from Dewdney 

needs a little more cash, I guess canola is off the list.  I mean 

that's the kind of legislation we got here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now how does that stack up? -- and by regulation no less -- 

how does that stack up with cost of production?  So no new 

taxes, cost of production for Agriculture. 

 

Oh, then we got the biggies, Mr. Speaker.  We got Health and 

Education.  Nine and a half years you Tories have been going 

to destroy the medicare system.  You know what we got to do?  

We got to give a major cash injection.  Mind you, the member 

from Riversdale says eight days before the election, we do have 

a $14.2 billion deficit, but we still believe that Health and 

Education need a major injection.  Okay, this is eight days 

before.  I mean we are into promise mode here by now.  We've 

still got eight days to go.  We can smell victory.  We want to be 

Premier, we've been in this House for a quarter of a century so 

it's into high gear.  And away we go, knowing full well we've 

got $14.2 billion, but we're going to promise some more for 

Health and Education. 

 

Well lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale 

is Premier.  And we promised all of these things.  Now we 

publicly said we've got a $14.2 billion deficit all in, but now 

how do we cover this with the folks?  How do we square it?  

Obviously we can't live up to our campaign promises; we've 

got to get on with something here.  So why don't we hold a 

financial review commission?  There should be enough cover 

there to sort of do a few things, hey. 

 

And who should we get to serve on that?  Well we'll get 

ourselves a chartered accountant from a firm that does 

megabucks with the government all through various agencies -- 

Deloitte & Touche, it's a good accounting firm but they do a lot 

of government business.  And then we'll go find ourselves 

three, no less than three, donors to the NDP Party.  I wonder if 

they're like the donors for the Liquor Board.  I wonder if the 

same criteria was used for the guys on the Gass Commission as 

the Liquor Board.  The Liquor Board seemed to be about a 

hundred bucks and up and you're on. 

 

Now we also know that with the Crop Insurance board that 

there's a little bit of different criteria there, that maybe it's a 

little bit higher cash donation to the NDP Party.  We're not sure 

but we've got three of them pegged now and we're researching 

the rest.  Now the Gass Commission, the Gass Commission, 

Mr. Speaker, because it was a little more high profile, I'm sure 

that the donations . . . And I haven't looked at them lately, but 

they were a little bigger and very high-profile people. 

 

So when we've got this commission, you see, we can put it to 

work.  But we don't have any conflict of interest guidelines that 

are public that people can feel confident 

about, you see? 

 

So when somebody absences themselves from the room when 

we're discussing something to do with the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool like Biggar Malt or whatever, we don't know who's voting 

on what.  We don't know who's saying what because the 

conflict of interest guidelines are never made public. 

 

So we have a Gass Commission without conflict of interest 

guidelines that comes up with some recommendations so that 

the member from Riversdale who told the public eight days 

before the election that there was a $14.2 billion deficit can 

say, whoops, sorry folks, all the promises I made I can't keep. 

 

You know that business about, read my lips, no new taxes?  

Read my lips, increased spending in health and education.  

Read my lips, cost of production in agriculture.  You know 

those promises? 

 

Well, so now we're down to it.  Ten months into the game the 

700 companies that supposedly were going to come and save 

our bacon because the Economic Development minister was 

going to lead the list with Piper and 699 were going to come 

roaring in right behind, well I haven't heard any airplane 

engines lately and I haven't heard anything from the other 699. 

 

So here we are.  We're 10 months into the game.  We got 

16,000 less jobs than we had last year at this time.  We got 

6,000 young people that were working gone out of this 

province, and we got 2,000 less jobs in agriculture.  And now 

the Minister of Agriculture is doing his best to destroy the 

packing industry, which is another 1,500 jobs. 

 

So you know what?  Things aren't going too smooth and I 

guess we got to blame somebody else.  So one day it's the 

former government.  And the next it's the feds.  And then when 

things really get tough we'll go down and pick on the RMs 

(rural municipality).  We don't like what Bernie Kirwan says so 

we'll hoot and laugh a little bit at him and we'll blame the 

municipalities for a few things when they complain about the 

minister tearing up the roads. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, when you're bankrupt of ideas, when 

you're so arrogant that you don't believe anybody should 

oppose you, there's only one thing to do -- that's blame 

somebody else.  It's the oldest trick in politics.  It's a heck of a 

lot easier than actually coming up with some concrete 

solutions. 

 

Or it's easier than eating a little crow and saying, you know 

what? I guess I messed up a little bit.  Maybe I should 

backtrack and rethink this process a little bit. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Have you ever done that, Rick? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You bet I have, sir.  You bet I have.  You 

know, there you go again, Mr. Speaker.  I mean we got total 

arrogance here.  The minister chirps from his seat that was 

going to bring 700 companies to our province and salvation. 

 

This is the minister that sent his friend Reggie Gross off to 

Florida to save us with an airplane factory.  You know, the  



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

same Reggie Gross that built all the nice condos in the parks.  

You know, and the minister chirps from his seat.  I wonder 

what Reggie Gross is up to these days. I suspect he's hovering 

around the edges a little bit.  You know Reggie Gross is one of 

the kind of guys that would do well in a Paul Jackson article.  

Seems to me they do a lot of quoting about Paul Jackson -- 

Reggie Gross just fits the mould perfectly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's time that this government with 

this large majority stop worrying about changing the rules in 

this Assembly so that they can silence 10 members, stop 

worrying about bringing in legislation to take away the 

constitutional rights of farmers, stop worrying about 

manipulating adults in this province in the way that they 

responsibly approach the use of alcohol, and get on with 

governing. 

 

Get on with bringing some of those companies to this province.  

Get on with some legislation that doesn't have the business 

community up in arms and demanding meetings with the 

Premier.  Get on with co-operating with people that are going 

to bring jobs and employment to this province.  Get on with 

getting off of agriculture's back and get on with pulling with 

them. 

 

And I would suggest it might even help to co-operate the odd 

time with the federal government.  Now you don't have to do it 

on a day-by-day basis or even week by week, but once in a 

while why don't you just co-operate with them, bring some 

cash home and get on with it.  You know, don't believe that 

you're smarter than everybody else all the time.  Don't believe 

just because you were . . . sort of have this socialist mentality 

that everybody else is absolutely wrong, and simply get on with 

doing what you were elected to do. 

 

Now you made a bunch of foolish promises, you can't live up 

to them, fair ball.  Just get down to the day-by-day stuff.  It's 

real simple.  You get up in the morning and you start one hour 

at a time and you just start building away at it, you know.  And 

if you do that week after week, and month after month you 

never know, something good might happen.  But all of this 

criticizing everybody else, all of this arrogance that we see 

displayed by this government isn't going to get us anywhere. 

 

We are going to be down to 700,000 people before you know 

it.  Where are they going?  They're going to Tory Alberta.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's time that these people, it's time that 

these people accepted that there will be criticism, accepted the 

fact that these 10 members will be here for the next three, four 

years and they'll probably bring forward amendments and 

they'll probably stand up and filibuster and they, I'm sure, will 

criticize this government because that's their job.  That's what 

they get paid for.  To stand in this House and say to the 

Minister of Agriculture, no we don't think you should take 

away the constitutional rights of people.  We think you should 

have sober second thought and regroup.  And you should get 

on with building this province, not tearing it down.  That's what 

this opposition will do. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the words of the 

Opposition House Leader who said, there can be some 

co-operation, that there can be opposition and 

government working together.  And all we have to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is get rid of some of this arrogant attitude that because 

we won an election, because we won an election, everyone 

should cease to speak for at least 18 months.  That's about what 

I figured they thought the honeymoon would be, that we should 

cease to speak and let them have the honeymoon.  And after 

that, then maybe we can come back once in awhile and say 

something because that was the attitude displayed in the debate 

tonight, Mr. Speaker.  And that's simply not acceptable.  So 

when the government gets over that attitude, then we probably 

can have some co-operation in this House, and we can get 

some business done. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that's why I think I have no 

choice but to say no to that arrogant amendment that was put in 

and vote against it and support the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I will 

be voting against the amendment and for the motion on a 

matter of principle related to the Legislative Assembly and to 

politics in the province of Saskatchewan particularly because 

we are in a democracy. 

 

And I'm going to base my arguments this evening -- the few 

words that I have -- on the fact that the NDP administration 

have talked when they were in opposition about their 

principles.  And they talked during the campaign about their 

principles.  And what we find, Mr. Speaker, is they have let the 

people down because they have reneged on their principles. 

 

And that's particularly annoying to the public who vote for 

people who believe they're going to do what they say.  And 

they vote for people who believe they actually have 

convictions. 

 

I'm going to start tonight, Mr. Speaker, with a couple of quotes 

from one of the hon. members.  And it's not going to be the 

Premier.  And I've done that a few times.  It's not going to be 

one of the front-benchers.  It's going to be the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

(2145) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He's a good man. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And one of the hon. members said he's a good 

man.  And I want to, Mr. Speaker, quote the hon. member prior 

to the election.  And then I want to talk about what happened 

since the election. 

 

This is July 25, 1989, page 2887 in Hansard.  And this is the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow; at that time I believe it 

was Moose Jaw South.  Mr. Speaker, I quote.  This is the NDP 

member from Moose Jaw: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, when a political party says one thing before an 

election, and then having won the election on the basis of 

those policies and platforms and statements, when that party 

is then given power and turns around and does just the 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that makes a sham of parliamentary 

democracy. 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Now the members opposite said, the man from Moose Jaw 

South, Moose Jaw Wakamow, is a good man. He is a preacher, 

he's well known in the community, and he has a solid 

reputation.  And he says, Mr. Speaker, when he's on this side of 

the House, that if you campaign on one thing and then turn 

around and do the very opposite -- particularly when you've 

won power on what you've said -- that makes a sham of 

parliamentary democracy. 

 

Now that quote, Mr. Speaker, is the reason the motion is here 

today because these people campaigned on one thing and have 

turned around and done the opposite.  They campaigned to help 

farmers, they campaigned to cut taxes, they campaigned to 

increase health care funding, they had campaigned to help rural 

people and seniors, they campaigned to make sure that 

medicare was funded and not charge user fees, and on and on 

and on -- I have a long list -- and they've done just what the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow finds so appalling.  They 

make a sham out of parliamentary democracy because they got 

elected on political perjury.  They didn't tell the truth.  Or if 

they did say something, they've done exactly the opposite. 

 

So they went out in front of all the public and they promised 

whatever it took to get elected -- I'll cut your taxes, I'll fix up 

the farmers, I'll decentralize, I'll provide you with jobs, all of 

those things -- and as soon as they get elected, they not only do 

the opposite, Mr. Speaker, they stand in the legislature and say:  

and you shouldn't call us on it.  You shouldn't remind the 

public because we won the election on this.  You shouldn't tell 

them and you shouldn't hold up the proceedings.  Even if we 

change the rules, even if we take away the right to go to court, 

even if we do the opposite of what we said, even if we make a 

sham of parliamentary democracy -- don't you talk about it in 

here because we won the election on that sham.  Well how 

about that, Mr. Speaker?  How is the public expected to feel?  

Not very good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote the same member again when it 

comes to the arrogance of the NDP administration in this 

House ramrodding and pushing through legislation.  The 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow says this about rule 

changes, unilateral rule changes.  And there's several quotes 

here, and this is in August 7, 1989, and days that are close to 

that, in Hansard.  And this is the NDP member when he was in 

opposition and he talked about limiting the rules and limiting 

debate, unilaterally bringing in closure and changing the rules 

here so the opposition couldn't speak. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, democracy can withstand every attack except 

neglect, except a government that will so neglect the 

traditions of democracy.  Mr. Speaker, they do this.  Why?  

They do it for short-term political gain.  For their short-term 

political gain, they are willing to neglect a century -- almost a 

century -- of democratic tradition in this legislature. 

 

This says the man that voted to change the rules in closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here's another quote from the same 

individual. 

 

 I tell you, Mr. Speaker, democracy can withstand every 

attack except this kind of neglect. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow goes on to say 

this: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that on this side of the 

House, democratic traditions do matter . . . 

 

So when the hon. member was on this side of the House and 

he's a Democrat, he says: 

 

 . . . democratic traditions do matter, the traditions of the place 

do count.  Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not once in all the 

years of CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or 

New Democratic Party administration in this province, not 

once did we seek to stifle the free speech of the legislature; 

not once did we seek to limit debate in this House.  Not 

during the heat of the debates of the late 1940s, not during 

the medicare crisis, not during that time when the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was being formed, not once did 

we seek to limit the rights of the opposition to speak in the 

legislature. 

 

The NDP MLA from Moose Jaw South, Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, spoke in here, talking about the NDP never limiting 

the right to speak in the legislature when he was in opposition.  

He goes on to say: 

 

 On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, democratic traditions 

count. 

 

And then he goes to say: 

 

 Well, Mr. Speaker, if I were a back-bencher on that side of 

the House (this is really interesting, Mr. Speaker, given what 

he had just said about the sham of democracy -- if I were a 

back-bencher on that side of the House), if I were a 

back-bencher over there, I would be absolutely ashamed to be 

voting for this motion.  I would be absolutely ashamed to be 

counted in with the . . . (rest) of government in Saskatchewan 

history to limit free speech in this House.  I'd be absolutely 

ashamed to stand up with that front bench and do as they 

have beckoned me to do. 

 

That's what the NDP member said from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

when he was here, and this year, he voted to do the very thing 

that he said he never would believe in and never would do.  

And he called that a sham when he was in opposition. 

 

And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 . . . this motion may pass.  I expect that enough of the 

back-benchers will fall in line some time today, that this 

motion will pass, and free speech and debate in this House 

will be stifled.  Their potash . . . legislation may pass, but 

some day, Mr. Speaker, some day either sooner or later, they 

will have to go to the people.  The people will have an 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

opportunity.  Who is there that will stop them?  The people of 

the province will stop them, that's for sure. 

 

And he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 You (can) see, Mr. Speaker, they may be able to stifle free 

speech, free speech in this legislature.  They may be able to 

silence this opposition.  They may be able to deny members 

of the House the right to speak, but they will not silence the 

people . . . 

 

And then he goes on to say, which I find extremely relevant: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, (this is the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow) I stand to oppose this action to limit debate in the 

Saskatchewan legislature.  I stand to oppose the silencing of 

an opposition.  And I stand to oppose this motion, not simply 

because it is the means by which this government wishes to 

privatize the potash corporation; I stand to oppose this 

motion because it limits the freedom of speech. 

 

So says the NDP member from Moose Jaw Wakamow when he 

sits on this side of the House. 

 

And then he goes on to say on August 7, the NDP member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

 . . . I'll put my name on record against this limiting of free 

speech in the Saskatchewan legislature.  And when that day 

comes and I no longer have a right to sit in this legislature 

and to speak here, when that day comes, I will at least not go 

away with the shame of knowing that I was part of a group of 

men and women who sought to limit those rights in this 

House. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker.  That same member, when he 

won the election on the sham of promising lower taxes, then 

gets on that side of the House, votes against the very principle 

that he stood and argued for here day after day after day in 

1989.  Now that's what the NDP are all about.  Whatever it 

takes to get elected. 

 

And why people want us to stand in our place and fight the 

Draconian GRIP legislation and fight changes in taxes and 

fight the changes in rural Saskatchewan and protect industry 

and encourage investment here in the province, is because they 

know if there was an election today, the NDP would not get 

elected.  They would not get elected because they'd have to 

stand up and say, well these are the taxes we're going to levy, 

here's how we're going to limit free speech, here's how we're 

going to go against our principles.  And all the things that they 

said in opposition mean absolutely zero.  Nothing. 

 

And it doesn't matter what your profession.  Whether you're a 

farmer, whether you're a policeman, or whether you're a 

preacher, or whatever it is, if you're elected NDP, you can say 

one thing when you're on one side of the House and do exactly 

the opposite once you get into power on the basis as the 

member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow said, on the basis of a sham -- elected on something 

that you knew you would never do but you promised it 

anyway.  Then you get elected and you do the very opposite. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have closure at its worst here when we 

find that on August 11, 1992, we have introduced into the 

House closure, closure, and the latest closure when they 

promised they would never do it when they were in opposition.  

They're going to limit the speech of members of the Legislative 

Assembly like they even did to the Finance minister when he 

was in here, so he couldn't even answer questions because he 

would have got skewered on his own petard as a result of the 

fact that the rules said if he got up and sat down, he couldn't get 

up again.  What a mockery.  He could only speak once, and 

we're asking him questions and questions and questions, and he 

didn't rise once on interim supply, not once, because if he did 

and then sat down, he couldn't get up again.  So my colleagues 

here and there could ask him questions and questions and 

questions, and he couldn't speak. 

 

Now what kind of rules are those?  What kind of rules?  Can 

anybody over there justify those rules?  Would the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow stand in his place tonight in debate 

and defend those rules?  Would he stand and defend those 

rules, where the Minister of Finance can't even answer 

questions, as a result of time allocation and closure in interim 

supply?  He brought in all the officials.  My colleague from 

Arm River asked him several questions, and the Minister of 

Finance can't get up because if he did get up and answer a 

question or two and sat down, he would not be allowed to get 

up again.  Imagine.  People don't even believe it when you're 

talking to them.  They say, for Heaven's sakes, who would 

bring in rules like that?  And they say, well I guess the NDP 

would. 

 

And here is the notice we got today.  Listen to this.  The public 

needs to listen to the rule changes.  Here is the notice the 

opposition got today -- time allocation, which is closure at its 

worst, the worst kinds of closure. 

 

 Notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly and following 

adoption of this motion, when the order is called for 

resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for second 

reading of Bill 87, An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation, not more than one sitting 

day shall be allocated to debate on such order. 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

One day to talk about it and two days in Committee of the 

Whole.  And the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, who 

had this great flowery speech on principles, is going to stand 

and vote for that.  And he said, when he was on this side of the 

House, he would never, ever, ever be on record sticking up for 

an administration in the province of Saskatchewan that would 

do such a thing.  He said he wouldn't follow the front benches.  

He wouldn't follow the front benches.  And in a year now, on 

something where they're at court, they've denied the rights of 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

farmers, they've changed the rules, we're going to get one day, 

and two days in committee, and that's it. 

 

And the members have spoken tonight, Mr. Speaker, and 

they've said, but the opposition shouldn't speak up.  They 

shouldn't speak up.  They shouldn't get in the way because all 

these arrogant things the new government is doing is absolutely 

necessary.  Well what balderdash.  What balderdash, Mr. 

Speaker.  Is this on the tradition of Tommy Douglas that 

recommended this somewhere in his writings?  And the 

tradition of Allan Blakeney?  Is this on the tradition of any 

NDP leader or CCF leader?  Where are you getting these ideas 

to do this?  Why are you so afraid of 10 members speaking 

about fairness and democracy and principles that you stood in 

your place and hoped to get elected on?  What in the world are 

you afraid of? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if they are so self-righteous, so 

self-righteous, then I would expect members to stand up and 

stand up and . . . 

 

(2200) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order!  I want to draw 

members' attention again to a rule which says that when one 

member is on his feet others are not to interrupt to the extent 

that that member can't even speak in this House.  And I ask 

members . . . and some of the members have been interrupting 

at least a dozen times tonight, and if they continue I'm going to 

ask them to please leave the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to draw to 

the attention . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just made a statement and the 

member from Shaunavon is no longer . . . I mean I haven't even 

sat down and he's already -- not from his own seat but someone 

else's seat -- making statements in this House.  I'll now ask him 

to please cease and desist. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add my 

comments here, and there's a large number of financial 

promises that were broken by the NDP administration.  And 

they no doubt don't want to hear this, and they don't want to 

hear about the principles they talk so highly about and then 

reneged on them.  But it's more than just the 10 members here 

that are talking about it, and it's more than just the public.  But 

it is being reported, and it is being published by newspapers, 

weeklies, dailies all across the province, over and over again. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, and as we know, after a short while 

of breaking campaign promises in Ontario, the NDP 

government there is extremely unpopular.  They ran third in a 

by-election and clearly they're going to be a one-term 

administration.  And this NDP administration is following right 

on the heels of the collapse of political support of the NDP in 

Ontario. 

 

And listen to some of the editorials, Mr. Speaker, when they 

talk about keeping campaign promises and living up to 

expectations, having a plan, creating economic opportunity.  

And these are mostly in 1992, but they've been in the last three 

or four months.  And I quote here the 

Leader-Post, and this is February 4 in an editorial:  "NDP's 

democracy tested": 

 

 . . . the real test of the NDP's commitment to democratic 

reforms comes now that the party is in power. 

 

What the editorial is saying, well let's see them for what they 

really believe in. 

 

 It is in a position to enact changes that will have a direct 

impact on how much control it will wield over government. 

 

 To date, the NDP has no formal process in either caucus or 

cabinet to discuss issues relating to democracy.  The closest 

is a cabinet committee on ethics that has been working on a 

package of democratic reforms (reforms) the government 

plans to introduce in the spring session of the legislature. 

 

There's a void.  There's nothing put forward on democratic 

reforms.  No tabling of them, no new ideas.  It's right out of hip 

national.  Every day, every day into this Legislative Assembly 

we find that they're bringing in reforms or changing taxes or 

changing rules or cut-backs or changing their promises, day 

after day after day, flip-flop, flip-flop, because they don't have 

a plan.  And it was reported as early as February this year.  

They don't know what they're doing. 

 

Next editorial, February 6: "NDP playing same old political 

game".  We expected the reform, we expected some new ideas, 

we expected the honesty, we expected the principles that they 

talked so highly about over on this side of the House.  And I 

quote an editorial on February 6, Star-Phoenix: 

 

 In the months leading to last fall's provincial election, 

Romanow solemnly pledged there would be no bloodbath in 

the public service.  He said competence and ability to do the 

job, not political affiliation, would be the standard applied to 

those working in government.  The NDP, Romanow said, 

would not engage in the purge and politicization of the civil 

service that happened under the Devine government. 

 

 His argument was that if the NDP took power and proceeded 

to root out those labelled as Tory partisans, such a purge 

would become the accepted approach every time government 

changed.  Romanow was saying the New Democrats were 

going to be different from the Tories. 

 

Well what happened? 

 

 But after three months, the evidence clearly shows the NDP 

can be just as vengeful when it comes to the civil service.  In 

fact, in some ways, the New Democrats are worse because 

they are more treacherous and sinister in their methods. 

 

Treacherous and sinister in their methods of purging other 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

political parties from the public service. 

 

 What we have seen is a consistent pattern of behaviour that is 

completely at odds with what Romanow said before the 

election. 

 

Well there's the old theme again, Mr. Speaker.  They said one 

thing before the election in their opposition and on the 

campaign trail, and it's exactly the opposite afterwards.  So the 

editorials have said, you promised you wouldn't practise 

patronage like this.  You wouldn't be treacherous.  You 

wouldn't be sinister in your methods.  You would be kind and 

decent and honourable.  And you'd have principle and you'd 

defend freedom of speech.  And today we got another closure 

notice, over and over and over again. 

 

 The NDP will defend this purge by hiding behind the deficit 

argument and claim it is all part of downsizing and the 

elimination of redundant positions. 

 

 But that is just more of the deception (says the editorial).  

This is a planned, orchestrated and well-executed political 

purge that is being handled by a small group within executive 

council. 

 

And the Premier's Estimates aren't even up yet.  There's a small 

group in Executive Council that is involved in this treacherous 

and sinister move to purge the civil service according to 

editorials that are going across Saskatchewan. 

 

And the NDP said they'd never do that.  They campaigned on 

the fact that they didn't believe in partisan politics.  The public 

service would be above that and they would not change the 

rules to limit free speech and they would reduce taxes.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder the public is fed up with them in eight 

months.  No wonder they're falling and diving like a rock in 

public opinion.  And no wonder there are motions before this 

House that show that the NDP are incompetent. 

 

Another one from the Star-Phoenix: NDP breaking election 

vows re the budget.  And it starts off: for a guy who didn't 

make many promises before coming Premier, Roy Romanow's 

not having much trouble finding ones to break.  It's been almost 

five months since they took power.  Instead of making excuses 

for breaking promises, the New Democrats should get their act 

together. 

 

Excuses, excuses, excuses.  That's it.  That's all we hear.  It's 

the federal government's fault.  It's opposition's fault.  It's the 

SARM's (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

fault.  It's their mother-in-law's fault.  It's the rule's fault.  

Parliamentary democracy isn't fair any more; they had to 

change that.  It's their fault.  We shouldn't speak in here.  That's 

our fault. 

 

The editorials are just beating on you something silly.  It's been 

almost five months since they took power.  Instead of making 

excuses for breaking promises, says Dale Eisler, the New 

Democrats should get their act together.  What is the plan?  

What would you do if you got elected?  People ask that.  I can 

remember asking that in the 1991 election 

campaign.  Well what would they do? 

 

Well they said, well we'll just cut taxes, provide more services, 

more health, more everything, better manage, and everything 

will be just sweet as you can imagine, highly principled, no 

patronage.  And the editorials are ripping this administration 

and ripping the NDP worse now than they did the Bob Rae 

NDP in Ontario after its first eight months. 

 

And they said they would balance the budget.  Well for 

Heaven's sakes, they had an $800 million deficit in the last 

budget, 500 in this one.  Their credit rating is falling through 

the floor -- falling through the floor.  And they said, oh no, it's 

easy.  We'll just show you how to manage.  We won't have a 4 

or $5 million GigaText problem.  We'll be fine.  We just won't 

do those things.  It'll be fine. 

 

They've given more money . . . they could have hundreds and 

hundreds of those kinds of projects on just the money they've 

wasted sitting on their thumb and getting in the way. 

 

Well the editorials continue.  Here's one, March 17: 

 

 NDP must escape the 1970s 

 

 . . . after five months it is becoming obvious just the opposite 

is true.  If anything, the NDP is struggling with the levers of 

power.  (Struggling.)  The new government is unsure of 

where it's going and how it's going to get there. 

 

Says the editorial.  So the public is saying, I don't think they 

know where they're going.  I don't think they had a plan and I 

don't think they know how they're going to get there.  They're 

going to tax and cut and hack and break their promises and 

change the rules.  They're even going to change history, 

democracy here, that the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

talked so righteously about, that he would never ever change.  

They've even talked him into voting for all these Draconian 

measures. 

 

And today, what do we get?  The worst closure of all, time 

allocation that limits debate on a Bill that removes the rights of 

people to sue the government and defend themselves in court.  

How ugly.  How awful.  How despicable.  How pathetic for 

so-called principled people that got elected because they were 

going to do good. 

 

And they say, well I must do this because there's a deficit.  For 

Heaven's sakes, they campaigned on the deficit.  They 

campaigned on it.  They say there's a $14 billion deficit.  So 

that isn't new; they campaigned on it. 

 

But once they get in power, as the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow said, then they make a sham out of democracy 

because they do the opposite to what got them elected.  Exactly 

the opposite.  And he will live with those words for the rest of 

his life -- the rest of his life.  He campaigned on it and they're 

here in Hansard and I believed him when he said it.  I believed 

him when he said it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Write your own speeches . . . 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

Mr. Devine: -- And the hon. member from Swift Current says, 

well write your own speeches.  I'll tell you, I made this one up.  

It wasn't very difficult.  You just have to listen to what the 

people said on this side of the House, then give them a little 

power and watch them blow it all to pieces. 

 

And the editorials say the same thing.  And the people are 

saying the same thing.  And on top of it, when you can't get it 

done, you change the rules when you said you'd never do that. 

 

That's as low as you can go in this building.  You can't get your 

own way with 10 people here, so you change the rules so you 

can bully everybody.  It wasn't enough to get elected.  You had 

to change the rules so you could just walk right over everybody 

else.  What despicable.  What in the world is this?  The NDP 

administration . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The rules allowed us to change it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And they're hollering from their seats, Mr. 

Speaker: the rules allowed us to change it.  Well aren't they 

proud?  Aren't they proud that they got a big majority, and they 

can change the rules so that now that they can even limit this 

small opposition from speaking up. 

 

Isn't that just classic democrats?  Isn't that classic democracy in 

action?  Isn't that so beautiful?  Isn't it something you can tell 

your grandchildren about, that you had this huge majority and 

you didn't like the opposition so you just ramrodded rule 

changes so that we couldn't speak, so the Minister of Finance 

couldn't even stand in his place in interim supply because if he 

did and spoke and then sat down then he couldn't get up again.  

What a record.  What a record.  And this is your claim to fame.  

This is what being NDP is all about. 

 

Well we could read speeches upon speeches upon speeches 

about the new-found Democrats that the NDP had here.  That 

the NDP leader spoke here, right from this spot.  I mean the 

room would echo with the kinds of things that they said and 

what I quoted tonight that they said here.  And the hypocrisy of 

doing the very thing they said they would never do when they 

got this huge majority. 

 

What are they afraid of?  What is it?  They're afraid of 

themselves, Mr. Speaker.  They know their own arrogance.  

They know their own lust for power.  They absolutely 

understand the greed and the need for power that runs through 

the NDP all the time. 

 

This is as good as it's ever going to get when you're an NDPer.  

This is it.  You finally got the government.  And you might 

make the cabinet benches, and that's as good as it's ever going 

to be for you.  And whatever it takes to get that and even to 

hang on to it . . . well you're not going to hang on to it.  You're 

not going to hang on to it.  Not at all.  Not given, not given . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Try it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'll try it.  You just call an election any time you 

like, and you'll know because you couldn't campaign on this.  

You wouldn't dare campaign on what you have done in the last 

eight months.  As my hon. 

colleague said tonight, you've not only done it for this year, but 

then you, as a slippery politician, extended it for the next year 

and the next year. 

 

Huge monopoly profits in the utilities.  Little old senior 

citizens, single parents, working poor -- they have to pay the 

power bills.  They have to pay the utility bills, and you stick it 

right to them, the old Saskatchewan family of Crown 

corporations. 

 

You didn't learn at all from those Romanow-Blakeney years.  

You didn't learn at all.  You just got the Saskatchewan family 

of Crown corporations bloated up with monopoly profits so 

you can do what?  Go out and campaign in three or four years 

and promise them a bunch more.  That's what it's all about.  

And the people know it.  It's in the editorials. 

 

(2215) 

 

And you know what, they aren't going to believe you.  Because 

you taxed them and taxed them and taxed them when you 

promised not to.  And they have no choice.  They got to pay 

their telephone bills or you cut them off.  They got to pay their 

power bills or you cut them off.  You got to pay your insurance 

or you don't have any.  And then if you don't like them, you can 

take them to court -- take them to court.  And then you'll even 

pass a law so they can't even sue you. 

 

What nice people.  What honest, good public servants.  

New-found, honest Democrats who were going to do all this 

like magic.  And then get elected and be kind to people and 

kind to the seniors and kind to health care workers and kind to 

single parents and kind to native people.  And you're just 

jamming it to them.  You've never seen such monopoly profits 

that you've got.  And you're sticking the rates up where they 

have no choice. 

 

What sensitivity.  And what a plan.  Isn't this amazing?  What 

an economic, industrial plan.  I know what we'll do.  We have 

three monopolies.  And monopolies are natural monopolies 

which should be regulated by government so that you don't 

make monopoly profits.  And if you go back and look at our 

administration, you found very small increases.  But what do 

you do the first time you're in?  You're in there and you raise 

them through the roof.  It's pathetic.  It's absolutely pathetic 

that you would pick on low income people who don't have any 

power.  And you stick them with higher and higher utility rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here's another editorial.  This is from the Star 

Phoenix.  Party headquarters virtually empty, virtually empty: 

seeds of NDP downfall already sown.  What the editorial says: 

while they preach no patronage, they've got the administration 

just packed with hacks and packed with relatives and packed 

with NDP supporters.  And they've got them on boards, they've 

got them in government, they've got them in Executive 

Council.  And it's absolutely packed.  And they said they'd 

never do that.  They campaigned that they'd never do it. 

 

Since November 1, NDP headquarters has become a forgotten 

and virtually irrelevant place.  It's significance evaporated 

almost instantly when the New Democrats marched to their 

landslide victory.  This decline of the 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

party machinery is not unexpected; in fact, it's inevitable.  With 

the NDP, it's inevitable.  Because this is it; this is the religion.  

This is it, whatever it takes to get elected.  And then pack the 

people in there.  You can campaign that you'd never do it.  But 

you do it.  You do it.  And you plot it.  And then you stand 

self-righteously . . . even the Attorney General stood in here 

and said, we have no patronage.  And unbelievably, they even 

put it in the Speech from the Throne.  We filled 500 positions 

with our own.  They have in the Speech from the Throne . . . 

And the Attorney General stands up and . . . we have no 

patronage in the NDP administration.  Well he has to smile 

from his face because well he can't say it with a straight face; 

it's impossible.  All the editorials are full of it, saying this is . . . 

in fact it's the worst.  I don't know if he was in here.  No 

patronage, with a nice smile on his face. 

 

Well I'll read it to you with a straight face.  This is what they 

says about your patronage, Mr. Attorney General: in fact in 

some ways the New Democrats are worse because they are 

more treacherous and sinister in their methods.  That's what the 

editorials say about your patronage . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . well he says, so they're wrong.  Well fair enough, the whole 

attitude over there is, well the public's wrong now.  The 

opposition's wrong.  We'll change the rules.  Everybody must 

be wrong because you got elected.  If you got elected on the 

truth, it would be one thing.  But if elected on a sham like the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow said, then you've got 

yourselves a problem. 

 

On June . . . another editorial says . . . and this one is in the 

Leader-Post: consultation is lacking.  The NDP administration 

does not consult.  What we see is government policy designed 

to create economic advantage and a more effective method of 

raising taxes only creating impediments and increasing the 

work-load from small business. 

 

No consultation with small business, no consultation with 

farmers, just raise taxes.  Make it more difficult for them.  

Everybody has to join a union; that's the plan.  Whether you're 

in the oil patch, whether you're in the farming community, or 

whether you're in construction, everybody join a union.  That's 

what I got elected for.  Well you didn't talk an awful lot about 

that in public before you were elected. 

 

And the editorial goes on: it's a complaint that the Romanow 

government would be wise to heed.  Already there are growing 

numbers who say the NDP government talks about consultation 

but doesn't act on its promise.  You don't act on your promise 

even when you promise to listen and consult with people.  For 

a government barely seven months into its mandate, the list is 

growing of those who already feel left out of what was 

supposedly going to be a government of reconciliation. 

 

Well you have made an enemy of virtually every group in the 

province.  You have broken contracts so now people know that 

you can break any contract.  You have the business community 

very upset.  You have the resource sector upset.  You have 

farmers suing you.  You have towns and villages worried about 

their life and job opportunities.  You've got the SARM and 

SUMA upset with you.  You have the taxpayers upset.  You 

have Indians 

and native community upset. 

 

You have people now who have contracts who are worried.  

Nurses have contracts.  Teachers have contracts and you have 

unilaterally and retroactively broken contracts.  So who's next?  

Treaties could be broken; pensioners are upset; seniors are 

upset; those that use insulin are mad at you; optometrists are 

upset; chiropractors are upset.  We have petitions in here by the 

thousands.  Can you think of a big bunch of people who are 

real happy with you? 

 

And your consultation is the key word.  Once we get into 

power we will consult with the optometrists.  We will consult 

with those who have diabetes.  We will consult with those who 

want nursing homes, level 1 and 2, and we will consult with 

those who are worried about patronage and we'll consult with 

the farmers.  We'll consult with the credit unions.  And the 

credit unions have backhanded you and said, I don't like your 

legislation, your proposed legislation. 

 

And the editorials pile up and pile up and pile up.  And they're 

credible editorials because they're credible arguments.  You 

don't have a plan.  You don't know what you're going to do in 

agriculture, what you're going to do in economics.  One day 

you're going to do something in uranium; the next day you're 

not.  One day you're going to do something with upgraders; the 

next day you're not.  One day you're going to harmonize; the 

next day you're not.  One day you're going to raise taxes; the 

next day you're not.  One day you're going to rip up highways; 

the next day you're not. 

 

For Heaven's sakes.  And you got elected on all this nice 

consultation and all this nice plan of people who really had it 

together.  You really had it together. 

 

And then they sit from their seat, Mr. Speaker, and say, but you 

should not be allowed to speak in this legislature.  We'll hush 

you up.  We'll bring in time allocation and closure, because, 

Mr. Speaker, they don't like to hear the truth.  And the truth is 

they are arrogant, they don't have a plan, they've made serious 

mistakes, and they have done the opposite to what they 

campaigned on. 

 

And in terms of principle, all you'll ever have to do the rest of 

your lives is read what you said when you were on this side of 

the House and then look at what you did when you're on that 

side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask members not to intervene when 

the member is speaking and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well that's his privilege.  And if the member wants to do the 

same, all he has to do is get up in his place and I'll recognize 

him. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I'm sure that 

when we read their self-righteous quotes from this side of the 

House when they were here, they find it a little difficult.  And 

they should.  If they have conscience at all, they should be 

embarrassed, they should be ashamed. 

 

Another editorial, and these are just coming day after day.  

June 16, this is the Leader-Post and it's about GRIP: 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

By now it's apparent the New Democrats have totally 

botched the entire GRIP issue (says the editorial). 

 

You totally botched it.  A major mistake. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What date is that? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- June 16, 1992: 

 

 They came to power promising to "improve" the insurance 

plan for farmers and have instead turned it into a holy mess. 

 

So here is an urban editorial that says that the NDP have 

absolutely botched GRIP and turned the entire farm program 

into a mess. 

 

 While their proposed changes will reduce the cost of GRIP 

on the provincial treasury, the new plan is arguably less 

popular with farmers than the one it replaces. 

 

 Basically, the government has turned this into a public policy 

nightmare and deserves the grief that it's getting. 

 

So what it says to the member from Quills is that you deserve 

this grief.  You deserve it.  You have botched it.  You've made 

a serious mistake, and you know that.  I mean, your members 

in your front row will tell people on one to one, whoops, we 

really wrecked on this one.  We really messed up.  This was a 

bad mistake. 

 

And they tell people that.  They tell them outside in the hall.  

They tell the media.  They tell our members.  They tell the 

public.  They really made a mistake on this one.  They knew 

they shouldn't do . . . oh this is a terrible mistake.  What are we 

going to do now?  Well I guess we'll have to just do what we 

can.  Maybe they'll take us to court; maybe we won't.  And they 

botched it up so badly, Mr. Speaker, that after this -- you know 

why they did? -- they had to change the rules of the House to 

kind of force it through, so they dug themselves into a hole. 

 

You botched it.  You made a serious mistake.  We were 

holding it up, so then you changed these rules despite all your 

high-minded arguments for not doing this.  These principled 

people, you succumbed to it.  You botched it up.  You wouldn't 

admit you made a mistake, so you changed the rules. 

 

Now people are suing you.  Now we have legal advice that says 

that this could end up in a constitutional challenge, and we'll go 

and we'll ask the Attorney General day after day if he will 

reference this to the Court of Appeal and to the Supreme Court 

as we did with the boundaries Act because they have botched it 

up.  Just clean it up and we'll proceed.  We'll see this thing go 

as quickly as possible.  And the man will not stand in his place 

in question period.  He won't stand in his place.  The Attorney 

General of Saskatchewan won't stand in his place because they 

botched up the Bill according to the editorials and the public. 

 

And then they want us not to speak.  And they stand in 

here arrogantly and say, you should not speak.  It's only eight 

months.  Leave us alone, leave us alone, leave us alone, they 

say. 

 

You have taken away the rights of people before the courts.  

You've changed the rules.  You've changed their contracts.  

You've changed their lives.  You've taxed them.  You've broken 

every campaign promise you can imagine.  You've got all of 

society mad at you.  And finally the thing you do is say, but I'm 

going to cut you off so you can't talk on TV or public . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you can call an election.  The 

member from Quills says we call an election.  I'll tell you, call 

an election.  Go call an election.  I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if 

any of the members want to stand up and take their record in 

eight months and go to the campaign trail, they are more than 

welcome on your record, your record.  The NDP administration 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Now we have debate going on 

between the member from Rosthern and the member from 

Quill Lakes and I think the member from Shaunavon.  A 

number of people in it.  We can't have four or five people 

debating at the same time.  I ask members to please let the 

member from Estevan have his say. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I have an editorial here, Mr. Speaker, that gives 

you a bouquet.  And I want to just refer to it because as an 

NDP MLA and candidate I give you credit for pulling the 

GRIP Bill when we were at this impasse.  I didn't agree with all 

the decisions that you've made, but this editorial says that you 

did the right thing.  And had we been able to proceed and to 

work through it, because they made such a mess of it, I don't 

even think that we would have got into the rule changes. 

 

Another editorial goes on to say that the NDP government must 

be condemned for trying to push through rule changes that 

limit bell-ringing in the absence of consensus among members 

of the Rules Committee.  That's what the public says.  You 

should be condemned for changing these rules unilaterally. 

 

Such an Act by definition is an attack on parliamentary 

democratic process.  It sounds just like the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow when he spoke here.  He said he would 

never be part of this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Shame, I 

guess shame.  It's a principle statement that the man made here, 

a principle statement.  And then he's on the other side and the 

member said well I've said that. 

 

I'm going to say it again and again because I thought he 

believed . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I do want to remind the . . . I have kept 

track and the Leader of the Opposition now has referred to . . . 

repeated the government has changed the rules, I think he's said 

it now six or seven times.  That is repetition.  And unless the 

member can make a new argument on it, I will have to call him 

to order if he continues with the same repetition. 

 

What's your point of order? 

 

(2230) 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My point of order is, Mr. Speaker, that in 

making his remarks, the Leader of the Opposition is 

emphatically trying to make the point that these rules were 

changed.  He may have made the comment six times, Mr. 

Speaker, but they have changed the rules eight times, so he still 

has two to go. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That is certainly not a point of order, 

and I think the member from Rosthern knows it. 

 

I simply want to say to the Leader of the Opposition if he 

continues with the repetition of the same argument I will have 

to consider asking someone else to speak. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I said at the 

outset, Mr. Speaker, my argument would be is that this motion 

is all about condemning the government for not living up to 

their promises.  They said one thing prior to the election and 

they're doing one thing, they're doing something else after the 

election.  They said one thing on this side of the House, and 

when they get on that side of the House they change their mind, 

and the public is upset.  So we're condemning them in this 

motion.  And the flip-flop which is part of the rule changes, the 

flip-flop and the hypocrisy of standing here and campaigning 

on the things that they really believed in and then doing exactly 

the opposite with this huge majority, is the whole basis for my 

argument. 

 

So it says here that the NDP government must be condemned 

for trying to push through these changes.  The reason it's 

completely unacceptable is because the changes are driven by 

the NDP government's partisan concerns -- partisan.  And that's 

the essence of my delivery tonight.  They didn't care about the 

people, didn't care about farmers, or the taxpayers, or the 

principles they talked about when here.  It's just whatever it 

takes to get elected.  And they can even have their members 

stand here, preachers or not, and say one thing and then go 

right over there and do the opposite.  And he called that a 

sham, Mr. Speaker.  He called that a personal sham.  So he has 

to live with that. 

 

And they may not like to hear it, but every one of them did it.  

Every one of them did it.  They campaigned on it and those that 

were elected before know what that means in this Legislative 

Assembly.  And then to go over and do that, and cut off our 

right to talk about it and to debate it, is as low as you can get in 

this House.  What else could you do?  What else could you do 

that would be any lower, any worse, to do the opposite to what 

you said you believed in and then cut off my right to talk about 

it?  Unbelievable. 

 

 Make no mistake, the government is trying to ram through 

the changes because it wants to pass its legislation to amend 

the Gross Revenue Insurance Plan (GRIP) for farmers.  If 

there were no GRIP bill, and had the Opposition Tories not 

already walked out for 18 days, the NDP would feel no 

urgent need to change these rules. 

 

This is the Leader-Post, July 8. 

 

 Thus, the motivation to change the rules of the house in the 

midst of a session and without a consensus of the members, is 

little more than a 

partisan NDP effort.  It is an affront to the legislature and any 

person with (one) ounce of integrity will admit as much. 

 

For Heaven's sakes.  Anybody with an ounce of integrity would 

admit it, and you know it's right.  You know this editorial is 

right on.  Your integrity went right out the window when you 

got this huge majority, and you're afraid of this handful of 

people that might bring you down.  Do you know what you've 

done?  By reacting to us, you've brought yourself down 

because we got inside you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- We got inside you.  And they cheer for this, Mr. 

Speaker.  The member from Quills cheers because we said we 

finally opened up the NDP heart to look inside to see what 

you're really made out of.  We opened it up and there's not one 

ounce of integrity in that heart.  None.  We opened it up 

because we said the 10 of us are going to stand and fight for 

farmers and fight for rights and you said, oh my gosh, no we 

won't let them do that. 

 

And you went as low as you could.  Take away our rights to 

speak.  More of it today.  And that's what you're really all 

about.  Frightened of yourselves; frightened of what you know 

is in here, which is the greed and lust for power.  To rule for 

what?  Rule so you can put NDPers or relatives and friends in 

places instead of somebody else's?  Is that what it's all about?  

Is that what it's all about?  The member from Quills knows all 

about that.  We've had lots of fun in this Legislative Assembly 

going back and forth and back and forth.  The list is about that 

long. 

 

Well, is that it?  Is that the whole raison d'tre of NDP?  It isn't 

about integrity.  It isn't about honesty.  It isn't about being 

consistent with the things that you believe.  And the editorials 

are coming more and more and more to say exactly that. 

 

And then on July 11, the next day, Mr. Speaker, a big editorial: 

the NDP is suffering internal ills.  It's finally getting inside.  

That old cancer of hollowness is getting to the whole party. 

 

And only the loyal are invited to speak and only the loyal can 

come out for coffee.  And only the loyal are going to be there 

because, oh-oh, we're losing it, boys.  They saw it, they opened 

it up and said look what we are.  We are this sham of an 

administration, sham of a government as described by the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who said anybody who 

would do that makes a sham of democracy. 

 

 In case you hadn't (this is the quote) in case you hadn't 

noticed, there's trouble in (NDP) paradise. 

 

 These should be the best of times for the Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party.  But less than nine months after one of the 

party's largest and, arguably, most impressive . . . (election) 

victories, the NDP has become a house divided against itself. 

 

 Instead of the party basking in the afterglow of 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

victory and the Romanow government gliding through an 

extended honeymoon, a siege mentality is taking hold. 

 

A siege mentality is taking hold of an administration that has 

absolutely let down the public on every promise they made 

about democracy, about the democratic rules of this Legislative 

Assembly and about the campaign promises. 

 

 Each day it's more apparent that discontent runs deeply in 

party ranks.  It has reached the point that some of the most 

stalwart NDP supporters are predicting that, unless the 

Romanow government dramatically changes course, this will 

be a one-term government. 

 

So in a few short months the editorials are saying, this is a 

one-term government.  You don't know what you're doing; you 

don't have a plan; you're into treacherous activity; you're taxing 

people; you're breaking promises; and the whole administration 

is being called a sham by people in your own party. 

 

And now you're only inviting the loyal to show up.  And you 

won't let us talk about them.  Can you believe this?  Cutting us 

off, these 10 individual MLAs, taking on both sides of the 

House.  You are so mighty and so powerful and so righteous 

that you have to change the rules so that we can't speak. 

 

For Heaven's sake.  That's what Saskatchewan . . . That's on the 

legacy of the CCF?  Tommy Douglas would recommend this?  

And the member from Swift Current says, it really hurts.  Hey, 

it really hurts.  Look, he's . . . (inaudible) . . .  He doesn't even 

get the point.  The point is there are principles in democracy.  

There are principles in democracy.  He says, no, no; there's no 

principles. 

 

Well of course there's not if they're not NDP.  No darn 

principles.  NDP, no darn . . . They don't believe in any of the 

things they say.  And that's what this motion is about.  You're 

not delivering what you said you would.  And you can't just get 

out of it by saying, well we found a deficit.  You campaigned 

on the deficit.  Your leader said it was 14.2 billion all last year. 

 

So what was your plan?  Your plan was, we'll do whatever it 

takes to get elected.  Then once we're in, we'll shut them up, 

we'll change the rules, we'll do all of this stuff. 

 

Well that's why the editorials and the public are beating on you.  

I mean this is like Bob Rae's administration.  He got these 

kinds of editorials, only it was later.  You're picking them up in 

the first few months. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . like Mulroney. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well he won two back-to-back governments.  

He just said he's a little bit like the Prime Minister when he 

won back-to-back governments, majorities.  But we'll see, we'll 

see if this NDP administration is capable of this. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're a sore loser. 

Mr. Devine: -- Well the hon. member says I'm a sore loser.  

I've won three times and lost three times.  This isn't about 

winning and losing.  It's about the principles of the individuals 

that you are running against. 

 

You don't know why and they laugh about that, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what the NDP talked about when they were on this side 

of the House.  They said, we are people of principle, we would 

never do one thing and say another, we would never do any of 

that.  And the editorials are saying the opposite. 

 

And now the members both, they stood in their place and voted 

for the very things that they felt so righteous about.  That's not 

principle.  They call it a sham.  They call it a sham.  And they 

wouldn't campaign on it. 

 

Let me give you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP 

promised no new taxes, no new taxes.  I've got a list of taxes 

here.  You promised no new taxes. 

 

First of all, there's a great big deficit, but don't let that bother 

you, the NDP is going to get rid of the PST.  Okay?  No new 

taxes.  And here they are:  increased phone rates, power rates, 

natural gas rates, and SGI vehicle insurance rates.  That's for 

starters.  Increase of 1 per cent in the E&H (education and 

health) tax -- that's a 15 per cent increase.  New surtax on 

personal income tax -- 10 per cent.  They said -- and I've got 

quotes in here -- that they would reduce the cost of fuel to 

farmers.  How about that?  That's what they campaigned on:  

we will not only give you the cost of production, but we will 

reduce the tax on your gasoline and your fuel.  They increased 

the tax on fuel.  Who did that?  Who did that?  The new NDP 

administration just days after they got elected. 

 

Increase in tobacco tax; increase of 1 per cent on the corporate 

income tax; increase of 1 per cent on the corporation capital tax 

surcharge; increase of 25 per cent on the corporation capital tax 

rate.  That's just to mention a few.  And they said, no new 

taxes.  That's why this motion is here.  How can they do that?  

We've never seen anybody do that.  We campaigned a couple 

of elections ago about taking the gas tax off, and we took it off.  

Tell them about it, and we did. 

 

Promised to stand behind rural Saskatchewan farmers.  Here's 

the second campaign platform.  They're going to stand behind 

rural and Saskatchewan farmers, rural people.  Listen to what 

they've done.  And they didn't campaign on this.  I don't know; 

maybe they did in Regina or Saskatoon or Weyburn.  Well this 

is what we've got in this legislature. 

 

They've eliminated the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and when 

there's a big uproar, they said, oh we'll kind of bring it back.  

And they brought back a shell.  So they don't match it, they 

don't guarantee any income, but it's kind of there so you kind of 

fool some of these seniors.  Well I'll tell the seniors tonight, the 

pension plan is gone.  It's not there.  They've gutted it.  They 

didn't say they'd do that, they didn't campaign on that, but that's 

what they've done. 

 

They've froze and eliminated health facilities in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Did they campaign on that?  For Heaven's 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

sakes, no.  They were going to build new ones and they were 

going to help everybody do it. 

 

They cancelled the rural natural gas distribution program, the 

natural gas distribution program, which is a pretty good 

program.  People get natural gas on their farms, towns, and 

villages.  They cancelled it.  They didn't campaign on that, but 

once they're in power ,they've got to cancel that.  They didn't 

bring it in when they were in power, Mr. Speaker.  In 1970s 

and the early '80s, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in power, 

they didn't have a natural gas distribution program.  They didn't 

do it.  So we brought it in.  Well when we did it, then they had 

to cancel it. 

 

We didn't have a pension plan when they were in power, so we 

brought one in -- very popular.  They cancelled it.  Didn't have 

a new agricultural building when they were in power.  All 

those years . . . You needed it for years, a brand new ag college 

building.  They didn't do it.  We did.  They condemn it. 

 

We put together new hospitals, expansions in . . . a brand new 

City Hospital in Saskatoon, expansions in hospitals across the 

province, in the city of Regina, wings on hospitals, 

rehabilitation centres like the Wascana Rehab.  They didn't do 

that when they were in power.  Now that we're in power, what 

do they do?  They cancel hospitals.  They cancel capital 

projects.  They're going to close rural senior citizens' 

accommodations.  And this is for rural people.  They gutted the 

GRIP program.  The reduced municipal revenue sharing.  And 

I've got quotes upon quotes upon quotes that the government 

has to give a bigger share and to help the rural municipalities.  

This is what the NDP said when they were on this side of the 

House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what did they do?  They did the opposite.  

They taxed them more.  And they said, oh but it's because 

there's a deficit.  Well you campaigned on the deficit.  You all 

campaigned on the deficit.  You said, well there's too big a 

deficit.  Therefore, we're going to have to fix this up.  And 

what did you do?  You said, well we'll cut taxes.  And we'll 

manage.  And then we'll do all these nice things for people.  

And you just whistled through your teeth. 

 

(2245) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If you're so sure, let's have a by-election, 

Grant. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well let's have a general election.  The member 

from Humboldt wants a general election.  We'll be glad to get 

into it.  Let's have a by-election in Humboldt. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Both members are out of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He didn't start it.  That's not fair. 

 

The Speaker: -- Look, I think the Leader of the Opposition can 

defend himself.  He doesn't need your help.  I've asked . . . The 

Leader of the Opposition knows he should direct his questions 

through the Speaker.  And 

the member from Humboldt certainly is out of order.  And it 

isn't the first time tonight that he has been warned. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The members 

opposite obviously don't like to hear these comments, and that's 

why they've changed the rules, so they're going to limit our 

debate which is indefensible. 

 

What else did they do?  User fees for cancer clinic patients 

from outside Regina and Saskatoon.  That really helps rural 

people.  Reduce the number of rural municipalities.  That's 

really going to help a lot of rural people.  Reduce the number 

of rural ridings, the big plan, the rural revenge.  I'll tell you 

what we'll do to those rural people.  They voted Tory twice, '82 

and '86, and they voted Tory federally. I'll tell you what we'll 

do; we'll reduce the number of seats out there, reduce the 

number of ridings.  And then when they come to vote, they 

won't matter because we'll have most of them in the cities.  Isn't 

that a nice plan for people?  How do you feel about that?  Isn't 

that kind?  Isn't that honest?  For what?  So you can get in 

power.  So your friends can have a job.  Is that it? 

 

The papers already are full of patronage that you're into.  They 

said what else are they about?  They don't have an agriculture 

plan, no economic plan.  They haven't balanced the budget.  

Their credit rating is going through the floor.  What in the 

world did they get elected for?  To do this to rural people.  

Agricultural fees are up. 

 

Cancel Fair Share, and we've got quotes of all kind that said 

they would never do that.  They would never do that.  By the 

members from Humboldt and the NDP leader have said, we 

will not cancel Fair Share; we'll continue Fair Share.  And we'll 

read the quotes.  In fact I might have them here.  If he gives me 

a minute, I'll probably look them up and get them and give 

them to him. 

 

And the member from Quill said the same things, and the 

member from Humboldt, oh yes, we'll continue with Fair Share 

-- anything to get elected.  And then once they were elected -- 

bang! -- it's gone.  Bang, it's gone.  When they thought there 

might be some departments going out into their communities, 

they said, oh that's really good; that's really nice.  And then 

when they get elected, the axe, it's gone, absolutely gone. 

 

And those quotes are absolutely accurate, and they would do 

anything just to stay in power because that's what they're are all 

about, and that's what the editorials are saying. 

 

They cancelled the feed grain adjustment program.  They've 

cancelled the cash advance program.  They've capped the fuel 

rebate for farmers.  They've increased pasture rental fees.  And 

this was to be in defence of rural people.  You've cancelled all 

of these programs, raised their taxes on the basis of we're going 

to help farmers.  So the taxes were changed, Mr. Speaker.  The 

rural programs, they went exactly the opposite. 

 

And here's another promise.  The promise was fund increases 

for health care and education.  Now listen to this.  The 

CCF-NDP said that they were going to increase funding for 

health care.  If you look at the budget you don't find it there.  

User fees on chiropractic and optometric 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard August 11, 1992 

services. 

 

The Minister of Health was in here the other day.  She says 

she's going to charge the people $13.6 million more if they've 

got eye problems or if they go see a chiropractor.  Good NDP 

plan.  Boy I'd like to campaign on that one if I was an NDPer in 

Swift Current or Humboldt or Melfort or some place else.  Isn't 

that nice. 

 

They increased deductible for prescription drugs from 125 to 

$380.  And when we put it on at 125, the NDP members said 

over and over again, you've wrecked health care; oh, these 

people won't be able to handle it.  And they cried and they wept 

and they pulled their hair out here and said how terrible it 

would be.  And then when they get into power it's not 125; 

they've raised it to $380.  For Heaven's sakes.  They removed 

diabetics from the drug program so people have to pay for 

insulin. 

 

There's a freeze on all capital projects.  Cuts in funding of both 

education and health care.  Proposed the closure of many rural 

schools, and certainly the member from Arm River is familiar 

with that.  And increased air ambulance fees.  That's when they 

promised that they were going to help in health care.  And the 

lists go on. 

 

And people are writing. Petitions come in and say, that isn't 

what you promised.  You said that you would help people in 

health care.  They promised to listen and this is a good one.  

They promised to listen. 

 

Number one, they've ignored all the plebiscite results.  People 

voted on three plebiscites in the last election and the NDP 

administration will not touch any of them and they promised to 

listen.  The public spoke.  They had it on a ballot, the first time 

in Saskatchewan's history.  And the NDP just said, nope, I don't 

see that I've just got one eye, plebiscites don't count.  They 

don't count.  Nothing to do with policy. 

 

And we're going to ask people -- and we'll be tabling, 

introducing our legislation here so that people's voices will be 

heard.  And you can change the rules here but we will make 

sure because every campaign that you go into, they're going to 

know the things that you said and know the things that you did 

not do -- like listen to the people who passed three plebiscites. 

 

Balanced budget legislation, they said, we want to see it.  NDP 

say, no.  Constitutional hearings, they want to see it.  No.  And 

the NDP laugh a little and they had the opportunity, 

harmonization to balance the budget.  No. 

 

They cancelled the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

agreement which had the approval of SUMA, SARM, the 

Canadian Federation of Labour, the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, the North Saskatoon Business Association, the 

Saskatchewan Real Estate board, Synergy today, Students 

Advocating Nuclear Energy, municipal councils throughout 

Saskatchewan, Great West Rural Development Corporation.  

All of these groups, every one of them supported the AECL 

agreement and every one of them, every one of them supports 

it today.  Every one of them supports it today. 

 

That is SUMA, SARM, the Canadian Federation of 

Labour, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the North 

Saskatoon Business Association the Saskatchewan real estate 

board, Synergy today, and students and the municipalities all 

supported the AECL agreement.  And the NDP said nope, 

we're not listening.  We're smarter than that.  We won't do it. 

 

And out goes hundreds and hundreds and literally thousands of 

jobs.  And it's economic development.  And they won't do it.  

Why?  Why won't they do it?  What's the justification?  What's 

the justification?  They never did come up with justification.  

Well the party has this kind of position.  We don't really . . . 

you know maybe we got to kind of . . . well we still haven't 

heard.  What is it?  Why are they against it?  Do you know why 

they're against the agreement? 

 

Well Grant Devine and the Tories did the agreement and it 

made a lot . . . We couldn't do that.  They got enough credit 

with agriculture buildings and hospitals and economic 

development and diversification.  We can't give them that one. 

 

Well what is your plan?  Where are the airplanes?  Where's the 

diversification?  Where's all these other things?  We don't see 

it.  Pasta. 

 

Well they promised to listen, and, Mr. Speaker, they didn't 

listen to farmers.  They didn't listen to plebiscite legislation.  

They didn't listen to the AECL agreement.  They didn't listen to 

SARM or SUMA or chambers of commerce, of boards of trade 

or anybody else. 

 

Who did they listen to?  They listened to themselves.  And the 

group's getting smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller.  

Now they only invite those loyal people because that's all that's 

left.  Just the loyal ones. 

 

And when we ask them questions here in the House . . . we ask 

the Attorney General, will you stand on your feet and defend 

your legislation?  Not a word.  And that accomplished lawyer, 

the Minister of Agriculture gets on his feet and he just defends 

agriculture and the law day after day in here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they promised to listen but they didn't.  

They also promised to be open and honest.  Can you believe 

that?  Open and honest.  And the editorials are full of the 

treachery and the sham and the dishonesty and the botching.  

Open and honest government they promise.  They've got 

closed-door commissions, verbal contracts with high-ranking 

officials -- verbal contracts, verbal contracts.  And the minister 

says, where?  Verbal contracts aren't worth the paper they're 

written on and you know it.  The member knows it.  Verbal 

contracts, and you can kind of change the verbal contract by a 

conversation, by a conversation changes a verbal contract, Mr. 

Speaker, but that's the new line.  The new NDP line is, well we 

haven't got it down on paper yet; it's a verbal contract. 

 

Well for Heaven's sakes, Mr. Speaker, we had farmers shake 

hands here.  We had farmers sign contracts.  Mr. Speaker, we 

had farmers sign contracts, sign contracts.  They've had 

contracts with a handshake, and the NDP administration breaks 

those contracts, introduces law to do it retroactively, removes 

any court process. 



August 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

And what does it do for its own hacks?  They get verbal 

contracts which are honoured.  Imagine the hypocrisy, Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP campaigners and the NDP hacks get 

verbal contracts which are honoured by the front bench over 

there and farmers sign contracts between the provincial 

government and the federal government . . . And the NDP says 

no; retroactively we'll have deemed them not to have existed.  

And what's more you can't sue us.  You can't sue us because 

we'll pass a law here says that we're above the law.  And for 

other NDPers you can have verbal contracts, and that'll be 

okay.  The NDP will honour the verbal contracts, but anybody 

else that has real, signed ones, paper, we'll just pass a law. 

 

Can you imagine the hypocrisy in that?  Mr. Speaker, that's 

why this motion is here.  They promised open and honest 

government, and they've brought in legislation to wipe out 

honesty, to wipe out access to the law and to the courts, to 

break contracts.  And if that isn't good enough, then they use 

their large majority to change the rules here so we can't remind 

people of that. 

 

And they don't want to sit.  We've been in the House -- what, 

60 days, 70 days?  Sixty-four days.  We've been in here 120 or 

longer and we've never had this kind of thing happen.  But they 

have to bring in these rule changes because they don't like us 

reminding the public that they change contracts.  And for 

themselves, the verbal contract is honoured.  And they laugh 

about that, and that's typical of the arrogance.  They laughed at 

farmers have lost their contracts.  Farmers are going to lose 

millions of dollars, and the NDP ministers sit there and laugh 

because they give their own people verbal contracts. 

 

They introduce a number of Bills which reduce individual 

rights -- and they said they'd be open and honest -- and give 

sweeping power to the ministers.  And if you look at the right . 

. . I mean, for Heaven's sakes, if you have a bar of soap in your 

house, the Minister of the Environment could come in, without 

a warrant, without anything else, and say, well I think there's 

something in there, we'll just break the doors down.  What kind 

of right . . . They need those kind of powers, I think, in Bills 3, 

10, 13, and 14.  You could have police investigations; you 

could go in there without any kind of warrant. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we're certainly getting their attention, aren't 

we?  They're chirping from their seats over there.  This is as 

lively as they've been.  And if they would have spoke in their 

place, maybe we'd have learned something in here -- the 

justification.  If the Attorney General would just stand in his 

place in question period and just address the questions, it would 

be very, very informative, I'm sure, to the public if we could 

find out why the Attorney General won't refer the GRIP Bill to 

the public.  And the Attorney General says, well no, we don't 

need to because he's just trained his new hand-picked 

Agriculture minister in law here, so he can stand up and he can 

enlighten us all about the legalities of the GRIP Bill. 

 

They promised . . . here's another promise.  Study 

decentralization on a case-by-case basis.  That's what they said, 

case-by-case basis, and that they would continue.  They 

cancelled Fair Share altogether and they 

promised not to.  And the MLAs from those communities like 

Humboldt said we will never do it, but they did it. 

 

They promised to eliminate poverty.  Mr. Speaker, they 

promised to eliminate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

member wants a point of order . . . They promised to eliminate 

poverty.  They promised to eliminate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order!  The member 

from Humboldt has been warned several times today and I 

don't want to warn him again.  And I ask him now to stand up 

and apologize to the House and withdraw those words 

immediately. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I stand and apologize for calling 

the Leader of the Opposition a liar. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Humboldt, I just want to 

give him a warning.  He has been disregarding the Chair 

considerably in the last little while and I simply want to tell 

him that it's 11 o'clock now, but I don't want that kind of 

behaviour to happen tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 p.m. 

 

 

 


