




















































Hansard: July 21, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1639 

 July 21, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Non-Confidence in the Speaker 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much.  I do not rise today 

with any joy or anticipation in this debate.  Rather I stand in 

my place with a great sorrow and a true sense of foreboding 

that this motion has become necessary.  Let it be clear that Her 

Majesty's Loyal Opposition did not want this motion to come 

before this Assembly.  Let it also be recorded that there has not 

been one member of the opposition that has not agonized over 

the burden that this motion represents. 

 

I have had many meetings with you in the hope of avoiding this 

aspect of the process, and we have both known and spoken 

freely that it could come to this.  At every opportunity, at every 

step, the opposition has tried to provide options that would 

have allowed this Assembly an honourable way out of this 

situation.  We have met at length and debated at length, and it 

is with a heavy heart that I must report that, to a member, the 

official opposition have informed me that their confidence in 

the Speaker has been permanently damaged. 

 

We waited for the Speaker to make some statement, to give 

some indication, that he would act to try to restore faith that the 

opposition must have in its presiding officer. 

 

And in fairness, it must be recorded that he did have options.  

When he first intervened so dramatically, we acquiesced 

because he indicated that he would convene the Rules 

Committee to come to an agreeable solution to the problems 

confronting this House.  And we applauded the wisdom of that 

decision and I have gone on record to that effect.  But within 

hours the same Speaker was on the television screens of the 

province undermining the very healing we had thought he was 

trying to accomplish, insisting that he would unilaterally call 

the committee and force an early decision. 

 

Even then we did not move on our eroded lack of confidence at 

that point; we held out hope.  As recently as Thursday I made it 

clear, and it was reported that the opposition was not 

committed irrevocably to this course of action.  We held out 

hope that the Speaker would move to save the independence of 

the Chair.  We earnestly waited for him to announce that as 

forceful as he was in demanding a resolution that injured the 

interests of the opposition before the Rules Committee, he 

would likewise insist that renewed committee meetings would 

be held to equally quickly find a suitable balancing mechanism 

for the damage that had been done. 

 

Our hopes went unanswered and we are here today, I say again, 

with no joy in our hearts, let me assure you about that. 

 

It is a serious issue we debate here this day.  And the Leader of 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) has made it clear that his 

NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) support the 

Speaker they elected.  Therefore 

we know full well that we have no chance of succeeding in this 

vote of confidence.  We can only hope to persuade the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana of the real and grave consequences of a 

refusal to take action in his own right as an hon. member. 

 

Some difficult things are going to be said tonight.  They are not 

meant to be taken in a personal context.  They may on the face 

of it appear to be hurtful, and they are not intended to hurt.  

These things need to be said because this institution cannot 

function if both sides of the House cannot have confidence in 

the impartiality of the Speaker and the independence of his 

actions and of his office.  And the real truth is that no matter 

what conclusions government MLAs, the media, or even the 

public may draw from these proceedings, it is a fact that the 

official opposition has lost its ability to have confidence in the 

Speaker. 

 

I say again, it brings me nothing but regret that I must now 

proceed to lay the argument as best as I can that brings us to 

the conclusion that we can no longer have trust in a presiding 

officer. 

 

We acknowledge, I acknowledge, I know that it is a lonely and 

that it is a demanding position.  I know a little bit about it 

because I was there -- in a subservient role but as a presiding 

officer during those hectic days of the spring session of 1987. 

 

I made a decision at that time that I was here as a politician.  I 

was here because of my partisan nature, and I did not want to 

give up my partisanship as a politician.  And I felt at that time 

that I could not fulfil a dual role to be here as a political 

member for the constituency of Rosthern, and at the same time 

sit as a presiding officer within this Assembly. 

 

And I asked the Premier of the day to remove me from that 

post so that I would be able to do due diligence to what I 

thought was important as a member for the constituency of 

Rosthern, and gave up the position of a presiding officer within 

this Assembly. 

 

The final intervention that removed from Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition the ability to hold full confidence in the Speaker 

came, of course, on July 16.  On that day the Speaker 

intervened with the second of his unprecedented statements in 

the midst of a division.  In that statement he set out a review of 

the situation that did not accord with reality.  Rather the 

Speaker's actions resulted in the protection of the NDP 

government and not the defence of this institution. 

 

I will deal with his July 16 ruling in some detail now.  He 

opened by stating that his primary responsibility is to support 

the parliamentary process, yet his action again did not support 

his words.  The parliamentary process does not include only the 

right of the NDP majority to have its way with this Assembly, 

but also the inherent right of this Assembly itself. 

 

The protection of the parliamentary process necessarily means 

the protection of the non-partisan nature of the process and the 

faithful application of the commonly 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

agreed upon rules.  The Speaker, cognizantly, in his statement 

informs the public that it is entirely within the rules for the 

government to implore . . . or to impose closure to stop all 

debate.  And the record shows that the Speaker went out of his 

way to legitimate the government's use of this tool.  Yet the 

Speaker did not inform the public that there is no rule, no 

practice, no provision of any kind, allowing any statement or 

speech in the midst of a division by any two members. 

 

What the Speaker did was against the rules, dotted throughout 

Beauchesne's, that there can be no interruption of a division.  

He did not benefit the public with that information.  Only the 

perspectives that happened to serve the interests of the NDP 

were referenced in his statement.  It is there for all to read. 

 

The Speaker broke the rules when he issued a ruling in the 

midst of the division itself. 

 

Further, in his rulings the Speaker makes repeated reference to 

his political position, that it is the opposition that is obstructing 

the business of the Assembly.  He does not inform the public or 

give any weight to the simple fact that the NDP government is 

in full and complete control of the legislative agenda and has 

the ability to call any item of business it chose.  This is a 

simple, a clear, and incontrovertible fact. 

 

The government could have called tax legislation, farm Bills, 

Justice Bills, any of the some 60 Bills that were on the agenda.  

And if it had chosen to do so, business of the Assembly would 

have continued uninterrupted, unimpeded. 

 

The simple fact is the government knew from the public 

statements of the Speaker -- and possibly from avenues 

unknown to us, but particularly from public statements of the 

Speaker -- that the Speaker would intervene on behalf of the 

government should it choose to stall the business of the 

Assembly. 

 

It is equally accurate to assign responsibility for the disruption 

in business to the government as it is to assign it to the 

opposition.  The opposition indicated repeatedly that it would 

facilitate any other business in a reasonable way if the 

government simply called other business forward. 

 

With the sure knowledge of the support of the Speaker, the 

government did not have to make that choice.  It could sit back 

and allow it to happen.  And the Speaker did not include that 

bit of balance in his statement, only implied condemnation of 

the opposition. 

 

In his July 16 statement, the Speaker also stated, and I quote, 

the normal rule change process was followed.  The normal rule 

process was followed.  And that, ladies and gentlemen, is 

simply not true -- absolutely not. 

 

The truth is that as soon as the Speaker had completed his first 

major intervention in the lawful proceedings of this Assembly, 

he then took it upon himself to undermine the normal rule 

change process.  How?  By immediately ordering a meeting of 

the Rules Committee -- an immediate meeting of the Rules 

Committee.  And that, for 

the benefit of the public, has never been done before -- 

absolutely never in this legislature. 

 

(1915) 

 

All committees of this Assembly meet after consultation 

among all parties to ensure that each is prepared.  That prior 

agreement is even more important when it relates to the basic, 

the fundamental, operating rules of this House.  The Speaker 

decided he had the right to dispense with such an agreement 

and deny the opposition the time to prepare.  He has argued 

that there have been many meetings and so all parties should 

have been prepared. 

 

But again, that amounts to a self-serving approach.  The fact is 

that previous meetings of that committee did not deal in any 

depth with bell-ringing and what might have been substituted 

for the elimination of bell-ringing.  We as a committee -- and I 

was a member of that committee -- we as a committee sat down 

and we agreed to disagree.  We agreed that for the benefit of 

this legislature, for the benefit of the rules and some of the 

good that could come out of them, that we would put aside this 

potentially contentious issue of bell-ringing so that it would not 

impede the other good work that we could arrive at by 

consensus. 

 

The fact that the committee, allowed to operate normally, could 

function successfully is proven by the fact that we have 

operated under rule changes that were unanimously adopted, 

and have functioned reasonably well over the past 48 days, this 

48-day trial period that we're operating under. 

 

But let us be clear how far off the normal rule change process 

the Speaker took that committee.  Not only did he force instant 

meetings, he arbitrarily decided that three meetings was enough 

to draw a conclusion.  This compares very inadequately to the 

many meetings that led to the consensus to try the new rules 

that we have before this House now and which are, sadly, due 

to become part of the losses accounted to this sorry situation in 

but two days time. 

 

The fact is, and let the record be very clear about this, the fact 

is that this Speaker came to that final meeting with its report all 

ready written.  He arrived with a completed report, assuming 

he knew the outcome of the meeting.  Now that supersedes 

normal process for expediency's sake.  The process that is 

normal, the process of a committee report being written in 

consultation and agreement among committee members was 

utterly disregarded.  The opposition has no choice but to 

believe that he did in fact know the outcome beforehand. 

 

Let history record that the public was misinformed and that this 

Assembly was misinformed when in the July 16 statement he 

said the normal rule process had been followed.  It had not. 

 

The Speaker continued this misinterpretation of the situation in 

a paragraph that follows the above-noted quote.  He claims that 

members argued that prolonged bell-ringing is justified to 

prevent the government from introducing or passing 

objectionable legislation, and that therefore the end justifies the 

means.  By its 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

incompleteness this statement is also not accurate. 

 

The opposition -- and I want to be clear about this -- the 

opposition held and continues to hold that prolonged 

bell-ringing is itself unacceptable.  What is unacceptable about 

it is that it stops all business of the Assembly rather than 

impeding the one pernicious and illegal action that the NDP is 

trying to perpetuate and to impose on the public through this 

legislature. 

 

It was and is our position that another mechanism is needed.  

We state that with a government absolutely unwilling to 

negotiate a different mechanism that the opposition has no 

choice but to use the only tool available to it -- bell-ringing. 

 

But that does not equal an argument that we find it acceptable.  

To conclude so would be equivalent to arguing that a doctor 

endorses amputation of a limb for infection.  A doctor -- and 

there are some in this House -- would agree a doctor will 

choose to treat the infection with antibiotics not the ultimate 

amputation. 

 

And the opposition chooses to treat tyrannical measures with 

public hearings, not bell-ringing.  That is our first request.  And 

the government refuses us that option.  With the refusal, the 

infection becomes so serious that there is no option available 

and bell-ringing must be used. 

 

Moreover, the bell-ringing on an adjournment motion is 

different in substance and implication from bell-ringing on a 

substantive motion.  To avoid an adjournment motion, all the 

NDP would have had to do was to call on a different item of 

business. 

 

Instead it made it plain that it would move to close off debate 

come low or high tide, and nothing anyone could do would 

prevent it from denying debate in this Assembly.  Why not?  

They knew their Speaker would intervene on their behalf.  That 

was a stated fact.  They knew the Speaker would intervene on 

their behalf.  And faithfully, as the NDP MLAs expected, he 

did just that. 

 

The opposition sought and does seek different means.  We seek 

the means of public hearings to accomplish an acceptable end.  

This Speaker dismissed this in his statement and continued to 

emphasize what amounted to a condemnation of the opposition.  

He can surely not expect in such circumstances to continue in 

the Chair with the full support of the opposition.  He concludes 

that paragraph by saying, other parliamentary means remain for 

the opposition to fight the NDP. 

 

But let's look at what he is saying and see what it's worth.  This 

NDP government is the first one in the entire history of 

Saskatchewan, and perhaps the Commonwealth, to impose 

closure only after five days of debate, five days of debate.  Five 

simple days of debate and the Acting House Leader moves to 

stifle that debate. 
 

So clearly the tool of the filibuster is taken away.  In fact it was 

on this very point, this very closing of debate, that we had the 

Speaker intervene to force a vote.  Imagine if you can a 

Speaker intervening to ensure that debate is killed dead.  That 

is what we find too astonishing for words.  A Speaker whose 

sworn duty is to protect debate intervenes 

claiming he is doing so precisely for that reason.  But the 

consequences still are to close debate. 

 

In as many public appearances, the Speaker has repeatedly 

stated that what his objection about bell-ringing is that it stops 

debate.  But he will intervene at the same time to ensure that 

debate is in fact stopped, and to try to salvage something, he 

makes a point of stating that shutting down debate is within the 

rules.  But he does not acknowledge the equal fact that until his 

intervention, bell-ringing was also within the rules. 

 

The Speaker goes on then to justify his unprecedented actions 

by claiming his intervention was needed to ensure that the 

House could conduct business.  As shown earlier, I think this is 

artful nonsense, quite frankly.  That the House was not 

conducting business was a decision entirely of the NDP 

government's choice.  The NDP chose not to call any other 

business than its closure motion. 

 

Now a motion on closure can hardly be called pressing when 

there are over 60 Bills to deal with and almost 30 Estimates to 

consider and to debate.  The government had the power and the 

choice to call any estimate on any Bill but it chose instead to 

press a closure motion with the sure knowledge that the Chair 

would come to their aid.  This cannot stand as an honourable 

decision of this Assembly.  And the Speaker that prosecuted 

this overthrow of the parliamentary order cannot remain the 

presiding officer of this Assembly. 

 

Even if this case was an isolated one, even if it was so isolated, 

it is so serious that the Speakership will be impaired by the 

continued incumbency of the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

The fact is that the most recent intervention is not isolated.  

Other interventions have not been as decisive in favour of the 

NDP government and so the opposition has been able to accept 

some interference.  But for the record, it is important to 

highlight some of the examples of interference that have added 

to our, the opposition's, inability as a member to hold 

confidence in the presiding officer. 

 

Earlier in this session the Speaker chastised one of our 

members for getting the name of a constituency wrong.  Now 

such a mistake, particularly after a recent reshuffling of names 

and seats following the election, is properly overlooked. 

 

Almost immediately after question period was interrupted . . . 

Almost immediately after that, question period was interrupted 

so that the Speaker could chastise a member of the opposition 

and in the process throw off the member's line of questioning.  

Right after that, the Speaker, as some of us will recall, made 

the same error in identifying constituencies. 

 

Now imagine the rudeness and the outrage that would have 

been emanated from members opposite if we had chosen to 

chastise the Speaker on that same transgression.  It would never 

have happened. 

 

Further disruptions of question period have been common.  

Early on the Speaker tried to tell the opposition 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

what kind of questions it could or could not ask.  It was 

apparent to us from the opposition perspective that he was 

remembering his days as an NDP cabinet minister when he sat 

down the member for Morse and instructed him that his 

questions were too precise and that they should be asked in 

Estimates.  We let that go, formally, but informally it was made 

known that the Speaker has no right to answer for a minister.  

If a minister wants to deflect a question to Estimates, that's his 

or her right.  But it has never been the practice in this 

Assembly for the Speaker to determine what kind or nature of 

questions the opposition can ask during question period. 

 

Indeed, when the the current Speaker was the opposition 

member for Saskatoon South, Hansard reflects many detailed, 

specific questions about post-secondary funding and private 

school accreditation from him.  The Speaker of the day did not 

take it on himself to order the member from Saskatoon South to 

get off that line of questioning and to save it for Estimates.  

That would have brought objections loud and continuous from 

the member from Saskatoon South -- and I might add, he 

would have been correct in objecting.  Those interventions by 

the current Speaker were interpreted by members on this side 

as part of an interference to supply the NDP minister an out 

from answering the questions. 

 

(1930) 

 

Also in question period, the Speaker has chastised various 

members for entering debate.  Yet the answers of the ministers 

are clearly recorded as argumentative and engaging in debate. 

 

The Speaker has ignored or repudiated the unique nature of our 

Assembly.  In the process, balance has been lost.  And I say to 

all hon. members that while the Speaker talks about this being 

the only Assembly that allowed unlimited bell 

_ringing -- and I want you folks to take notice of this -- that 

this was the only Assembly that allowed unlimited bell-ringing, 

he misses the point that this Assembly is also unique in many 

other ways; that a balance exists and that by his unilateral 

action that balance has been upset. 

 

For example, while other assemblies have removed unlimited 

bell-ringing -- that's a fact -- they have also created other 

effective tools of opposition to replace that bell-ringing.  In 

other legislatures there are various tools such as more readily 

obtaining public hearings.  In Ontario, also with an NDP 

government, for the first time the government agreed to allow a 

budget, the entire actual budget, to go to public hearings.  Now 

that's a powerful tool.  That's a powerful tool to exchange for 

bell-ringing. 

 

In other jurisdictions the opposition is given the right to select 

which Estimates will be called when.  They have that right.  In 

other jurisdictions private members are given more power in 

committees, and especially in the Rules Committee.  In other 

jurisdictions there has been some balance maintained, and more 

importantly, the Speaker has always been acutely aware of the 

need for him or her to remove any hint of partisanship 

activities. 

 

Now the person who sat in the throne in this very 

Assembly prior to this conducted himself in line with those 

traditions, and it was not an approach that won him friends in 

the government caucus, I can assure you.  As an example, the 

former Speaker would not make a regular habit of lunching or 

dining with government members, and when he did he made 

sure that there was a member of the opposition present.  Now I 

know some of you are thinking, well boy that sounds kind of 

petty -- but it is a matter of substance in a position of trust. 

 

For example, this Speaker told us that he was receiving 

unending phone calls demanding he intervene.  While I will not 

challenge the truth of that assertion, the only way that 

happened, in my estimation, is if the NDP members 

orchestrated such calls, and the Speaker is an experienced 

enough politician, I would suggest, to be able to pick that up. 

 

Sir Moses Finley said this of democracy: 

 

 Democracy is exactly what the word means etymologically -- 

rule by the Demos, the people: the people themselves make 

the decisions. 

 

Considering what has happened in this Assembly, I would 

suggest that Mr. Finley would have added, except in 

Saskatchewan.  For the Speaker has ruled that even if his 

intervention means certainly, and without doubt, that in two 

weeks, in two weeks time, the NDP government will have the 

absolute power to remove the right of the people to seek 

redress in the courts, even if that is not the case, his purpose is 

not to serve the democracy and therefore he can rule as he 

wishes. 

 

And the fact is that there is nothing to prevent a Speaker from 

doing anything -- literally anything he chooses -- so long as he 

maintains the support of the majority members of this House 

on the government side. 

 

Now the Leader of the NDP has made it clear in the media that 

his party is very satisfied with the Premier's chosen Speaker.  

And therefore the Speakership will remain in its current status, 

unless the member from Nutana can come to grips with the 

situation honourably and step aside. 

 

And I say this to the Speaker: even if you believe in your heart 

of hearts that you have not acted in a partisan way, even if you 

believe that what you have done is the right thing under the 

rules, the fact is that the official opposition regrettably cannot 

have confidence in you. 

 

It's a very . . . the most serious and the most difficult thing to 

say, the things that I am saying today.  But they have to be said.  

It is tragic that it has come to this.  But we feel as an opposition 

that we have no choice.  There have been simply too many 

interventions that have taken us beyond the point that we can 

feel that the Chair is being conducted in a fair-handed and 

non-partisan way. 

 

Perhaps that is simply an inevitability, when a Speaker tries to 

modernize a legislature, when there is not bipartisan consent to 

that process.  There must be bipartisan consent to the process.  

And whatever the cause, the House cannot be honourably 

presided over by a Speaker that does not enjoy the confidence 

of both sides of the House. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

That we are not by nature obstructionist, and that this motion is 

not simply another means of obstruction, should be clear from 

the dispatch in which things are being done on a routine basis 

in this House.  In the course of such business, the position of 

the Speaker of the routine business is not critical, because the 

business is not particularly critical. 

 

But I put it to this Assembly that when further, as there will be, 

that when further, highly controversial legislation is put before 

the Assembly, how can the opposition be expected to be 

effective?  And this is not a trivial concern. 

 

The government, we know, is considering dramatic and very 

Draconian labour legislation as an example.  We know that 

presentations have been made that would force, for example, 

every farm-hand in the province to join the Grain Services 

Union. 

 

What about when the government comes forward with a total 

restructuring of health care in the province?  What if their 

Minister of Rural Development, that we'll be hearing about 

later on tonight, exercises the power he wishes to take unto 

himself to unilaterally eliminate the rural municipal system of 

government? 

 

These are very basic, highly controversial proposals that 

absolutely demand a trusted Speaker.  The fact is the 

opposition did not wake up one day and say we choose not to 

have confidence in the Speaker.  Confidence either exists or it 

doesn't exist.  We deeply wish that it were otherwise.  But there 

is no such confidence and that is a situation that cannot remain 

unresolved. 

 

Simply put, regrettably put, for the sake of the institution, it is 

my humble belief that the member for Nutana must go back to 

being exactly that, the member for Nutana. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That this Assembly, in view of the unprecedented action of 

Mr. Speaker in his direct refusal to abide by the rules of this 

Assembly and his subordination of the rights of the House to 

the will of the NDP government, resolves that it no longer 

has any confidence in its presiding officer. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

have thought carefully about this motion, and I made a courtesy 

call to you, Mr. Speaker, to inform you of my intentions.  I'll 

now share this information with the members of this Assembly. 

 

After sitting in this House as a participant and an observer, and 

as the only person who can understand what it is like to be 

isolated while trying to learn and understand a new role, I've 

watched as Mr. Speaker has presided over the workings of this 

Assembly, most often with fairness, at times in an exemplary 

fashion, and yes, on a few occasions making judgements with 

which I did not agree.  However, it is my opinion that any 

individual in the position of Speaker will make errors from 

time to time, hopefully not making the same one twice. 

 

I do have faith in the member of Saskatoon Nutana as Mr. 

Speaker, and in his work in this Assembly.  I say this in spite of 

my concern regarding first, his speaking to the media; and 

second, his decision to call the Rules and Procedures 

Committee to expedite changes to the rules mid-session.  It is 

in his position as chair of the Rules and Procedures Committee 

that I believe Mr. Speaker has a conflict of interest, and should 

reconsider holding the chairmanship of this committee. 

 

Over all I remain unconvinced that any individual would 

preside over this House any better than the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, given the divisiveness and the disrespect 

between the government members and the official opposition. 

 

It is evident that the time has come for all members of this 

Assembly to create a better environment in which we can carry 

out the work of the people of this province.  Instead of placing 

all of the responsibility and criticism at the feet of the Speaker, 

we should behave more responsibly, and perhaps we would 

become the beneficiaries of a less critical public.  I think the 

time is for us to do our part.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the 1700s the 

great British philosopher Edmund Burke has this to say about 

parliaments.  He said, and I quote: 

 

 "Parliament is not a congress of ambassadors from different 

and hostile interests.  Parliament is a deliberate assembly of 

one nation, with one interest, that of the whole; where not 

local purposes ought to guide, but the general good resulting 

from the general reason of the whole.  You may choose a 

private member, but he is a member of parliament." 

 

Parliament is an assembly with one interest, one meaning, main 

interest, and that is that of the whole, not local.  Good words, 

profound words, wise words, and as true now as they were 

then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is more in sorrow than outrage that I join this 

debate.  I regret having to take part in debating this motion 

because, by doing so, in some small way it gives it credibility. 

 

I regret having to take part because, and here I quote again: 

 

 What this debate is about is the defence of this institution -- 

this parliament, its officers, its traditions and its rules of 

conduct. 

 

These were the words spoken during a similar debate in this 

House 12 years ago by one of the most respected members to 

sit in this Assembly, Mr. Auburn Pepper from Weyburn. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, debating this motion is sad because it means 

we are defending an institution which really should need no 

defence.  But to let it pass unchallenged would be to yield, as 

Burke said, to local prejudices and to local interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the shortest way to reply to this 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

motion is to make reference to that similar motion submitted by 

a Conservative opposition in 1980.  The names in that debate 

are well-known in this House and to the Saskatchewan public.  

Let me just take a moment to run through them.  John 

Brockelbank, now retired; Eric Berntson, now a senator; 

Graham Taylor, now retired; Auburn Pepper is deceased; Doug 

McArthur has moved from the province; Allan Blakeney has 

retired from public office and teaching at the University of 

Saskatchewan.  Those are the members who debated a motion 

of non-confidence in the Speaker on April 29, 1980.  They are 

gone but the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and the 

office of the Speaker are still here. 

 

(1945) 

 

The institution of parliament was challenged for reasons, I 

venture to say, that no one here remembers.  However, the 

office of the Speaker, with its responsibility, with its power, 

with its lonely majesty, is still here.  Sometimes in the 

hurly-burly of daily discussion in this Assembly we forget the 

long view. 

 

Now I bring up this historical precedent for a particular reason.  

The reason for the challenge to Speaker Brockelbank is now 

unclear.  In fact, even rereading Hansard on this debate, the 

reasons are still unclear.  Presumably the passions and 

machinations and the tensions of the day led the then 

opposition to decide, in its wisdom, to mount the challenge. 

 

Speaker Brockelbank survived the challenge because his 

position, in addition to his reputation as a fair and impartial 

dispenser of legislative justice, far outweighed the supposed 

grievances of the particular moment.  And when the day is over 

again, I am sure the same sense will remain. 

 

This current challenge started supposedly over one issue -- 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) -- and thereby lies its 

flaw.  If the opposition wants to debate GRIP, it should debate 

GRIP.  This kind of back-door transference or projection of one 

issue on to another is an approach that I'm sure a psychologist 

could explain.  As a psychological aberration it makes some 

sense.  As a parliamentary procedure it is demeaning.  And the 

public of Saskatchewan knows that. 

 

If the opposition prefers to reserve their right to challenge and 

personally attack the Speaker every time it disagrees on a 

single issue, we would have a new Speaker every week.  That I 

think will not serve this Assembly or the public good. 

 

I've heard it said, Mr. Speaker, that the first Speakers selected 

in England were somewhat reluctant to look at the job as an 

honour.  Often the Speaker feared for his head.  And the reason 

for this was because the Speaker was the one who carried the 

message; he was the messenger of the people's representatives.  

He carried it to the ruling monarch for implementation and the 

ruling monarch did not always like the message.  The king did 

not always respect the duty of parliament to the whole and not 

the local.  I would have hoped, Mr. Speaker, that in our present 

system the security of the position of Mr. Speaker would not be 

at stake. 

Now this motion is especially vexatious because it is levelled at 

an elected Speaker, one that all parties of this Assembly agreed 

to.  Now the opposition wants to change its vote.  Should we go 

back to the old rules whereby the government appointed the 

Speaker?  That too would not serve the evolution of our 

parliamentary Assembly. 

 

To quote Burke again: 

 

 Nothing in progression can rest on its original plan.  We may 

as well think of rocking a grown man in the cradle of an 

infant. 

 

This institution consisting of human beings is fluid.  It evolves.  

It works within strong traditions.  It adapts itself to 

circumstances.  With the elected Speaker, with the new rules, 

with many other policy changes we have been keeping 

ourselves relevant. 

 

Now with this motion the opposition wants to prolong its 

griping about GRIP.  That won't do, because there are 

expectations of us as parliamentarians, that we must balance 

our partisan causes for the common good.  Our responsibility 

is, as Burke said, for the whole, not only the local. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are members in this Assembly who have 

served with distinction for a number of years -- our Premier, 

the member from Arm River, the Minister of Finance to name a 

few -- and they have served under a number of Speakers, both 

in government and in opposition.  I dare say they have not 

always agreed with the decisions of the Speaker at the moment, 

but the business of the House carried on because they 

recognized that what matters is the pattern of decision making 

that is shown over a long period. 

 

Now during this session I have been tempted to question a 

ruling or two by Mr. Speaker.  I questioned them into myself 

because it's apparent that during this session -- Mr. Speaker's 

first session -- Mr. Speaker has been fair, even 

_handed, some say stern, but impartial. 

 

And impartial a Speaker must be.  He has shown by his actions 

and his rulings that his concern for parliament is for parliament, 

not for himself and certainly not for a party.  He has shown 

responsibility for the whole and not for the local.  To suggest 

otherwise is small.  The public agrees with the Speaker's 

action.  And I dare say even the ever-vigilant members of the 

press agree. 

 

There are other points to argue but they are redundant to the 

main point.  I can mention, for instance, that every other 

legislature in Canada, including the House of Commons, has 

restrictions on bell-ringing more stringent than ours.  But that's 

not the point. 

 

The point here is that Mr. Speaker, acting by his own counsel 

and with the guidance of the ages of tradition he represents, 

made a ruling in the interests of parliamentary democracy.  He 

performed his role.  And now we play ours. 

 

As Burke said, our responsibility is to the whole, not only to 

the local.  Bringing forward this motion is an affront.  To 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

support it would be an abdication.  I therefore ask all members 

of this Assembly to soundly defeat this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is 

not with a great deal of pleasure that I stand in this Assembly 

this evening to speak to the motion that my colleague from 

Rosthern has brought to this Chamber.  The more years that 

one sits in this Chamber, the more appreciation, I think, one 

develops for the process that we as parliamentarians go 

through, a process that is very trying, but one that is necessary. 

 

My seven years-plus in this Assembly pales as compared to 

many other members who have served in this Assembly.  It 

certainly pales, sir, in number of years to the service that you 

have put into this Chamber.  Those seven years-plus have been 

extraordinary times in our province.  They have been times of 

trial and tribulation for nearly everyone in this province no 

matter what their occupation, no matter what their status in life, 

no matter what they as Saskatchewan people do on a daily 

basis. 

 

The 1980s particularly were not easy.  Governing has not been 

easy.  And by that the way that this Assembly operates has not 

been easy.  Politics and politicians have probably never been 

under greater stress than they are today to maintain some type 

of honourable profile with the citizens that they are charged to 

represent. 

 

Reform of our process and along with it our Assembly, are 

high on the public's agenda.  I think that is why that all 

members of this Assembly felt that it was a logical step in the 

right direction when this Assembly elected its Speaker for the 

very first time.  And that election resulted in the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana becoming the elected Speaker of this 

Chamber. 

 

Because the public cynicism at the perception that politicians 

simply play partisan games meant that change has to occur, that 

public expectation that everyone will do better, they will do 

more, and that they will do it for less, comes right home to 

roost in this Assembly. 

 

And it means that each and every one of us have to stop and 

re-evaluate our role in life as an elected member of this 

Assembly perhaps more often that we did in the past.  People 

are clearly saying out there today that partisanship as is applied 

by political parties in this province and this country have gone 

too far in many cases.  And that that partisanship is getting us 

into a very uncomfortable position as the people who are 

entrusted with the management of our democratic process. 

 

We have been faced, Mr. Speaker, as you know, in the last few 

years with issues that have tested this Assembly as it has never 

been tested before.  The other day in debate the Premier 

outlined a whole host of times and areas when this Assembly 

was put to the test, when members had to look inside 

themselves and look deeply. 
 

And he was correct.  This Assembly stood through the 1930s, 

the most awful depression that our country has ever seen, with 

questions of substance.  And at that time it stayed together.  

This Assembly stood in the face of the 

debate on medicare which was tearing our province asunder, 

which had thousands of people on the steps on this legislature.  

And through all of that people were able to look in themselves 

and dig deep and fend off those desires to short-circuit this 

process. 

 

Those solutions as we know it are not easy, and the confidence 

must be restored -- it has to be restored or this profession will 

lose what honour it has left.  And this House must rethink the 

process that it has gone through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) in 

his remarks just now has somewhat trivialized the debate that 

went on in this Assembly, the debate that was involved in the 

bell-ringing motion, the issue of closure, and yes, ultimately, 

the issue of GRIP.  Because these are all symptoms of what has 

been coming on in this House over a number of years. 

 

In all honesty, Mr. Speaker, in that debate on rule change -- a 

rule change that I say to you, sir, was fraught from the 

beginning, as outlined by the member from Rosthern, because 

the process was not legitimate -- during the course of the 

debate on rule change, the debate was closed with closure 

before even all of a small, 10-member caucus had spoken in 

this Assembly.  Not a caucus of 20 or a caucus of 25, but a 

caucus of 10 had spoken on this issue. 

 

It was read into the record of this Assembly day after day, 

some of the most eloquent defence of the democratic process 

that I have ever heard in a British parliamentary system.  It was 

delivered by the member from Rosemont and the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway and the member from Prince Albert, and 

indeed, sir, it was delivered by the member from Saskatoon 

South in 1989. 

 

(2000) 

 

Some of the most eloquent defence ever probably heard in 

parliaments across this land was delivered by the New 

Democratic Party caucus in this province on the question of the 

limitation of bell-ringing to one hour.  And it seemed very 

appropriate in this debate in 1992 that that defence that was so 

heartfelt, that was so strong, that obviously meant so much to 

so many members of this Assembly, should be read back into 

the record and that the same feelings should apply. 

 

And that is why I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this was 

absolutely the wrong time in our history, both as a parliament 

and as the stewards of the political process in this province, for 

even the slightest hint of partisanship to be displayed by the 

presiding officer of this House. 

 

The arguments made by the House Leader of our caucus are 

very succinct in outlining a process that would lead to no other 

conclusion, a process that simply said the government's agenda 

must be followed at all cost.  Never before in the history of this 

province, our country, and indeed maybe beyond that, on the 

question of substantive motions, have rulings been made in this 

manner. 

 

Today as I was reviewing my remarks, I happened to read a 

line from the Hon. Jeanne Sauvé, the Speaker of the House of 

Commons about a decade ago, where she 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

clearly outlined to the members of that Assembly the process 

on substantive motions and the right of the opposition to 

obstruct. 

 

And I would say to you, sir, that rule is as valid today in the 

House of Commons as it was then.  There have been reforms.  

There have been modifications.  There have been changes in 

the way that that process works.  And that process works 

because those modifications were arrived at through a form of 

consensus and agreement amongst all parties of the House of 

Commons. 

 

There was no ramrodding.  There was no hurry-up offence.  

There was no ultimatum delivered in that process.  And you, 

sir, nor anyone else in this Assembly, cannot tell me that at the 

end of the day if that process had been made to work properly, 

that the idea of unlimited bell-ringing would have become 

history in this province, that the opposition would have been 

confident that it had enough tools at hand through some 

changes as outlined by the member from Rosthern, as through 

changes that have been outlined by other members of this 

Assembly, the member from Greystone, that at the end of the 

day that balance would have still been here and would have 

been achieved.  And this House would have been proceeding in 

a normal and regular fashion. 

 

And instead, we are faced with this debate tonight.  We are 

faced with a very large majority government and a very small 

opposition, a small opposition that does not have the tools that 

other jurisdictions have -- and will not have them -- an 

opposition that does not hold a very powerful weapon in its 

arsenal to use against a government that seems to indicate to 

citizens in its province that it can break the law of our land, that 

it can deny a day in court, that it can retroactively break 

contracts at will. 

 

I say to you, sir, those are very strong, strong methods to 

govern by.  And they require very strong, strong alternatives to 

oppose by.  And now the official opposition is faced with the 

prospect of being in a Chamber that has, in my view, sir, 

desecrated that process that we are all the stewards of.  And it 

is very difficult to fulfil the obligations vested upon me by the 

people of Thunder Creek in that climate. 

 

And it is for that reason, sir, that I support the member from 

Rosthern in his motion, as my caucus does.  And I say to you, 

sir, there are very few chances left for this Assembly, and it is 

going to take a lot of courage by a few individuals to right the 

wrong that has been done in this Assembly.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to make a few comments this evening with respect to the events 

in the past few weeks.  I want to phrase my comments around a 

question: how should this Legislative Assembly debate 

something like retroactive legislation and breaking a contract, 

breaking a law?  Should this place debate it one-sided, should it 

debate it efficiently, or maybe should it debate it slowly and 

painfully and indeed inefficiently. 

 

And I use those words for a reason, Mr. Speaker, because I can 

recall being in a conversation in this Legislative 

Assembly with the premier before I was premier.  Allan 

Blakeney said to me one time, democracy is not designed to be 

efficient; it's designed to be democratic and sometimes it can 

be very inefficient and very slow and it can be costly because 

people need to feel like they have been heard. 

 

And as an economist I found that an interesting statement.  And 

the more I thought about it, the more I acknowledged that he 

was correct, because as my colleagues have pointed out, we 

want to debate things we feel very emotional about.  And we've 

heard here several times, and if I go back and look at the 

debates in 1989, public opinion feels very sensitive about some 

things, very sensitive. 

 

Sometimes politicians can lather up the support of public 

opinion about certain things, as the New Democrats did in 

SaskEnergy, and obviously as we do and others do with respect 

to farm legislation where tens of thousands of families feel like 

they, number one, want the right to choose what their crop 

insurance looks like; number two, want the right to go to court 

before the law; and number three, the public in any polling that 

you do or we do will tell you the public believes the farmer 

should have his day in court, and it does not believe that this 

government should retroactively rewrite the history and 

deemed to have done it one way when we know it didn't do 

another.  And they want that debated, not efficiently, not 

one-sided, not in one particular way, but they want it aired, and 

they want it so they can feel that their members have had an 

opportunity to speak openly and as often as possible and 

passionately because these people feel passionate. 

 

I can tell you without any exaggeration, if you think that they 

felt passionate about bonds or shares in Energy, they feel 

passionate about their farms, and they feel passionate about the 

stress that they're going through.  And they feel passionate 

about their bankers and their accountants and their lawyers and 

their contracts and their kids and their families.  And when you 

change that retroactively, they feel passionate about that.  

Honestly. 

 

And they're not looking for an efficient Assembly that could 

get it done quick.  And they think, oh, weren't they really on 

the mark and they had a couple of questions and it's all over 

and it runs so effectively and efficiently and they passed 15 

Bills Tuesday by 4 o'clock.  That isn't what they're looking for.  

They're looking for democracy because the strength of our 

system is that you can stand in this Legislative Assembly and 

you can speak for the people you represent with passion, and 

you can do it again, and you will have the respect of members 

opposite, even if you have a small opposition and certainly note 

that both parties know what that is about.  All three parties 

know what that is about.  And you can do it because you 

respect the process.  You get elected, somebody else gets 

elected, but when you are elected you represent your people 

and you are proud to do that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, why we're on our feet here tonight is we've 

been cut off.  We've been unilaterally denied the right to speak 

passionately at length about things that our people and your 

people and people throughout the province feel very, very 

serious about.  And it is so ironic, 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

Mr. Speaker, and I've got these lists of your speeches and other 

speeches that the members made.  It's so ironic and I think 

difficult for members opposite and all of us to have the first 

elected New Democratic Speaker to participate in this 

non-democratic activity where people are denied the right to 

speak on behalf of their constituents. 

 

As my colleague and seat mate said here, it's going to take 

courage to allow the public to know that we can respond in an 

open, democratic way. 

 

We've even asked, could we just take this Agriculture 

Committee -- there's the standing committee of this Legislative 

Assembly -- and take it to the people.  Take it to the people.  

Let them speak about this thing that involves their life and 

about retroactivity.  And of course, the government doesn't 

want to spend money on farmers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I can go back and I can read your speeches, 

and I've almost got them memorized here where you said, why 

doesn't the government deal with the real issues rather than the 

rules.  Why don't you deal with helping farmers; they're in a 

crisis. 

 

Well here we are -- how ironic, Mr. Speaker -- with a New 

Democratic government, a New Democratic MLA elected as a 

Speaker, cut off debate about helping farmers.  In '89, for 

Heaven's sakes, he was talking about the crisis then and the 

crisis is a multiple today and tonight of what it was then -- a 

multiple, the worst since the Depression; in some cases, a 

magnitude of threefold on the Depression in terms of we have 

the technology, but we are losing families and farms and stress 

and people leaving.  And it's extremely difficult. 

 

And a New Democratic Party and a New Democratic 

government and a New Democratic MLA elected by this 

Legislative Assembly sits in the Chair and says: no more 

debate about farmers.  We are going to retroactively change 

their life.  You can't debate that any more because it's not 

efficient.  The Legislative Assembly would not be efficient, 

would not be effective, if we let people debate.  There isn't a 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that you can think of, who would think 

of tens of thousands of families don't warrant public debate 

when they've signed for three years on the line because they 

need help. 

 

Yesterday, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan asked 

for more and more money to help farmers.  We can only 

believe that he knows that there's a crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's why we're in this debate this evening.  We 

have the right to debate.  And in democracy if you're denied the 

right to debate and stick up for the people that you believe in 

and the principles you believe in, then once you get elected, 

you don't need an opposition whether with five or six or ten or 

eight as you had, or none.  You don't need them. 

 

(2015) 
 

They can filibuster for a while.  They can do a little bit of this, 

little bit of that, and you just have your way, and then we'll wait 

until the next election.  But that isn't the way it's been designed, 

that isn't the way it's run.  That isn't the way it's protected 

people's rights and gotten all of us 

interested in public life to come in and say, I believe in the 

system.  I'll run and lose; I'll run and win. 

 

And we've all done that.  I think I've lost three times and won 

three times.  But I respect the system because it allows me to 

speak up for the people that I believe in.  And we don't always 

agree.  But that's changed now.  And it's on the basis that we're 

going to be efficient; we're going to be effective.  And the 

government has to get on with its business. 

 

Well it's too partisan, Mr. Speaker.  It's too partisan for this 

place to work with genuine respect because we no longer have 

those rights, and all the rights that you had, Mr. Speaker, and 

the rights that the opposition had when they were here.  And 

they were eight.  And they wanted those rights to stick up for 

the things that they believed in.  And they're gone. 

 

I don't have the time . . . maybe some other time, we could read 

all your, as my seat mate said, all your eloquent speeches about 

democracy.  How good they were.  How good they are.  How 

relevant they always are.  Changing the rules in the middle of 

the ball game -- great analogy.  Start the game; don't like the 

way its going, so you change the rules.  You can't do that.  

Nobody get involved with it.  And you don't expect that to 

happen here, particularly by people who say we are the New 

Democrats of North America. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this small opposition in this particular 

legislature is just experiencing the sadness of the loss of a 

vitality of this great Legislative Assembly.  Great debates.  

Great debates.  Very lively, imaginative, colourful personalities 

have been in this Legislative Assembly and hopefully will be 

for hundreds of years to come. 

 

But we have changed those rules unilaterally at a time when 

you say, well we got to be more efficient, more effective.  I 

know that farmers are in trouble but we got to do it differently.  

And we'll do it even if it means breaking the law and if we can't 

get that done, we'll break the rules; we'll change those.  What a 

record.  What a record. 

 

So we don't like it.  And we don't think it's fair.  And we think 

you picked the wrong issue to say I will unilaterally change this 

because the House has to operate, because we really have to 

change the Bill on the farmers, because we just can't really pay 

them this even though we signed a contract.  And therefore, if 

you won't let us do that, we'll have to change the rules, even 

though it's been there for hundreds of years.  That's the way 

they do it.  At least you'd have a committee do it and you'd 

have consensus, but we won't even allow that.  It's just one 

thing after another, another and another and another.  And then 

we've got this situation where you muzzle the wishes of people. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will just say that I honestly and 

sincerely believe Allan Blakeney was right on the money when 

he says democracy is not designed to be efficient.  It's to be 

democratic.  So that people feel free to express themselves 

uninhibited, with respect, but have the time and the capacity to 

stick up for their constituents, and not in the middle of a crisis 

which you've talked about and the Premier talks about, we've 

all talked about -- a rural family community crisis.  We 

retroactively 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

changed the Bills, we retroactively changed the law, and we 

muzzle the small opposition because New Democrats are afraid 

of an inefficient Legislative Assembly. 

 

So if that's what it's boiled down to, we'll take it, Mr. Speaker.  

And we have no choice.  But it's your record.  It's a democratic 

record.  The New Democrats have this on their plate.  And it 

will be there for ever.  And people aren't going to forget that.  

There will be other debates at other times.  But imagine the 

precedent you set for the next government and the next 

government and the next government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely believe you've made an error.  

You've made an error in cutting off the tradition of this 

Legislative Assembly.  You made an error particularly at a time 

of a crisis when we need the passion and the debate so that we 

can go and fight for people.  And when we need openness.  

And again as my colleague has said, but the public wants 

openness and not partisanship; we need that more than ever to 

have this place respected. 

 

So it's with sadness that I rise tonight to speak in this particular 

motion.  But I have to support my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, in 

saying that the operation of this Legislative Assembly for the 

people of this province and the people of this country and in all 

democracies is more important than the political career of any 

one individual or any one government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you.  I rise tonight greatly 

disturbed by many of the actions taken on the part of the 

Speaker and therefore must support the motion of 

non-confidence in the Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

When I was elected in October for the first time, I never 

expected to participate in this kind of debate.  Although I am a 

new member, it is clear in whatever literature I have read, 

whether it be Beauchesne's, or Parliamentary Practice, that 

the position of Speaker of the House is clearly defined. 

 

It is my understanding that a Speaker should be above the fray, 

above the politics, and above the cut and thrust of daily events 

in this House; that a Speaker must oversee the daily 

functioning of the House.  He or she must ensure that all the 

rules are followed and that all members are treated equally as 

allowed by the rules, procedures, and traditions of over 600 

years of parliamentary heritage.  In fact, the 21st edition of 

Parliamentary Practice says that, and I quote: 

 

 Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an 

indispensable condition of the successful working of 

procedure. 

 

This is not a vague description.  The author used the word 

"indispensable" when describing the confidence and 

impartiality of the Speaker, meaning it is essential.  It is 

fundamental.  And it is vital that a Speaker have the trust of 

every member.  Confidence and impartiality are vital if an 

Assembly wishes to be successful at carrying out the wishes of 

the people. 

 

I am sorry to say that this Speaker does not possess the trust of 

this member from Souris-Cannington.  The 

member for Saskatoon Nutana has on many occasions caused 

me to question his non-partisanship.  Unfortunately, actions 

taken by the member for Nutana leave the official opposition 

with no other avenue to pursue but a non-confidence motion. 

 

What this Assembly has seen in this spring session is anything 

but non-partisanship on the part of the Speaker.  If this were a 

hockey game, the position of Speaker would be that of referee.  

But on this sheet of ice, that referee is cheering for the home 

team.  It is one thing for the referee to cheer for a team when 

he's not on the ice; it is entirely another matter when the game 

is in progress and the referee uses the rules, changes the rules, 

or breaks the rules to ensure that the home team wins. 

 

What this Assembly witnessed on July 16 was the Speaker 

changing the rules, indeed breaking the rules to ensure an NDP 

victory on GRIP.  He did this by allowing the temporary House 

Leader for the government to use closure to stifle debate.  The 

Speaker allowed the government to use closure to shut up a 

mere 10 opposition members.  Shut them up after they had only 

spoken for five days. 

 

After reviewing the history of the bell-ringing debate in 1989, 

the NDP filibustered for 28 days.  The Speaker of the day did 

not intervene.  Closure was not used.  The government did not 

proceed because there was no consensus. 

 

Closure was not necessary in this debate, and not only because 

it only extended for five days, but because the government had 

many chances and many compromises offered to them by the 

opposition.  They chose none of them, because they knew they 

could persuade their Speaker to do the dastardly deed of 

stifling the opposition for them. 

 

The government did not have to compromise on their 

retroactive GRIP Bill because the Speaker of the House would 

compromise his position instead.  Actually in this case the use 

of closure compliments the effectiveness and the ability of this 

opposition.  And it also admits that this government is afraid to 

give the people of Saskatchewan their day in court without 

rigging the game.  It is easy to win when you have bought off 

the referee. 

 

I cannot hold confidence in an individual who has abused his 

position as the presiding officer of this Assembly -- a 

non-partisan position -- to further his political party's agenda.  

We have a place in this House for such partisanship.  There is a 

place for the member for Nutana to practise that partisanship.  

That place is the back benches of the government side of the 

House, or a cabinet position at the pleasure of the member for 

Riversdale. 

 

When the Speaker spoke to members about the number of 

phone calls he was receiving on the bell-ringing issue, he 

should have wondered where and why those calls were coming 

to him, and who was orchestrating them.  He is an experienced 

politician above all.  And I'm sure he was aware of what was 

happening.  He stated he had the public on his side to 

intervene.  In fact, what he had was pressure from his own 

political party.  Yet he portrayed 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

such partisan activity as a reasonable measure for what he 

should do. 

 

A Speaker's actions can never be taken based on some real or 

contrived public sentiment.  What, I ask, if there were 

widespread public sentiment to deny French, or Catholics, the 

right to speak in this Assembly -- I chose those two groups 

because they are of my own heritage -- would a Speaker argue 

he had public support to deny that right, and therefore proceed 

to extinguish it?  I would hope not. 

 

This Speaker privately lobbied members of the official 

opposition, telling them that the politics of it were not right for 

those MLAs.  How could he in any way believe that it is proper 

for him to do such a thing?  How can a Speaker, even if he 

thinks he is speaking personally, try to persuade individual 

MLAs of a given course of action?  All of these things belie his 

statement that he was acting narrowly on the procedural issues. 

 

We do not believe that this Speaker is capable of engaging in 

the partisan isolation that is a necessary prerequisite of being 

Speaker.  This is not a personal attack; rather, an assessment of 

the facts.  It requires a special temperament to be Speaker, and 

the most important temperament is the ability to separate 

yourself from the politics going on in the House and to some 

extent in the province itself. 

 

For example, while we have no evidence, we have come to 

question whether or not the new creation of executive assistants 

to the Speaker are being used in the service of the Assembly or 

in the service of the member for Saskatoon Nutana.  We are 

suspicious that the Speaker's office is no longer itself secure 

and protected on behalf of all MLAs. 

 

(2030) 

 

Why is it necessary to create these new positions?  Certainly 

they have never been needed in the past and we have no good 

explanations as to why they are needed now.  Yet we are in the 

position where questioning them is tantamount to questioning 

officers of the Assembly, and we feel cornered -- cornered by 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

If the Speaker of the legislature is not going to be impartial, is 

not going to be fair, what is the point of having a Speaker?  

Why not just let the government sit on one side, the opposition 

across the way, and let them go at it? 

 

It is with the actions of a partisan Speaker in mind that I must 

say to the member for Nutana, please step down. 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me 

begin by saying that as a new member of this Assembly I feel I 

have learned a lot about the legislative process by sitting on the 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures.  I have also 

learned much from the veteran members of the Assembly and I 

would therefore like to thank them for their assistance. 

 

I have been impressed by the speech of my colleague 

from Prince Albert Carlton on this debate tonight, and my 

colleagues' speeches last Thursday on the debate on 

bell-ringing. 

 

Perhaps the most important thing that I have learned is to 

respect the institution of the Legislative Assembly, and that 

includes the role of the Speaker.  Democracy is not always 

efficient, but it is by far the best system we can have.  

Understanding its principles is essential in understanding the 

key role the Speaker has in maintaining democracy in the 

legislature that we participate here today. 

 

I would also like to recount Allan Blakeney's last speech to the 

legislature, as did the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow last 

Thursday.  Blakeney's last speech to the legislature was 

eloquently delivered on the principles of the House.  I will not 

quote his speech, as it has been already.  But in essence I again 

want to highlight three principles members should keep in 

mind. 

 

First is that, as MLAs, we are here to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Secondly, the legislature is first and foremost a 

forum of debate, where the right to speak is precious and 

should be provided and guaranteed.  Third, the principle which 

says the majority must have the right to govern, and the 

minority must have the right to be heard. 

 

The Speaker's role is to maintain these principles in the House.  

This is not an easy task and should never be regarded as easy.  

It goes without saying that members do not always agree.  

Therefore a mediator, a referee -- as many of the public view 

this job -- is elected as a Speaker.  A Speaker is needed to 

ensure adherence to the rules and a smooth functioning of the 

legislative process. 

 

There is definitely a need to keep traditions, but only if they are 

functional.  As J. Burke said, and I quote, "A state without the 

means of some change is without the means of its 

conservation."  The obstructionist tactics employed by the 

opposition have paralysed the legislature and called into 

question the rules of the legislature.  I agree with the Speaker's 

statement that it is neither parliamentary nor democratic to 

permit continual obstruction by the use of tactics that mock the 

principles of this institution.  A minority must not dictate the 

actions of the Assembly, especially after the issue has been 

debated.  People in this province and in my constituency have 

told me loud and clear they want their representatives and 

government to be at work.  Our proposed rule changes still give 

the opposition more generous provisions than any other 

opposition in this country, to ensure that the voice of the 

minority is heard. 

 

As a member of the Rules Committee, I must at this time speak 

to some of the unfair accusations made by the members 

opposite.  At the insistence of the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Speaker called a meeting of the Rules Committee.  At this first 

meeting, discussions occurred over a length of time and finally 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton brought forward our 

proposal.  The meeting was adjourned so that members from all 

parties could study the proposal or come up with their own.  

When we met the second time, no new proposals were 

presented, and after three hours we put forward our 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

proposal as a motion.  There was no vote taken, so that the 

opposition could have time to review the motion with their 

caucus.  The meeting was adjourned over the weekend so that 

opposition members would have more time to review this 

motion.  At our third meeting, again, no amendment was put 

forth from the opposition and the motion was voted on in the 

Rules Committee. 

 

The Speaker throughout all these meetings was impartial and 

fair.  The Clerk had the typed motion ready at our third 

meeting, as the motion had been moved the meeting before.  

The Speaker also told us at this time he had various typed 

options of motions ready depending on what happened to the 

motion in committee.  This is not partisanship; this is 

competency.  I am appalled at the lack of integrity of members 

opposite to give only partial truths here tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new rule changes represent a reasonable 

compromise.  The opposition is allowed to ring the bells for 30 

minutes and to suspend Bills for three days.  These rule 

changes were thoroughly debated in the House and they still 

remain the most generous across Canada. 

 

I must also at this time address some of the remarks made by 

the Leader of the Opposition.  A rule that limits bell-ringing is 

not a rule that limits debate, but rather encourages debate in the 

legislature.  Bell-ringing ends the debate.  It is a silencer.  The 

public has clearly indicated their displeasure with perpetual 

bell-ringing, therefore the practice must come to an end. 

 

The opposition claims that they are using these tactics to 

prevent changes to GRIP, but indications so far are that fewer 

farmers have opted out of GRIP '92 than new farmers who have 

signed up.  And it goes without saying that we have not 

witnessed any massive rallies or mass signing of petitions over 

this matter.  And no, what we saw was an interview of the 

Leader of the Opposition on a golf course.  Is this an example 

of passion and debate and concern for the farmers in 

democracy? 

 

And if I remember correctly, the opposition seemed very 

satisfied with the Speaker's first intervention which suspended 

the GRIP legislation.  The government is not happy with 

further suspension on GRIP, but the efficacy with which a 

Speaker carries out his duties must be evaluated over the entire 

session.  One cannot pick and choose.  One cannot praise the 

Speaker at one point and then call for his resignation at another 

point. 

 

We as members of this House may not and will not always 

agree with the rulings of the Speaker, but I have not seen any 

evidence of partisanship on behalf of the Speaker.  If every 

time we did not like a judgement, we changed the Speaker, we 

would see chaos in our institution. 

 

Members opposite have praised the Speaker many times on his 

fairness and judgement in the legislature.  And the government 

side, although not always agreeing with the Speaker's ruling, 

have never questioned his integrity, fairness, and 

independence.  I feel that the Speaker has done an admirable 

job as the chairperson of the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures.  Many progressive rule changes were brought 

about by the first report. 

One change that I feel very positive about is the greater role 

created for private members.  The principles of democracy, the 

legislature, and the role of the Speaker, must be protected from 

political gamesmanship.  The people of this province are not 

questioning the ethics of the Speaker, but may very well be 

questioning the ethics of an opposition which do not just want 

to oppose, but to obstruct; do not just want a chance to debate, 

but to have the right of a veto -- which would in fact halt the 

process of the legislature.  As a government member, I have 

seen no cause to doubt the Speaker's competence, his fairness, 

integrity, and independence.  I'm opposed to the motion and I 

encourage all members to vote against this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I do not enter into this discussion light-heartedly.  

The motion that is before the House has been discussed in great 

deal before it was placed on the order paper, and I will not take 

a great deal of time for discussing my reasons for supporting 

this motion. 

 

The Speaker of this Assembly has not been able to separate his 

partisanship when overseeing this Assembly.  I believe, in the 

recent series of events, the Speaker sided with the government 

in an unprecedented fashion.  As a new member to this 

legislature, I was under the impression that the Speaker would 

always be non-partisan.  I do not believe today, though, that the 

Speaker has conducted the affairs of this House in an 

independent fashion. 

 

The NDP government has, as a result of the Speaker's actions, 

now been given the go-ahead, been given the go-ahead to crush 

the rights of over 50,000 farm families in this province. 

 

My colleagues and I recognize the job of the Speaker is not an 

easy one.  However, we also realize that it is impossible for this 

Assembly to successfully work together if all members do not 

have a belief that the Speaker's rulings will be fair.  A Speaker 

is a servant of this Assembly not the master of this Assembly, 

and I am afraid that the decisions made by the Speaker in 

Saskatchewan have blatantly crossed that barrier. 

 

The Speaker has forced through rules . . . changes in the Rules 

Committee, an unprecedented act.  The Speaker forced a vote 

on an adjournment motion, another unprecedented act.  The 

Speaker forced a vote on the rule change motion, again another 

unprecedented act.  Decisions such as imposing closure after 

four days of debate and arriving at a rushed Rules and 

Procedures Committee meeting with a prepared statement of 

outcome in his folder -- that cannot be seen as fair. 

 

It is because of these kind of actions that I no longer believe 

this Speaker has the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan in mind.  The Speaker has clearly shown to 

everyone that he agrees with the NDP government's attempts to 

protect the Minister of Agriculture who after breaking the 

GRIP contracts of farm families is now trying to cover their 

tracks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not about bell-ringing.  This is not 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

about bell-ringing.  I'll say that again.  This is about the 

problem associated with the GRIP contracts that the 

government now finds themselves in that predicament.  They 

are going to strip the rights of every farm family in this 

province in less than two more weeks.  In two weeks or less the 

government will put forward a motion that will deem that the 

farmers received notice of changes in their GRIP contract when 

indeed every farmer, every member of this Assembly, every 

member of the public of Saskatchewan, knows indeed that they 

did not receive any notice of any kind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is indeed what is happening today in this 

province.  And I would argue that the Speaker of this Assembly 

has helped them arrive at that goal.  The Speaker has clearly 

shown that what he believes the Minister of Agriculture has 

done is correct, when indeed this matter is still before the 

courts, and the evidence now is being presented shortly by the 

government, will tamper with that evidence and indeed crush 

the rights of those people that are involved in the court case. 

 

And I'm afraid it is impossible for the Speaker of this Assembly 

to regain the trust and confidence that he has lost.  I realize, just 

as the government . . . or pardon me, just as the Speaker has 

rallied around the government, I realize now that the 

government members will rally around the Speaker.  It is now 

incumbent that the Speaker searches his own conscience to 

decide if he should resign. 

 

Therefore I must stand in support of this motion and ask the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana to do what I consider the only 

honourable course of action left to you, sir, is to step down 

from the Chair of the Speaker of this legislature. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I also rise with a significant degree of sadness this 

evening on this particular motion.  This motion in my view is 

extremely vindictive.  It's extremely cynical.  And I'm very 

disappointed that some of the new members who have been 

here a total of maybe 40-50 days are buying into this kind of 

nonsense in the face of evidence to the contrary in terms of 

your role. 

 

It was my hope, Mr. Speaker, coming in here this evening that 

the House Leader of the opposition would have the decency to 

reconsider and to withdraw the motion.  And I'm disappointed 

that he hasn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the theme through the opposition speeches 

tonight, the theme has been a theme of intimidation, a theme of 

false accusations towards the Chair and towards yourself 

personally.  A theme of it's my way or no way.  That's how 

they function. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is not interested in debate.  

They walked out.  They adjourned the House during question 

period.  Well that to me does not sound like they're interested 

in debate.  And I hope that people watching tonight will be 

clearly aware that they're the ones that walked out during 

question period.  They weren't interested in debate. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the former premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition, went on at some length about his concern about 

retroactive legislation.  Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand here -- 

and I want new members to listen to this -- I have in my hand 

here some 70 Bills that were retroactively legislated in the last 

term of that government.  Some 70 -- 7-0 -- 70 Bills, 70 pieces 

of legislation, 10 of them in 1991 alone, Mr. Speaker.  So talk 

about retroactivity -- well, Mr. Speaker, that is the height of 

cynicism.  And it's totally inappropriate. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the former premier, now the Leader of the 

Opposition, talked about broken contracts.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

he should talk to the 400 dental nurses who he pulled into a 

gymnasium when he told them that their job was abolished.  

Talk to them about broken contracts. 

 

He should talk to the municipal governments about the way he 

dealt with the ward system, the way he opposed the ward 

system changes on another level of government.  He should 

talk to them about broken contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this motion is all about, it has nothing to do 

with anything but the defeat of the Tories in October, 1991.  

That's what this motion is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposition reached a new low 

tonight, a new low for them, when they're addressing you, sir, 

and questioning the way in which you are using your personal 

staff in the Speaker's office.  Mr. Speaker, that from a new 

member from Souris-Cannington, from my home area which 

I'm very embarrassed about, that from a new member who is 

well aware by now, surely, because the general public is well 

aware, that the Liquor Board had about 10 or 15 employees 

who were paid for by your government and they had no job 

descriptions in the Liquor Board. 

 

And there were some 50 people in ministerial offices being 

charged to the public purse.  And he's got the nerve to talk 

about someone else's office, particularly as he's attacking a 

member of the Assembly.  And I think that's a very sad day.  

And I hope that the new member thinks about what he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I personally cannot believe what I've been hearing 

tonight.  I did not want to participate in this debate, but I just 

feel that it's important to come to the defence of the Speaker's 

Chair and to the preservation of this institution.  And therefore 

I decided to make a few comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before my time, I think it was in 1987, the 

government of the day, the opposition now, but many the same 

team is there, they attacked the Legislative Law Clerk, an 

Assembly member here, a member of this Assembly, a servant 

of this Assembly.  Attacked the Legislative Law Clerk. 

 

And the premier, who is Leader of the Opposition, is part of 

that.  I was here, Mr. Speaker, when the former government 

attacked another servant of this legislature, their vicious attack 

on the Provincial Auditor. 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that attacks on the servants of 

this Assembly -- yourself in this case and your Chair -- 

devalues all MLAs in this House.  It devalues the opposition, it 

devalues the government, it devalues all of us. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we as members have a 

responsibility to protect the servants of this Assembly.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would say though, even in the face of those attacks, 

and the record of those attacks by the former government -- the 

current opposition -- that our parliamentary system will still 

survive.  It has stood the test of time, Mr. Speaker, in moments 

like these.  It has done this before and it'll do it again. 

 

As much as I profoundly disagree with this motion, in our 

system of parliamentary democracy, they can make this kind of 

a motion.  And we can debate it, and life will go on and the 

institution will survive. 

 

Having recently been to the United Kingdom, Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf, I would say of the Assembly -- it had all-party support 

-- I was fortunate enough to attend a conference on 

parliamentary democracy.  During that conference, Mr. 

Speaker, there were members of the Commonwealth from 

across the world.  I gained an appreciation for the strength of 

our parliamentary institution and, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

nations -- in fact most nations -- that are not as fortunate as we 

are. 

 

Even with the imperfections of parliamentary democracy, and 

there are many, the alternatives, Mr. Speaker, are not very 

great.  Reforms are required and a number of important 

changes have already been made.  A number of important rule 

changes have already been made with all-party agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all agree that additional reforms are necessary.  

The public is telling us that they want additional reforms.  But, 

Mr. Speaker, motions like this that are based on vindictiveness 

and cynicism are not constructive -- I would even say almost 

hatred, Mr. Speaker -- they're not constructive to the process of 

positive legislative reform.  And this motion is not conducive 

to effective functioning of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the strength of our parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker, as 

you know, is the ability to adapt over time.  And in various 

environments, there are now some 50 Commonwealth 

countries -- another 6 or 7 countries are wanting to develop a 

system like ours -- they want to get into the parliamentary 

association, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, 

Mr. Speaker. But in our system there's got to be the will to 

make it work by governments, by oppositions, by all parties. 

 

Our system will not survive . . . it will survive but it will have 

set-backs with these kind of motions, Mr. Speaker, particularly 

where servants of the Assembly are attacked.  Mr. Speaker, our 

system has provided for political continuity and for stability.  

The system that we're operating in, Mr. Speaker, in the Isle of 

Man has survived for over a thousand years.  Mr. Speaker, we 

only realize this, and the value of our system, when we see 

fragile 

political coalitions all over the world that are falling apart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, and as most people I would say 

know, that during the 1980s, during the 1980s -- in North 

America certainly, in Saskatchewan, in Canada, in the United 

States, in the United Kingdom -- those were the years, that was 

the decade when the public lost faith in their democratic 

institutions and, quite frankly, in we as politicians. 

 

And one must ask the question, Mr. Speaker, and I think many 

people are asking the question, why did this happen in a decade 

under Tory reigns?  Why is it during the 1980s that the public 

has lost confidence in their elected officials and their 

parliamentary institutions?  I think, Mr. Speaker, the new 

member from Souris-Cannington may want to think about that.  

Why in the 1980s has the erosion of public confidence 

occurred? 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people believe that this loss of public 

confidence is because of the vindictive and the cynical actions 

like this motion.  The current opposition, Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest, does not know their role as opposition members.  They 

do not know that an important responsibility comes with the 

role of the official opposition. 

 

In government, they never believed in good government; they 

never believed in accountability; they never believed in 

openness or responsibility, Mr. Speaker -- and the evidence is 

overwhelming.  The information . . . This is well documented 

that this government never believed in good government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Provincial Auditor well documented that in his special 

report -- his mid-term report that he felt the need to release to 

the public, Mr. Speaker, saying that the former government, the 

now opposition members in the front bench, broke their own 

laws by not sharing information with him that he had a right to 

see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor also said that he could only account . . 

. he could only see 50 per cent of the expenditures of the 

Government of Saskatchewan during their tenure, Mr. Speaker.  

He said ministers were not co-operating.  They were not calling 

the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  This is the 

opposition now, and I want the new members to be aware of 

this, that set up a secret police, secret security, the Property 

Management Corporation, and another confidential department 

that nobody knew about, that was giving out money.  The 

public didn't even have a way of it -- Saskatchewan 

Diversification. 

 

The people concerned about democracy tonight are the people 

who took this province beyond five years before they called the 

election, had the election; had four vacant seats that had been 

vacant for up to 22 months.  They say they care about 

democracy and protecting the integrity of this institution, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first piece of legislation that many new 

members had to deal with in this House after the 1986 election 

was a Bill where that government before, now the opposition 

leader, brought in a Bill giving sweeping powers -- Bill 5, 

sweeping powers -- to his cabinet, 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

where he was able to reorganize departments, set up agencies 

without even coming into here.  They tried everything they 

could do to bypass this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that's the hypocrisy of what we're hearing tonight, Mr. 

Speaker.  The public is not going to be fooled by the pretending 

concern about democracy now and their focus on the Chair, 

Mr. Speaker, and you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current opposition did everything possible to 

discredit the role and institution of government and to bypass 

this Assembly.  That was their record in government.  Plus, Mr. 

Speaker, another test of the strength of the parliamentary 

system is that they were wiped out almost in the last election.  

That is the safety valve, Mr. Speaker, of a parliamentary 

system.  There were messages for the Liberals in 1971, there 

were messages for the New Democrats in 1982, and there was 

a strong message for the Tories in October 1991.  My point 

here, Mr. Speaker, is that democratic institution, this Assembly, 

will outlast and transcend the longevity of any political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new member in 1988, it was a great honour 

for me to be here.  Now the residents of Saskatoon Eastview 

that I had the privilege to represent went 10 months without a 

representative, which then was the record in all of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, by an opposition that now says they're concerned 

about democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I came in as a new member, had the privilege, 

even though I was shaking at the knees, to speak the second 

day after I was elected.  I had a lot of respect, Mr. Speaker, and 

I still do for the Chair then and for the Chair now and you in 

the Chair.  I had a lot of respect for the history and the great 

political members that have served here from all political 

parties.  Mr. Speaker, I honour the role of the Chair and the 

role of the Speaker as a symbol of integrity and respect and 

fairness. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, it is still a privilege to be able to speak on 

behalf of my constituents and to be recognized by you, sir, in 

the Chair.  When Mr. Arnold Tusa was elected Speaker, we in 

the opposition at the time supported and applauded his election.  

Even though it was at the 11th hour in the mandate of the 

government, we applauded that. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had worked with him . . . I had worked with 

him on the democratic reform paper.  We felt, as members of 

the opposition, free to go to him at any time.  He was interested 

in us as members, like you, Mr. Speaker.  He was just and fair 

and he tried his best in very trying, difficult circumstances.  

Mr. Speaker, like you, Mr. Tusa took the Speaker's job 

seriously, he was dedicated, and he worked very hard. 

 

Like you, Mr. Speaker, and I think like most members here, we 

considered Mr. Tusa a friend; we consider you a friend.  And 

I'm proud to say that I keep in touch with Mr. Tusa.  I 

personally have found him and yourself very approachable.  I 

felt that I could talk to him in confidence and I feel I can talk to 

you in confidence. 

Mr. Tusa did an excellent job under trying circumstances.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my personal view that the previous government, 

the now members of the opposition, put a lot of pressure on 

him.  That was very evident from my seat, Mr. Speaker.  The 

former government's tactics, like now, are tactics of a 

school-yard bully.  That is well documented, Mr. Speaker.  

They beat up on anyone who disagrees.  It could be the 

Legislative Law Clerk, the Provincial Auditor, or the Speaker, 

the Ombudsman, small NGOs (non-governmental 

organizations).  Anybody who disagrees with them, they beat 

up on them.  Civil servants, they've beaten up on civil servants, 

Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they beat up on anyone who 

disagrees. 

 

Now the member from Rosthern, Arm River, Wilkie; they're 

part of this past, Mr. Speaker, the member from Estevan.  And 

it continues today, until today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many examples -- just touching on the 

previous Speaker -- there are many examples where we in 

opposition did not agree with Mr. Tusa.  One doesn't always 

agree with the referee.  But, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that he 

was doing the job to the best of his ability in difficult times, 

and we never doubted his motivation, Mr. Speaker.  We 

supported him, we elected him, we were all interested in his 

position succeeding, because the integrity of the Chair, Mr. 

Speaker, is of the utmost importance in this Assembly.  It was 

when we were in opposition.  It is now that that party is in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker.  In opposition we have a 

responsibility to protect the Chair.  Mr. Speaker, we have the 

obligation to respect the Chair no matter where we sit in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our job in fact is to enhance and to elevate the 

integrity of all servants of the Assembly.  And I'm very sad that 

when the Provincial Auditor was attacked, the then premier 

allowed that to occur.  And I'm very sad that the now Leader of 

the Opposition is agreeing to or possibly even orchestrating this 

attack on you and the Chair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly why -- to enhance the 

independence of the Assembly and the watch-dog agency of 

the Assembly -- is exactly why, Mr. Speaker, we want to have 

an all-party committee that the watch-dog agencies like the 

Ombudsman, the Human Rights Commission and so on, is 

accountable to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say to you that while we disagreed on many 

occasions with Mr. Tusa, it never once crossed our mind, we 

never once had a discussion in our caucus about showing our 

non-confidence in him through this kind of a motion.  Mr. 

Speaker, this motion, especially in the face of the difficult 

circumstances of the past months, demonstrates the 

opposition's continued attack and vengeance on the institution 

of parliamentary democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your record is one that you can be proud of.  I 

think, Mr. Speaker, there is no question in the media editorials, 

whether it's print, radio, or TV, that you've got the unanimous 

praise for your performance in your Chair.  Mr. Speaker, the 

public is solidly behind you, and, Mr. Speaker, public opinion 

recognizes the vital role that 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

you're playing in restoring decorum, dignity, and confidence to 

this Chamber.  The public recognizes your record of 

impartiality and fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question, as you see tonight the 

Liberal leader is supporting your chairmanship.  Mr. Speaker, 

you have sat down the Premier, you've sat down the Leader of 

the Opposition, you've sat down the Liberal leader.  You've 

done that by demonstrating your independence in the Chair.  

You've appropriately reprimanded all sides when necessary. 

 

I think that we on this side of the House recognize that you're 

in a lonely, difficult position that takes a lot of courage.  Mr. 

Speaker, you have shown that courage, and, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to make it very clear that we on this side of the House 

believe that you have done just an excellent job, and we will 

not be supporting this motion which is based on vengeance for 

the defeat of the government in 1991 and has very little to do 

with the performance of you in the Chair, Mr. Speaker.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with regret that I 

enter the debate this evening, and in fact the comments just 

made by the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain bode 

a fair bit of discussion and debate in this Assembly this 

evening.  But I will not get into the total involvement of 

debating the comments that have been made regarding the 

member. 

 

The debate that is taking place this evening, Mr. Speaker, 

centres around an issue.  And if we take a look back to 1989 

and a number of the comments regarding the Speaker of the 

day in 1989, the Speaker of 1989 did not unilaterally call the 

House back to order but allowed the process to work, allowed 

the Government House Leader and the Opposition House 

Leader to sit down and work out a negotiated settlement under 

the rules and under the guidelines of the Assembly of the day. 

 

We're also aware, Mr. Speaker, that at that time as well the 

House was asked to call for the Rules Committee.  It was asked 

to sit down and try and come up with some changes to the 

Rules Committee, part of those changes being to address the 

bell-ringing question. 

 

And at that time the Rules Committee was allowed the same . . 

. the process was allowed to operate.  A motion was brought 

before the Assembly by the Assembly, by the then Speaker, 

and at that time, as we all remember, there were 28 days of 

debate centred around that bell-ringing motion.  At the end of 

the day the agreement of the House, again by consensus, was to 

allow that process to go back to the Rules Committee. 

 

I believe it's unfortunate that we are in this debate today and 

that we stand in this Assembly . . . must take a stand to voice 

our concern.  And I would suggest it's unfortunate that the 

Speaker's Chair is probably even tied up with committee, as 

especially chairman of the Rules Committee, as I believe that 

the fact that the Speaker being involved as the chairman of the 

Rules Committee -- not just today but in preceding days and 

preceding legislatures -- opens itself up for pressure from all 

sides 

and in particular from government to use their heavy hand to 

force a decision. 

 

No doubt the debate that has consummated in this Assembly 

over the past six weeks, six to eight weeks, was a debate that 

really hit at the emotions of people, not only in this Assembly 

but across the province -- a debate that affects people right 

across the province; affects their rights, privileges, the rights 

that the constitution of this country gives to people in this 

country. 

 

It gives them the right to challenge governments in court and, 

as was indicated yesterday in question period, when the 

Premier of this province attempted to bring the land bank 

legislation into this Assembly as an argument against 

retroactive legislation, or the process that the government of 

the day are now taking regarding the GRIP program, in going 

back to the land bank legislation, we must remind the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan that the land bank legislation 

didn't take away land from people, and even if people felt 

challenged people were given, through the legislation, the 

ability to go to the courts without any legislation that would 

hinder that ability. 

 

And therefore it's very difficult to stand in my place today and 

condone the process that has taken place.  It's difficult for me to 

stand here because I believed when we elected the Speaker for 

this Assembly, and the process that we decided, the process of 

change that took place last fall in the first election of a member 

from the floor to the Chair, that it was the proper process, 

proper procedure, and that the member elected to the Chair 

would indeed be duly holding his position very highly and 

exercising a very non-partisan role in this Assembly. 

 

The fact that the Speaker did make a move and did call the 

House back in, I believe around the middle of June, was a 

decision that Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition didn't appreciate 

and didn't agree with, but we accepted it because we also 

realized that bell-ringing was a process that the public certainly 

were asking for decisions to be made on.  Now we didn't agree 

with the fact that the Speaker would unilaterally call the House 

back in, but we believed that when the Speaker asked the 

House to come, and the Speaker asked the House leaders and 

asked for the process to work, we had faith in the process.  

However, Mr. Speaker, we must stand here opposed to the way 

the process actually did work and did operate. 

 

For the process did not operate under the rules of this 

Assembly.  What we saw was a government using its 

committee, a committee where it had the majority, to force or 

to push or to pressure its way into the committee so that when 

the committee brought its report to this Assembly there wasn't 

unanimity amongst the committee members. 

 

However, the Assembly was asked to vote on the 

recommendations of the committee that the bells be limited.  

And we will not argue the fact that bells should not be limited, 

but we must strenuously stand up for the process and suggest 

that opposition members -- be they Liberal, be they 

Conservative, be they NDP, whenever from now on in -- will 

continue to ask for and must have a form, not only of debate in 

this Assembly, but a form by 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

which they can ask the government to hold a piece of 

legislation so that they can have the proper time needed to talk 

to the public and debate with the public. 

 

We do not argue the 30 minute bell-ringing.  We stand here 

today in support of the limited bell-ringing.  But we cannot 

stand here and support the fact that the opposition is limited to 

a 30-minute debate.  And the arguments that the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain brought forward just do not 

coincide with the arguments brought forward in 1989. 

 

The support of the Speaker in 1989, Mr. Speaker, the Speaker 

of that day did not unilaterally rule and unilaterally give his 

support and stand to the position of the Rules Committee and 

support the government in their wishes and demands.  Mr. 

Speaker, as I indicated I did not and do not intend to stand here 

all evening to debate this motion.  But I must indicate that it is 

with regret that I must support my colleague in the motion that 

he has brought forward. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to rise today to enter the 

debate and want to talk a little bit about some of the history of 

the Rules Committee.  And I want to lay that out before this 

Assembly here today.  I must say that I believe that the House 

Leader has very precisely laid out the reasons why I believe 

that we need to deal with this matter and we need to deal with 

it today. 

 

In the discussion on the Rules Committee -- I was pleased to 

serve on that committee, I was asked to be the vice-chairman of 

that committee -- and during the discussion that took place at 

that time to deal with the process on those rules, it was 

continually brought to our attention by the chairman and by 

members of the committee that consensus would be a part of 

the delivery of an opportunity to change the rules in this 

Assembly.  And during that period of time there was strong 

debate on issues.  There were points of view that were made, 

but consensus consistently made the day.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

compromise made the day. 

 

And what I see here today and what I have seen in the past 

three or four weeks have totally riddled the opportunity to have 

consensus and compromise operate in this Legislative 

Assembly in the rules and the process of this Assembly.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a very, very serious concern to me because 

I believe that there was an opportunity in this Assembly to do it 

right for democracy.  I honestly believe that.  There was a 

willingness on the part of this opposition to participate in 

reform.  There was a willingness to participate in decision 

making that would enhance the opportunity of this Legislative 

Assembly.  But I think it's been seriously curtailed by 

involvement of the Chair in various areas in the process that 

has followed the decision to accept the rules as they were 

outlined. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this opposition gave you high marks for the 

decision that you made to suspend the GRIP Bill.  We did it 

over and over again.  The media did also.  And we do that 

today.  However, the principle of the suspension was the 

principle that needed to be dealt with in a consistent way all 

through the process.  Because that is precisely the 

reason why this Assembly and members of the opposition said 

no to the proposal of an introduction of a Bill that would 

retroactively change history.  And we said no because in my 

mind it is an illegal act by this Legislative Assembly. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, we applauded you when you said, 

suspend the Bill.  And the principle of suspension was the 

principle that we asked when we dealt with the Rules 

Committee discussion on this side of the House.  We dealt with 

precisely that observation. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we made an amendment to the motion 

that would have allowed us to go back and provide a time line 

and a decision-making process whereby we would have 

established the credibility of this Legislative Assembly, the 

Rules Committee, and established a precedent for this 

Assembly and the Speaker of this Assembly to have confidence 

in the process of this Assembly.  But what happened? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, I want to point 

out . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member not to 

interrupt.  Let the member have his say.  I'll recognize you 

when you want to get up. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the process in this Assembly 

was there to allow the opportunity for suspension.  It was dealt 

with in a way that would've allowed the Rules Committee to 

deal with it.  And the member from Moosomin outlined very 

clearly that in 1989 it was the decision of the Speaker not to 

become involved.  In 1989 it was the decision of the 

government not to involve the Speaker.  It was a decision of 

this Assembly, and at the process of time, that the people who 

were responsible for making this House work were held 

accountable to make the process work.  And those were the 

leaders of the government, the House Leader and the House 

Leader of the opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was the way it worked.  And what 

happened was, as was outlined by the member from 

Moosomin, the point was that the Rules Committee had the 

reference by this Assembly to establish that it should be taken 

to the Rules Committee.  That was why when we went to the 

Rules Committee it was on the table there for us to discuss. 

 

And that is history that is established as a precedent in this 

Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, your suspension assisted that 

democratic process in doing that.  However, the day that you 

decided to deal with that in the way that you did said to this 

opposition, and I believe to the people of Saskatchewan, that 

you were in error. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we in this side of the 

House believe that it is fundamental to the continuation of this 

Assembly that freedom of speech and the involvement of 

dealing with issues that are controversial, that should be 

debated, that should be argued with adamancy as crucial as and 

hard hitting as you possibly can get it, should be done in this 

Assembly on this basis that we're discussing this issue here 

tonight. 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

However, to the members of the government and the executive 

branch of this government, as I said in the discussion on 

transferring this back to the Rules Committee, you are in error.  

Members of this Assembly who are not in executive branch are 

in error by allowing this Assembly and the leader, so-called, 

the member from P.A. Carlton, who made the motion in the 

Rules Committee, is in error.  Because it is his responsibility as 

it is mine to hold executive branch of this government 

responsible for their actions. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where we are at.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

as difficult as this is for me to say this, I do not have the 

confidence in your partiality, in your focus in dealing with this 

Assembly.  In Beauchesne's it says this: 

 

 The chief characteristics attached to the office of Speaker in 

the House of Commons are (two things) authority and 

impartiality. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have recognized the authority.  We have 

recognized that in our conduct in this House, I believe. 

 

We have had Bills in this Assembly that we strongly disagreed 

with, in the last session and in this session, but did we curtail 

the discussion by bell-ringing? Other than one that was going 

to illegally take and place a Bill before this Assembly that 

would void 50,000 contracts.  We said on our part that we 

could not deal with that very lightly.  We said, there is a place 

for this hard-hitting kind of action, and we placed it right there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have just as much disagreement with the energy Bill, we 

have just as much disagreement with the environment Bill that 

are coming forward, but have we said that we would not debate 

and tell you what we think about it?  We have had just as much 

difficulty with the E&H (education and health) tax Bill that you 

have presented to this House, and we have put the Minister of 

Finance through a lot of questions in Committee of the Whole 

because we don't believe in the things he's proposing to do.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is our right as an opposition. 

 

But when it comes to our role in dealing with the fundamental 

belief that we do something illegal in this Assembly in 

changing the laws retroactively to deem something to have 

happened that didn't, then, Mr. Speaker, we draw the line in the 

sand.  We say that is as far as we as the opposition, 

representing those contract-holders who have told us over and 

over again, to consistently resist the government in its 

deliberate attempt to stop those contracts, to rewrite them . . .  

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what this opposition decided to do, 

understanding the rules right from the beginning that that's 

what they were.  And in the middle of the ball game, the 

umpire gets involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've been a sportsman all my life, 

participated a lot, and I've seen bias in calls and I've kept my 

mouth shut.  I've never been kicked out of a game.  I've never 

been kicked out of a ball game, a hockey game, and I've played 

a lot of them.  And, Mr. Speaker, the reason is because I listen 

to the authority that was there, and that was the referee, and I 

had to play under those rules. 

But there comes a time, Mr. Speaker, and this is more than a 

ball game, this is democracy. This is the fundamental belief in 

the freedom of individuals to express through their elected 

representatives the voice that they have, to have themselves 

heard and to be represented here in the kind of way that we are 

doing here today.  And I saw that, Mr. Speaker, curtailed.  And 

I'm sad about it.  I'm very disappointed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's with a great deal of sadness that I 

support the member from Rosthern today.  And I say again as 

Beauchesne's has said: 

 

 The chief characteristics attached to the office of Speaker in 

the House of Commons are authority and impartiality. 

 

And I don't believe the impartiality was there because you 

placed yourself at risk when you decided that you were going 

to place yourself behind the government to dictate the politics 

of an issue.  And I don't believe that you were fair in doing 

that. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an 

indispensable condition of the successful working of 

procedure . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that also.  And I believe that the 

impartiality was set at risk in this Assembly.  And therefore, I 

will be supporting the motion by the member from Rosthern 

because I fundamentally believe that to be accurate.  And I 

fundamentally believe that I'm representing my constituents 

and the people who called me on the issue that generated this 

concern. 

 

And I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that we will see more of this.  

And it bothers me a lot when I see the kinds of things that are 

being done by this administration.  The resistance that we need 

to place in the way so we can say to them, look it, there are 

better ways to do it, are things that we should consider, are 

seriously curtailed by your decision to do this. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am supporting the member from 

Rosthern's motion. 

 

The division bells rang from 9:28 p.m. until 9:32 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens  

--9 

Nays 

Romanow Lyons 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Lingenfelter Murray 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

 

Shillington Draper 

Koskie Whitmore 

Anguish Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Kluz 

Upshall Carlson 

Bradley Renaud 

Koenker Langford 

Lorje Haverstock 

--34 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, we would 

move to government business. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Rural Development 

Vote 43 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

glad to see that you have your folks with you all ready to go on 

the questions for tonight.  As I indicated in the previous 

attempt to go through these questions, I will now ask you if you 

will deliver the answers to the questions that we asked at that 

time.  I have some of them but I don't have all of them.  If they 

are available or if you have made them available I would like 

to know where are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have the 

information that was asked for on the staffing.  The question 

that they raised concerning one Mr. Brian Oster who had a 

lease, I can inform the members opposite that Mr. Oster 

surrendered his lease on May 27 of 1992 and he is given an 

annual permit for 1992 and some of his . . . he was paid out for 

leases as is . . . for improvements on the lease as per standard 

policy of the department. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, how much was he paid out and 

when was the payment made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't believe, 

without checking with the Department of Justice, that we can 

release information on individual accounts to the public on 

numbers that were paid, at this time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, with all due respect, I don't 

believe that your answer is correct.  I would give you one more 

chance to answer that question because I believe that it is 

within your power to release that figure. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we will check with 

the Department of Justice to see if this is indeed not a violation 

of the individual's rights.  And if it is not, and indeed is 

available to the public, we will certainly release it to you. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I think this looks more like a 

cover-up than anything else I've seen so far.  You have an NDP 

candidate in the election whom everybody in our constituency 

was wondering where his pay-off would be for sacrificing his 

own principles that people thought that he had, to run with a 

party that most folks believed that he didn't belong with to start 

with.  And everyone believed that there would be a pay-off. 

 

I suggest to you that you are covering up a pay-off.  This is 

taxpayers' money and the public demands to know where this 

money was paid and when it was paid and why it was paid.  

And I demand of you that you tell the people of this province 

how much money you paid your candidate so that he could 

move to Medicine Hat to live because he couldn't stand to live 

under this very regime. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, section 39 of the 

Act spells out what improvements and how they will be valued 

and how they will be paid out.  And that was what we . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  If it's the wish 

of the members to continue in committee then the members 

will observe order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  The Minister 

of Rural Development.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said, section 39 

of the Act spells out specifically what improvements and how 

they are to be valued and how they are to be paid out.  This was 

totally in this case complied with.  All we did was complied 

with the Act and paid out according to the formulas therein. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have no doubt that you would follow the 

rules in the Act, Mr. Minister, in order to cover your backsides.  

The point is, who did the assessment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the department staff 

do the evaluation according to . . . from a manual that sets out 

how it is to be done. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would you name the individuals involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The lands manager in that area is 

Greg Haase.  And we assume that it was done under his 

supervision or by himself. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is that individual an employee of your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that certainly 

is what I said the first time.  That the employee . . . the staff of 

the department that do the land evaluations and improvement 

evaluations as we do on all . . . When all leases are turned over 

we do the valuation of the improvements, and they're paid out, 

as I said, by the staff according to the manual and according to 

section 39 of the Act. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Do you not think, Mr. Minister, in a situation 

where there's a definite conflict of interest that you knew would 

be raised in this Assembly, had to be raised in this Assembly, 

that you should have gone to the independent assessment that is 

available to your 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

department and is practised in all cases like this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know what conflict of 

interest the particular civil servant would have had in that case, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- When you were dealing with the assets to be 

valued of a person who has just run as a candidate for your 

party, a partisan political party, when that individual has run 

for you . . . and I know that this hurts the government members 

in the back benches and they can't keep quiet to listen to it 

because now we're washing their dirty linen in public.  And this 

is dirty linen.  Believe me, the people of Saskatchewan will 

know about this dirty linen. 

 

It looks to me like about $80,000 is the figure that's floating 

around for a farmhouse out in the country that may be worth 

money in the city but has absolutely no value whatsoever 

sitting out west of Golden Prairie some place in the boondocks 

of Saskatchewan -- $80,000.  The only place they could find a 

candidate was out close to the Alberta border where he could 

escape back to Medicine Hat to get away from the very 

administration that he had once tried to join. 

 

In view of that conflict of interest, it would seem to me that 

you would do an independent appraisal, an independent 

appraisal of farm buildings in Saskatchewan that nobody else 

will ever want.  Because this government has seen to it that 

farmers are going to go broke and there will be no demand for 

farm homes any place in this province.  There will be no 

demand for those buildings.  There will be no way that you can 

recover that money. 

 

I say to you that you will have orchestrated very probably a 

figure that would be commensurate with homes in a populated 

area of this province, not out in the areas where nobody would 

ever buy it again to live in, the likelihood of which is very slim.  

And I suggest to you that you should have hired an independent 

appraiser for those buildings. 

 

I suggest to the people of this province that this is the pay-off 

for that candidate.  Everybody in our constituency was 

wondering where his pay-off would come from.  They were 

expecting him to get a big government appointment, but seeing 

as how he was leaving the province there was no other better 

way to pay him off than to give him cash.  When all else fails, 

cash sounds better.  That's what one of the guys said over here. 

 

Mr. Minister, in consideration that you not only, through your 

department, paid this individual $80,000, as reported through 

the folks out in the country, and now that you're refusing to 

give to us the actual amount, in view of the fact that you have 

done that, you are now saying that you leased this land back to 

that same individual, are you not?  Is that what you've done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm surprised that 

the member opposite would refer to his riding as the 

boondocks.  I assure the member that we do not consider 

Maple Creek to be boondocks and that we . . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We are certain that there are still 

people who want to live in Maple Creek despite the 

representation that they have down there, and they will 

probably be able to sell a house . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm informed by my officials that 

Mr. Oster hired on his own a private appraiser to appraise it.  

That appraisal value was higher than what the department 

appraised it at, so he ended up getting the lower value which 

was what we appraised it at when the department . . . 

 

As to the leaseback, this land was leased back on an annual 

permit and will be tendered for rent this fall. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, could you give us the name of 

the independent appraiser that Mr. Oster used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Apex is the name of the company 

that appraised it for Mr. Oster. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you give us the name and the address 

of the people who actually did the appraising? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do not know the . . .  Mr. Oster 

hired the company to do it.  We're not aware of which 

individual did the appraisal.  We were given the appraisal 

which . . . not the . . .  It's not our business to know who works 

and who does appraisals for private corporations. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you provide to this 

Assembly whether that individual was accredited with the 

engineers who are required . . . who has his association with the 

registered appraisers of the province of Saskatchewan?  Will 

you provide the name of the company and the individuals who 

were involved in that appraisal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that is a private 

company doing private work.  The appraisal that was used in 

the valuation was the appraisal done by our department.  The 

appraisal that was done by the private company was higher 

than what our value was appraised at. 

 

That was a question that was asked, and I just passed that on 

for the information of the member who asked it.  It certainly is 

not our intention to demand from private firms the names of 

their staff who do work for them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it is a requirement under the 

lands branch regulations that a registered appraiser be used in 

qualifying the bids that are placed by individuals on their own 

individual land.  And I don't think that you need to pretend that 

it should be any other way. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why we're asking you to present this 

individual's name and also where he's registered in, significant 

in the appraisers' organization so that we know exactly who he 

is.  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the policy of the 

department has always been that with the surrendering of lease 

and valuing of improvements, it is done by the department 

staff.  And that has been the policy and it is done in many, 

many cases. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In addition to that, Mr. Minister, it is the 

policy of the department to ask for an approved appraiser to 

deal with the appraisals that are going on.  If I had lease land, it 

would be the responsibility of mine if I did not approve of the 

price that I was going to use to purchase that land that I would 

have to have an approved appraiser to verify the value of that 

land.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

And we want to know whether Apex was just a blip in the 

system or whether it was a registered appraiser doing the job.  

Was he a realtor that didn't have an appraisal licence in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the rules may well 

say that to accept the appraisal we need an accredited appraisal.  

We did not accept the appraisal of the private appraiser.  The 

appraisal that was accepted was the one done by the 

department, accepted by Mr. Oster, and that's the one by which 

the value was determined. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Minister.  However, at this point in 

time when a person who ran for you is asking for money from 

the Government of Saskatchewan, it is incumbent on you to 

provide that to us because we feel that perhaps, if it wasn't an 

approved appraisal that was done by some individual who is a 

realtor, that does not qualify that individual to have that as the 

bench-mark so that you can undercut it by that volume of 

dollars. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is what I perceive has happened here.  

And I would like to know who they were and their registry as 

an approved appraiser in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the policy and the 

Act states that on purchase of land, an accredited appraiser is 

needed and we would not accept appraisal of any other than an 

accredited appraisal.  In the case of valuing of improvements, I 

repeat again, the department policy has been for the department 

staff to value the improvements and to accept, on occasion, if 

the lessee is not happy with our valuation, to accept outside 

valuation from other appraisals and not necessary accredited 

appraisers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not going to buy that 

because I want to know who the individual was.  Was he out of 

Medicine Hat?  Was he out of Calgary?  Where was he out . . . 

Was he a realtor?  Was it Apex realty? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To the best of the recollection of 

my officials, it was Apex realty that did the appraisal.  Again, 

Mr. Chairman, I point out that the land, the value that Mr. 

Oster received, was the value that was put on the improvements 

by the staff of the department in compliance with the Act and 

in compliance with the manual for valuing those assets. 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister provide to this Assembly the 

details of the appraisal, for us to see it, and provide that 

evaluation of whether that was a responsible estimate of the 

value of the goods that you purchased. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly, Mr. Chairman, we can 

provide the method of calculation that was used and again, as 

I've said earlier, on consultation with the Department of Justice 

as to what individual rights are in reference to particular 

contracts, whether or not we can release these, if there is not a 

problem with the individuals' rights on releasing information 

on those contracts, we will also release the final numbers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When was the land sold to the Land Bank 

Commission that he was resident on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have that 

information but we can certainly get it for the members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, will you provide the value of 

the land, the time it was sold, and from whom it was purchased 

-- whether it was purchased from him as an individual or was it 

purchased from his family?  Who was it purchased from?  And 

we'd also like to have you establish what those assets were sold 

for, and provide that information to this Assembly as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 

provide that information.  I would remind the member opposite 

we did not sell this land, merely paid out the leasee for 

improvements that were made to the land. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, are you . . . how many other 

places in the province of Saskatchewan are you providing the 

same benefit in lands branch at this point in time?  How many 

other places have you got in similar circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in any case . . . in 

all cases where leases are surrendered, lessees are paid out for 

the value of improvements. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, how many in the province of 

Saskatchewan in 1992 to this day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, again we don't have 

exact numbers.  My officials estimate probably in the 

neighbourhood of 15 or 20 lessees that received value for 

improvements. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to have you provide a 

list of all of them to this Assembly for us to consider. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly, Mr. Chairman, we can 

provide a list. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- We'd like to have the list with the evaluation 

and the process that was used in evaluating the value of the 

assets in the delivery of that also, Mr. Minister. 

 

(2200) 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we can.  We can even 

provide you a manual that the staff use and you can calculate 

them yourself. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, in my work with the 

Department of Rural Development, I happened to write some 

of that stuff so I know what's in it.  Unless you changed it 

drastically to suit your customer, Mr. Brian Oster who now 

lives in Medicine Hat and who was a candidate of yours, unless 

you typically did that for him, I understand what those rules are 

about. 

 

I want to know all of the details of every single one of those 

land sales or facility sales that you have made since 1991.  And 

I want to ask you to provide that to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I already said we 

can give the list of land sales . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we will provide the 

list that's been asked for. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We will 

anxiously await the answers to those questions, and the people 

of Saskatchewan will also anxiously await to find out how 

much it's worth to run as a candidate defeated in an election 

when you are with the NDP. 

 

Mr. Minister, last time we were involved in this questioning of 

your department, I started to ask you some questions that I had 

jotted down and I think that I may have confused some of the 

questions a little bit.  And in respect for you being able to 

answer the questions, we would gladly offer to send those 

questions across to you in written form. 

 

If you prefer, I will read them in.  I realize that we had 

instructions from your side of the House requesting that we put 

into words all of our questions.  If you'd like us to do that, we 

will do that.  The choice is yours and I ask you now which way 

you'd like to have it.  Which way would you be prepared to 

answer the questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we probably would 

be less confusing to have them in writing. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- All right.  Just for the benefit of the listening 

public, my colleague has suggested that I really should read 

them to you and then deliver the written thing so that you will 

actually have it. 

 

I started my first question by saying we wanted to start with 

your own staff, Mr. Minister, and we wanted you to give us a 

list of the persons working for the minister's office, or 

otherwise who report directly to you, each of their titles, 

salaries, job description, education and employment history, 

including their last place of employment.  I'd also like to know 

each, if any, who worked or were paid by any other part of 

government before being on your payroll. Have any of them 

been reclassified since joining the government? 

 

(1)(b) Please provide (1) covering all persons terminated 

or vacant positions eliminated: (a) a list of all the persons fired, 

retired, or otherwise terminated in the department since 

November 1, 1991, including the nature of termination and 

whether with cause or without cause where applicable; (b) a 

separate list of positions eliminated including the names of 

incumbents where applicable. 

 

And (2) for each position in both categories referenced above: 

(a) the name of the immediate superior; (b) a job description of 

each position; (c) complete compensation details including 

salary, expenses, allowances, special payments and so on; (d) 

the length of time employed, including the date the person first 

started work for the department; (e) the employment record, 

including the place of last employment of most recent 

incumbent; (f) employment qualifications, including education 

of most recent incumbent; (g) where contracts exist, true copies 

of those contracts of most recent incumbents; (h) the physical 

location of a person's place of employment, i.e., where the most 

recent incumbent actually did their work; (i) if a replacement 

was hired, the name and same details above requested for the 

new employee; (j) if the position was eliminated as opposed to 

some other position, what was the process and the resulting 

rationale for getting rid of this employee or his position? 

 

k) If the incumbent had been hired since November 1, 1991, 

the name and the same detail requested above for the 

immediate preceding incumbent.  (1) (c) provide a) a list of all 

positions created since November 1, 1991; b) a job description 

of each position created; c) the specific rationale for creating 

each position; d) the name of the persons filling each position; 

e) the salary and benefits associated with each position 

including related costs such as office equipment, furniture, and 

space costs, and if the employment is by way of contract, a true 

copy of that contract, the existence of which is required by law. 

 

(1) (d) the results of (1) (a) to (1) (c) should be a complete list 

of all the persons hired and all persons terminated since 

November 1, 1991.  For clarity ensure that a complete list with 

full details is provided that is comprehensive in covering all 

persons hired since November 1, 1991 in any capacity, and all 

persons terminated since November 1, 1991 for any reason. 

 

(1) (e) where in above questions you refuse to provide 

employment history, have you asked the affected persons for 

their consent to provide their employment history to the 

Assembly, and if not, why not, considering no law forbids the 

release of such information with the consent of the affected 

person.  If so, confirm that the employee directed that his or her 

employment history be kept secret. 

 

(1) (f) a list of all reclassifications in the department since 

November 1, 1991, including the names of the affected 

employees, the changes in position, the reasons for 

reclassification, the resultant changes in salary and benefits, the 

date of the most recent previous reclassification along with the 

same details for that previous reclassification. 

 

Now that, Mr. Minister, takes me to the end of the questions 

that I had written up for you last time, but in 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

perusing it I realized that I had left parts out in the questions.  

And so now you have the more complete list of the things that I 

personally would like to know on behalf of my constituents and 

the people of this province. 

 

If you want to make a comment on that, I'll let you and then I'll 

proceed with the rest of my questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we, I think, 

answered some of those questions last night.  I think we have 

some more information here.  I think what I would like to do is 

get that in writing and we will make sure we have a complete 

answer to all of those questions and get them back to you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 

some of your earlier responses to the member from Maple 

Creek on the questions about Mr. Oster, can you tell the 

Assembly on what date the funds were dispersed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, those funds have 

not yet been dispersed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So that the settlement that the member from 

Maple Creek was asking about which you said you would have 

to check with the Department of Justice, that none of those 

funds have been dispersed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I find it a little bit strange that if 

you have not dispersed any of these funds to the individual yet, 

they aren't actually in his hands, why you would have problems 

divulging to the legislature the appraisal value which your 

department has placed upon it.  In other words, that the 

individual hasn't got the funds of the taxpayer yet.  Your 

department has made an evaluation.  He doesn't have the 

money.  Why would you not want to divulge that information 

to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it's not that I don't 

want to divulge the information to the Assembly, and as I've 

said, if I find . . . On consulting with the Department of Justice, 

if I find that it's not violating an individual's rights to release 

the terms of a contract with us, or potential, we will certainly 

release those. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- All right, Mr. Minister, we'll give you the 

benefit of the doubt and allow you to consult with the 

Department of Justice. 

 

I have another couple of questions I want to ask you.  You 

placed the lease-to-own program on hold this spring.  Can you 

tell the Assembly how many contract-holders were involved in 

the lease-to-own program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we do not have 

with us the number of farmers who bought land.  It's about 

190,000 acres that was sold under the rent-to-own program. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- So, Mr. Minister, we're given to understand 

that all contracts that were entered into under the lease-to-own 

program, whether it was people that simply had their 

application in or those that had already been processed, that 

anyone who was in that program has 

been put on hold?  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I explained 

this last night.  Anybody who had an appraisal completed and 

paid for, the sale was continued and finished.  No other sales 

were proceeded with. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sorry that I missed that 

discussion last night, but I have a number of constituents that 

were involved with the lease-to-own program.  And given the 

state of the agricultural economy, it looked like a reasonable 

way for them to acquire, in some cases, Crown land that had 

been in the family through leases for generations and that they 

had planned on maintaining their farming operation with this 

particular mechanism that was available to them. 

 

I wonder if you would mind, for my satisfaction, to sort of put 

the reasons forward again of why this particular program was 

put on hold this spring. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we are in the 

process of reviewing all of our land sales programs and our 

rental programs, our land use programs, and that is the reason 

this particular program was put on hold. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what you're saying is that those people 

that had started the process, had appraisals done, were looking 

forward to participating in this program, that you have no 

philosophical problem with it, that you simply are doing a 

review and that review will be done by when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That review should be completed 

some time this fall. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think it's pretty important, Mr. 

Minister, that as these people start plannng their lives again, 

that you're prepared to be fairly definitive with them.  Will it be 

September 15?  Will it be October 15?  What is the 

expectation?  One does not line up financing, one does not 

decide how many heifers you're going to carry over, what your 

breeding program will be, you know, just at the spur of a 

moment.  People have to plan their lives. 

 

(2215) 

 

The same arguments have been made with the problems with 

the GRIP contract.  You're expecting people to redefine their 

farming careers around bureaucratic decisions of your 

department.  And I think it's incumbent upon you to tell this 

Assembly that this process is going to proceed at some given 

point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

point out to the member opposite that the rent-to-own program 

was for people to purchase land that they were currently 

leasing from the department.  It's not as if they were adding or 

changing their farming operation.  It's simply a purchasing of 

lease land that they now continue to lease. 

 

We do plan to do considerable consultation on our land policy, 

and for that reason I think, given the harvest season and the 

summer season, that before we do our 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard July 21, 1992 

consultation and have a final policy review done, it will 

probably be closer to November, December than it would be to 

September. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what was the . . . Of the 

contracts that your department had the ability to review, what 

would be the average size of the lease-to-own program?  What 

would be the median average that farmers and ranchers in this 

province were looking at on the lease-to-own program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think the average would be 

somewhere in the average of two or three quarter sections. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So we're not talking about very large parcels 

of land in most instances.  We're talking about very small . . . 

and I would suggest to you the ability to pay is a prime factor 

in people deciding on what they're going to do.  And I think, 

Mr. Minister, the statement that they're already leasing this land 

isn't good enough.  People are lining up financing to purchase 

this land.  They're purchasing through a lease to own, but 

they're trying to ensure that their future won't be impinged, I 

would suggest to you, by some future government decision in 

the leasing area perhaps. 

 

And I think in your consultation that you make sure that you 

talk to all of the groups that are relevant in this area, unlike 

what we've seen in some of your other forays in the agricultural 

area.  And that you be prepared to report to this legislature 

about those consultations, who you've talked to, and be able to 

document it well and bring it back to the floor of this Chamber, 

unlike some of the other consultations that supposedly have 

gone on in this House by your department and others, and 

there's never any verification.  And I would expect and will 

serve notice to you, on this particular issue, that you and your 

department be prepared to give us that documentation of who 

you were talking to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the members 

opposite have been in the Assembly too long and are used to 

Hansard.  When we have meetings, we don't normally record 

minute details and minutes of consultations with groups in 

town halls and elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, in the 

budget you used the figure, I believe, of 7.4 per cent reduction 

in average municipal grants for this year.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- A couple of things that I want to know is, 

after yesterday's questions we received from you a list that says 

the rural revenue-sharing grants, Saskatchewan Rural 

Development, June 1992.  Now would this document reflect 

those figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, those numbers 

reflect the . . . There are some grants which are not on that 

sheet, some additional grants. 

 

The numbers there reflect a little of the creative bookkeeping 

of the previous administration.  They reflect 

the difference between the numbers that were sent out to the 

RMs (rural municipality) last year as compared to the numbers 

that were sent out this year.  The 7.4 per cent is the difference 

between what was spent last year and what will be spent this 

year. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, if there's any creative 

bookkeeping going on in this province today, it's by your 

government.  You're in charge now.  You're responsible for 

what you say and what you do. 

 

You said to the people of this province that you were showing 

restraint in every way, that you were only going to cut back 7.4 

per cent.  You went out into the news media and you planted 

that figure in the minds of everybody -- creative or uncreative 

bookkeeping, that's the figure you used.  That's the figure you 

spread through this province to every municipality. 

 

You told everybody in this province that you were using a 

rational approach to down-sizing the amount of money that you 

were going to spend.  And the bottom line on this page for the 

people of this province to know is that you decreased it by 18.3 

per cent to municipalities, not 7.4 per cent.  And the reality, 

Mr. Minister, there, is that you deceived the people of this 

province by telling them 7.4 per cent when in fact it was 18.3 

per cent. 

 

You have municipalities in here . . . and at the time I recall 

reading articles in the media where you made statements that it 

would average out, that there would be some municipalities 

that in fact would have increases in their grants instead of 

decreases, and those increases were going to counterbalance 

the ones that got big decreases, and that the average would in 

fact be 7.4 per cent. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that I can only find one on 

the first page, one on about the fourth or fifth page . . . How 

many pages are there?  There's two I can find out of 298 

municipalities, I think, there are altogether.  And I find two 

municipalities that were increased, two were increased.  And 

there are less than a handful that are under 7.4 per cent.  The 

rest, in excess of 250 if all of the municipalities are on this list 

-- I haven't counted them but I take your word that you gave all 

of them to me, because that's what I asked for -- in way in 

excess of 250 municipalities have decreases in excess of 7.4 

per cent.  And in fact your own figure at the bottom of the page 

says 18.3 per cent.  And I'm going to have a mathematician 

check that, because I seriously doubt that it's even that. 

 

The reality, Mr. Minister, is that if you had been totally out 

front with the RMs and just come clean with them and told 

them that you were going to cut their budgets by an average of 

18.3 per cent, these are the kind of people, Mr. Minister, out in 

the country who would have accepted the fact that they have to 

play a role in paying the bills of the province.  They wouldn't 

have liked it.  But they would have accepted it. 

 

But now they have no trust in you.  They'll have no faith in 

you.  The next time you come up with a set of figures they're 

going to say, this guy doesn't know how to run a calculator.  

When he says 7.4, it really means 18.3. 

 

How do you expect the people of this province to have 



July 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

any confidence in you or your department from this date 

forward?  All of the municipalities that we talked to told us 

through the winter, boy we sure got hit.  Somebody must have 

really came out of this thing looking good and got a big 

increase. 

 

So we checked around the municipality and we couldn't find 

any.  Then we asked the Minister: how do these figures work?  

We asked him repeatedly in this House.  But oh no, he skirted 

the issue.  He wouldn't tell us how the system works.  Now he 

says there are even some grants that haven't been disclosed on 

these pieces of paper. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, last time we met in this Assembly and 

discussed these matters I asked you for a list of all of the 

grants, every one of them.  And if there is something now that 

you aren't showing us, I give you one more chance to deliver 

them to us and show us that you can still have some respect out 

in the country, in the province of Saskatchewan, with the rural 

people that you are supposed to represent. 

 

And that poses another question, Minister.  What is your 

position in cabinet and how do you view it?  Do you view 

yourself, Mr. Minister, as the champion of rural Saskatchewan 

and municipalities and crop insurance?  Or do you view 

yourself as a member of a cabinet where you have to do what 

you're told?  Are you their champion or are you the one that's 

supposed to deliver the goods to the farmers and the ranchers 

and the municipal people in this province, and stick it down 

their throat the best way you know how so that they don't see it 

coming, and pull the wool over their eyes wherever you can?  

Is that the role you play? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Or are you Roy's lap-dog? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Somebody mentioned the term lap-dog.  I 

don't know if that's quite right or not but it just makes me 

wonder.  In past it has been the experience of rural 

municipalities to have ministers in charge of their affairs that 

championed their causes, that would actually put their jobs on 

the line in cabinet in order to represent the people that were in 

need of the services of their department, of the very department 

that you are the head of. 

 

That's what's expected in the province of Saskatchewan 

especially from people in rural municipal circles.  They expect 

the minister of their affairs to actually champion their causes 

and to come into this cabinet and sit at those tables in those 

discussions and argue for the rights and the needs of the people 

in the country.  And you haven't been doing that.  You say 7.4 

per cent and it turns out to be 18.3 per cent.  It is an absolute 

fact that you do not have confidence from the people in this 

province any longer.  And, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that 

you are playing your role wrong.  You are to be the champion 

of the people that you represent through your department.  The 

Minister of Health champions the needs of the people who are 

sick.  The Minister of Rural Development must be the 

champion of the people in rural municipalities in rural 

Saskatchewan and the people that need the services of Crop 

Insurance and all those other departments that fall in your 

jurisdiction. 

It is absolutely a fact, Mr. Minister, that democracy can only 

work in fairness if the ministers in charge of each department 

have the confidence of the people that they represent.  And you 

no longer have that confidence. 

 

And I want you to take note from this day forward and correct 

your ways.  Because it's only three years to the next election, 

and that may not be a long time when you're busy, but it's a 

long time if you're out in the municipalities watching things go 

from wreck to ruin and from rock to dust.  And it just seems to 

me that maybe at this point you could turn your direction 

around and do something that would make you important in the 

eyes of the people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 10:30 this House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 


