




















































Hansard: June 03, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 853 

 June 3, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, a visitor who is seated behind the 

bar on this side of the House, Mr. Walter Smishek.  Mr. 

Smishek is a former member of the Legislative Assembly for 

many years and served with distinction as a cabinet minister, 

and it's my pleasure to introduce him to you today.  Please help 

me welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly, 45 grade 4 and 5 students from Esterhazy East 

School.  Esterhazy is my home town and I'm proud to have 

these students, teachers, and supervisors here this afternoon. 

 

I'd also like to introduce Darrell Paproski and Diane Godwin, 

the teachers that have taken the responsibility for taking the 

class down here; and also to the chaperons: Bernise Verner, 

Elaine Tochor, Ruth Kunkel, Shirley Melenchuck, and their 

bus driver, Bea Stevenson. 

 

I hope these students have a fruitful afternoon, that they enjoy 

their tour to Regina, and I wish them a safe trip home.  And I 

will be meeting them for pictures and for refreshments after 

question period.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm 

pleased to introduce to you Mrs. Katherine Schaaf and her 

grandnephew, Brandon Tomaschefski, from Regina.  They're 

sitting in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

They're the winners of the Bridging 125 contest which brought 

together seniors and students to write about life in 

Saskatchewan's past, present, and future.  The contest was 

sponsored by the Senior Citizens' Provincial Council as a 

special event for Seniors Week. 

 

With them are Dr. Bill Klassen, a Regina member of the Senior 

Citizens' Provincial Council, and Brandon's mother, Mrs. Lynn 

Tomaschefski. 

 

Later this afternoon they'll join me for refreshments and the 

presentation of prizes.  I'm sure the members will join me in 

extending congratulations to Mrs. Schaaf and Brandon on their 

accomplishment. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to 

you another very special guest -- my youngest boy, William 

MacKinnon, who's a grade 4 student in Saskatoon.  And I'm 

very pleased to have him 

with me here today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'm very pleased this afternoon to introduce to you 

and through you to other members of the legislature two guests 

from Tanzania.  We have David Kirumbi and Aminiel Maro 

who are here today as visitors to Saskatchewan as part of an 

exchange program with Luther College. 
 

Both are teachers in Tanzania at the high school level and are 

teaching at Luther College these weeks.  They're here in 

Saskatchewan for a month.  They've been here two and a half 

weeks already and they're accompanied by their host, Larry 

Fry, who is teaching at Luther College. 
 

And we welcome them to Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also rise and add to the 

greeting of the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, and 

welcome David and Aminiel here. 
 

It was my pleasure to meet with them at the unveiling of an 

environmental stop in my constituency.  And the host couple, 

Gail and Larry Fry are members of the constituency as well.  

And I would also like to welcome them and wish them well in 

their experiences here and their tour.  I know they're also 

looking at the beginnings of a two-party system in Tanzania.  

And so I wish them well in the move toward democratic reform 

in their country. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the 

Education critic for the opposition, I would like to welcome our 

guests from Tanzania, and wish them well in visiting our 

country. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure and 

privilege today to introduce to you and to members of the 

Assembly, a group of 25 civil service folks who are with us 

here today.  They are here from a number of departments, 

including the Department of Economic Development, 

Department of Justice, Community Services, Department of 

Highways, Department of Social Services, and the Department 

of Food and Agriculture. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome them here today and to invite 

them to stay, watch question period.  I'm sure they will enjoy 

themselves.  I want to ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them here. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

welcome some guests here, and introduce them to you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly here.  Some friends of 

mine in the Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker, Jack and Alice 

Dzus, who travelled from Kelowna, B.C. 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

(British Columbia).  They knew me when I was much younger 

than I am right now, if you can believe that.  And also with 

them is their daughter, Judy Konotopsky from Coronach.  So 

I'd ask you to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, today marks the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square 

massacre in China, and our Assembly should not let the 

occasion pass unmarked.  The Tiananmen Square massacre was 

a brutal and a deadly attack by a government on its own people 

and it is a warning, Mr. Speaker, a strong warning to all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while nothing so dramatic as the repression of the 

Chinese government could happen in our own country, we 

should heed its warning about the vital need to protect the 

rights of the individuals and to stay on guard against 

government so eager to do well that they take the easy road of 

reducing freedom. 

 

The price of liberty truly is eternal vigilance.  And that 

vigilance is needed today in this very Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  

We have laws proposed in this Assembly that will give 

politicians the right to forcibly enter private property without a 

warrant, to give politicians the right to deny evidence to courts 

of law that might well be vital in proving someone's innocence, 

and to give cabinet ministers sweeping powers to make 

decisions about real people in secret and without consultation. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to focus 

today on our province, because as far as I'm concerned and I 

think all members at least on the government side of this House 

would state, that Saskatchewan is a unique and wonderful place 

and we all recognize that there are many values and benefits 

from living in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are many examples and the example I would like to 

focus on specifically today is the Wanuskewin Heritage Park 

which is opening now in Saskatoon.  It's a tourist attraction 

that's been 6,000 years in the making and puts Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan on the world heritage stage. 

 

As a former Saskatoon city councillor, I was proud to be part of 

the decision to proceed with the Wanuskewin Park.  We see 

many benefits in this province from the tourism industry.  We 

see well over 16,000 people employed and $780 million spent 

directly in tourism.  We expect that with the Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park opening that this will increase.  There will be 

many dollars and much employment generated from the 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park. 

 

I'm pleased that SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) was able to contribute $130,000 

grant for a gift shop and restaurant.  And I'm also pleased that 

Wanuskewin recognizes and gives body 

to the spirit of co-operation in Saskatchewan between the city, 

the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority), the university, federal 

and provincial governments, all five Indian nations, and all 

Indian districts in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 

to commend the town council of Langenburg community, 

which is in my riding, for showing the leadership and for 

taking the initiative to organize its first annual ratepayers' 

meeting last Wednesday evening.  The meeting displayed an 

example of co-operation between provincial and municipal 

authorities in an effort to explain to the ratepayers what is 

happening in local and provincial governments. 

 

The meeting was addressed by the mayor who chaired and 

explained the format of the meeting.  He then introduced the 

Minister of Community Services who informed the meeting of 

some of the initiatives taken by the provincial government with 

respect to municipal concerns and issues.  She discussed at 

some length environmental issues, including the Bills before 

the House.  Topics discussed included funding, regional 

landfill sites, assessment, and others. 

 

In fact the minister is meeting with the Saskatchewan mayors 

in Saskatoon this afternoon to discuss their concerns and to set 

up a process for making changes that would allow urban 

governments to meet the challenges they face because of the 

changes in economic, social, and democratic . . . demographic 

conditions in this province. 

 

The Langenburg meeting then featured a short presentation by 

each councillor who explained his or her committee duties, put 

forth the problems they faced, and indicated the direction that 

they wanted to take in that specific area.  The taxpayers were 

given the opportunity to question the council on their reports 

and to make suggestions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of community leadership that is 

taking place in the Saltcoats constituency.  I would recommend 

this type of healthy co-operative exchange . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to take a moment today to recognize the hard work, many 

volunteers across this province, and certainly pay a compliment 

to the 4-H movement in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 4-H was something that I was involved in when I 

was a teenager, and I always enjoyed that aspect of working 

together with livestock and working with my peers, Mr. 

Speaker.  Certainly the 4-H movement is a way of developing 

character for young men and women across this province.  And 

I wanted to acknowledge the 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

many volunteers who give so liberally of their time to serve the 

young men and women in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm looking forward to, over the next day or so, just taking a 

moment to drop in on some of the 4-H achievement days to 

indeed view the exhibits as many of the 4-H'ers themselves just 

take a moment to show to their parents, their peers, and anyone 

interested the efforts and rewards of their work in 4-H. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, as anyone who enters Saskatoon 

from the east will know, the 6 kilometre stretch of Highway 5 

between the Saskatoon city limits, the CPR (Canadian Pacific 

Railway) bridge, and the 41 Highway at the Sundown Drive-in 

Theatre is a very busy and even a dangerous stretch of 

highway.  Residents of my Erindale constituency are 

particularly concerned about the safety of the McOrmond Road 

intersection on Highway 5.  Indeed this spring, I personally 

knocked on doors to survey them regarding their concerns.  

Some of the comments read: it's an accident waiting to happen; 

I avoid the intersection if my daughter's in the car; I do a little 

prayer turning left off the highway. 

 

Recognizing the level of safety concern for this intersection, 

the Department of Highways has announced that in July it will 

begin construction of a four-lane highway, including a 

twinning of the CPR overpass bridge outside Sutherland and a 

turn lane, with lighting, at McOrmond Road. 

 

I understand that completion, with paving, will take place next 

summer.  And I simply want to commend the Minister of 

Highways and the department for the co-operation they've 

given me in addressing this concern.  And I'm absolutely 

convinced that it will end up saving the lives of all 

Saskatchewan residents who use that stretch of highway, both 

from Saskatoon and from rural areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I recently completed the fourth annual business 

survey in my constituency, and I wish to thank the business 

men and women who so kindly responded again this year. 

 

An analysis of these recent results indicated that our businesses 

want the province to: (1) get its financial house in order; (2) the 

debt under control; (3) some tax relief; and (4) fair tendering by 

their government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having talked to local business people last 

weekend, and having just participated in two new business 

ventures in Saskatoon, the clear message conveyed to me was 

that the Government of Saskatchewan is on the right track in 

these areas. 

 

More businesses in my survey are optimistic about the future of 

their enterprise than has been the case in the past 

three years.  Given their optimism, along with the development 

of the Saskatoon Economic Development Authority and the 

booming housing sales in April, there is a positive feeling that 

better days lie ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the creativity, determination, and 

contribution of the small-business sector as they show their 

confidence in working co-operatively with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and in fact all of the people of this province.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  June 1 to 7 is 

Senior's Week in Saskatchewan and I think it's a good time to 

review progress but also to talk about some of the impacts in 

the budget.  Mr. Speaker, many seniors will remember the 

Depression and the many ups and downs in the economy.  And 

during that time they took leadership in resolving the severe 

hardships but also still having compassion for the poor. 

 

In considering the budget, the province took into account that 

Saskatchewan has the lowest incidence of senior poverty in 

Canada and the highest incidence of child poverty.  Based on 

this and other information, it was decided that seniors could 

play a role in solving some of the financial problems and 

directing resources to those most in need.  Mr. Speaker, I know 

that all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) would 

appreciate seniors letting us know if anyone is experiencing 

undue hardship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the legislature I want seniors to know 

that we in the province are thinking of them during Seniors' 

Week.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 

House to revert back to introductions for a brief moment.  

Guests arrived late. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you, members.  I would like to introduce to you, sir, 

some special guests in your gallery, seated to my right.  They 

are visitors from the Sakhalin region of Russia.  And I will 

introduce the members of the party to you.  Seated in your 

gallery is the governor of the Sakhalin region, Governor Dr. 

Valentin P. Fyordrov, and his wife, Tamara.  With them is Mr. 

S.V. Golubckov, the vice-president; Mr. Grinco, chief of 

foreign relations; Mr. V.I. Lozovoi, the director general.  And 

they're accompanied by Mr. C.M. Kapoor and Mr. G.V. 

Shankar, chairman and president respectively of GPCP in 

Saskatoon.  And also in the gallery with them is the Member of 

Parliament for Regina-Qu'Appelle, Mr. Simon de Jong. 

 

Now Governor Fyordrov and his party have just returned from 

a G-7 meeting in New York city.  The governor and 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

his group are here to discuss the possible use of Saskatchewan 

goods and services for the development of the Sakhalin region.  

As members will know, the Sakhalin region is an island off the 

Russian Pacific coast.  It is rich in coal, oil and gas, forestry 

and fisheries.  This inland region has a significant impact on 

the Republic of Russia through its unique topographical 

position and its close proximity to Japan. 

 

We wish the governor and his entourage all the success, and 

hope that our province and our business community can 

contribute to the economic and social development of Sakhalin 

and that part of the Republic of Russia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope to meet very briefly with the governor.  

Unfortunately not enough time today due to other 

commitments.  But I would ask you, sir, and all the members of 

the House to welcome this distinguished group of visitors to 

the legislature and to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too on behalf of 

the opposition would like to welcome the visitors from Russia.  

It was a pleasure for me to travel to Kiev and to Moscow and 

St. Petersburg in February this year to visit with members of 

parliament from the Ukraine and from Russia and I spent a 

very pleasant time there. 

 

And I want to say that we want to encourage you to continue in 

your democratic reform and your initiatives in relation to the 

economy.  We want to encourage you to keep your eye on the 

positive aspects that you've already accomplished.  Thank you 

very much for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Effects of Legislation on Individuals' Rights 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, recent 

announcements, legislation, and actions taken by your 

government have many people concerned about the direction 

you are taking this province with respect to justice and human 

rights. 

 

In 1987 the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal ruled that it was 

unconstitutional to charge the owner of a vehicle for an offence 

if the driver of that vehicle could not be determined.  Mr. 

Minister, while there may be a few reasons why you intend 

now to circumvent that ruling to allow charges to be laid 

against people who may be innocent, even you must recognize 

the dangerous precedent being set.  As one lawyer recently 

said: if it goes so far that you can be convicted for something 

when it wasn't you, then there's something wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, won't you agree that allowing the justice system 

to charge and convict an innocent person goes against the 

fundamental principle that a person is indeed innocent until 

proven guilty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question, which is a very important question indeed. 

 

The idea of being able to charge and convict the owner of a 

vehicle for a wide variety of matters is of course well 

established in Canada and has long been followed.  For 

example, all of our parking tickets -- ticket the car and the 

owner is responsible regardless of who was driving at the time. 

 

And there is of course a logic, which I know the hon. member 

appreciates, in reducing the dangers of high-speed chases and 

that sort of thing. 

 

With respect to the unconstitutionality of the previous 

provision, the member will know that it was the possibility of 

the owner being imprisoned that was found to be contrary to 

the charter -- imprisoned in a situation where the owner had not 

himself or herself actually committed the crime.  And that was 

found to be unconstitutional. 

 

Now if that is changed, if the option of a jail sentence is taken 

away, then the law will be the same as it's been in 

Saskatchewan for a long, long time and the same as it's been in, 

I think, every other Canadian province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, for your response.  

But I must remind you, Mr. Minister, and I believe, that most 

people in the province and indeed in Canada still feel that to 

allow for traffic violations to be sent to a person rather than 

being given to them personally goes against the personal rights 

indeed of individuals.  We are certainly in favour of guarding 

against the possibility that some . . . we are in favour, Mr. 

Minister, of people being charged with an offence that they've 

committed, but we want to guard against the individual rights. 

 

Imagine being able to charge and convict an individual for 

possession of stolen property merely because they found 

documents in their office that were left there, Mr. Minister. 

 

My question is simple, Mr. Minister.  Did you consider 

including in your legislation a provision for individuals to be 

found innocent should they provide an alibi? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that that's a very good point that 

the member raises.  We, of course, as the member, believe very 

strongly that people are innocent until proven guilty.  And the 

member will know that in the enforcement of this type of 

legislation across the whole country these provisions are 

common.  There are some circumstances in which the identity 

of the driver can't be discovered, or can't be discovered without 

a very high level of risk.  For example, the drivers of school 

buses has petitioned our government, as they did yours, with 

respect to people who go splashing by a stopped school bus 

where children are being disembarked from the bus.  And that 

creates a very dangerous situation and you know the law 

provides a very severe penalty for it. 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

And yet the driver can't see the driver of the car and can't 

identify them, and they're gone, and there's no police in the 

area, but they can see the licence plate.  And they have brought 

this matter to our attention.  So we think it very important that 

people are innocent until proven guilty, but yet there has to be 

some way of handling these situations for the protection of the 

public and the due administration of the Act. 

 

Now I think the member is also aware that there aren't many 

people charged as the registered owner.  I mean, the police and 

the prosecutors have not used this provision very much in the 

law, although it has been in the law for a very long time.  But it 

is necessary, I think, in a band of cases that this be available for 

the police and for the prosecutors.  And that's what this is all 

about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, yes we are concerned about 

the situations where people may pass school buses, but I would 

also suggest that maybe many school bus drivers also recognize 

many of the vehicles, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But there are also examples of individuals who have been 

caught in the unfairness of this kind of legislation.  An example 

of an Alberta woman who had left her car with a mechanic for 

a test drive was charged and convicted for an offence 

committed by the mechanic.  Surely even you would admit, 

Mr. Minister, that this is unfair if not unjust. 

 

Mr. Minister, another simple question.  Should the innocence 

of this individual be the priority, or do you believe that the 

system is more important than the innocence or the guilt of the 

individual? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Oh, I believe very strongly that innocent 

people should not be convicted.  I mean that is quite, quite 

obvious.  And of course it is available in every case for a 

person who has been charged to come before the court, or for 

that matter to contact the police, and say, I wasn't driving my 

car that day, my car was being driven by Sally Brown.  And 

that will be the end of the matter. 

 

And certainly that would be a defence in court and that 

continues to be available and it should be available.  We're not 

into wanting to convict innocent people of crimes.  We're just 

simply looking to enforce The Highway Traffic Act as it has 

been enforced in this province for years and years and as it is 

enforced in every other province. 

 

We've got to protect people.  And I mentioned the example 

earlier of the children in rural Saskatchewan disembarking 

from a bus and there aren't a lot of police out there to enforce 

these laws as cars offend the rule against passing a bus while it 

is stopped.  And it would seem to me . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the minister has 

answered the question. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I believe 

this legislation paves the way for the introduction of 

photographic technology which would enable the province to 

fine and convict owners of cars travelling at a rapid pace, or for 

whatever conviction they may lay.  This legislation also allows 

the province to collect fines from small businesses, such as car 

rental companies who own the cars that have been involved in 

traffic violations. 

 

Mr. Minister, is the true reason for the implementation of such 

measures another means of increasing the revenue for your 

government, given the fact that you have increased your take of 

traffic violations from 7 per cent to 25 per cent, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With respect to the last item, the 7 per 

cent to 25 per cent, the member will know of course that what 

we are trying to do is simply recover costs.  This is not any 

kind of a revenue- or profit-making enterprise that we're talking 

about, was simply a matter of trying to recover the province's 

costs. 

 

With respect to the use of those photographic cameras to assist 

in highway traffic enforcement, the member will know that 

they have been in place in Alberta for some time, as well as in 

Nova Scotia.  And recently their use was challenged in the 

courts in Nova Scotia and, if my memory is correct, were found 

to be unconstitutional or contrary to the charter, or something 

like that.  That's my memory. 

 

And if that's correct, we would certainly want to await the 

result of that sort of . . . or that case, and have the courts 

pronounce on it before that's considered in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe this government is living 

proof that the dispensing of injustice is always in the most 

capable hands.  And we see a very disturbing pattern 

developing through legislation that is coming into this House. 

 

Mr. Minister, the environmental management Act directly 

attacks individual rights, giving a minister or any of her 

political appointees the power to enter any land or building she 

thinks necessary without a warrant, without the consent of the 

owner or occupant, without consent, Mr. Minister.  That seems 

to be an underlying trend in many of the Bills that are coming 

forward. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify giving power to a minister 

that even the Royal Canadian Mounted Police don't have?  

Even they must obtain a search warrant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I must confess to the member, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am not familiar with the provision that he's 

referring to. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

I want to say as a general point, as a general answer to the 

member's question, that this government is conscious of the 

rights of people in this province fully.  We fully respect the 

individual's rights and freedoms. 

 

And I think that you will find, if you're in a fair-minded mood 

about this at all, that none of the legislation that we bring 

forward and none of the steps that we take as a government 

will be contrary to the rights and freedoms of people in this 

province.  And I challenge the member to give us any example 

where we have trampled on the rights and freedoms of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, certainly 

you are the minister in charge of the judicial system in the 

province.  And we on this side of the House are very well 

aware of the need to protect our environment, to protect our 

people from murder or the problem of narcotics.  There are all 

kinds of crime.  But we also, as you indicate and I would like 

to reiterate, we want to protect individual rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, before an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) official can forcibly enter private property in the pursuit 

of evidence of murder or drug trafficking or any crime, we as 

citizens demand -- demand, Mr. Minister -- that that officer 

obtain a legal search warrant.  As the highest Justice officer, I 

ask you, sir: what is it that makes you believe that people 

should trust that any bureaucrat with powers should be able . . . 

that any bureaucrat should be entrusted with such powers while 

an RCMP officer doesn't have the same trust? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the question is difficult to cope 

with.  I think if the member is referring to a piece of legislation 

which has been proposed to this House, then with respect I 

propose that we deal with it within the context of that Bill.  It's 

just a little tough to deal with these in general. 

 

But as a general proposition, I want to assure the member that 

we're certainly not proposing to trample on the rights and 

freedoms of the people of this province.  And I just refer you to 

my previous answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the member continues with his 

question, I think I should draw to the attention of the members, 

if, as has been alluded on both sides, that the member is 

referring to a specific Bill, that question would be out of order 

in question period.  Those questions are directed to the 

ministers in third reading or Committee of the Whole.  So if the 

member is reading from a particular Bill, I would rule him out 

of order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

purpose is to bring to the attention of this House, and certainly 

of the minister -- and I believe the minister indicated a few 

minutes earlier that he may not be familiar with all the Bills . . . 

and we're not delving into all the Bills specifically as we will 

get into that when we get into committee, Mr. Speaker. 

But a question to the minister is certainly, Mr. Minister, there is 

a disturbing trend that we have seen coming forward in many 

of the Bills being brought before this House -- the mining Bill 

and certainly the environmental Bill -- that put the power . . . or 

greater powers in the hands of ministers, ministers of the 

Crown, greater powers than are even available to the police 

forces in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

That is the problem we have, Mr. Minister, in the fact that we 

are very interested in individual rights and freedoms, the 

question we are asking you: how can you give those powers to 

the ministers rather . . . or how can you give ministers such 

excessive power, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said to the 

member, we should discuss the specific matters within the 

context of the particular Bills.  And if there's four or five Bills 

involved, we'll discuss it within the context of those Bills.  

What I want to say is, as a general proposition, I have tried to 

answer the question a couple of times.  If the member thinks 

that he sees signs that this government is going in the direction 

that he's suggesting, then all I can say to him, with all of the 

kindness and consideration that I can muster, is that he's 

misreading the signs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, 

when you first entered this House you did so with a great deal 

of respect from all members in this Assembly, including 

members on this side of the House.  You have continually since 

that point eroded the position of the office you presently hold.  

You started by swearing that no patronage existed in your 

government, and that was so transparent as to elicit laughter 

from this side of the House. 

 

Now you stand as the minister of injustice and tell this 

Assembly that a frontal assault on the rights and freedoms of 

Saskatchewan people is just.  Mr. Minister, did you personally 

as Justice minister have any input into the decision to give civil 

servants more power to search and seizure than you give to the 

police? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm a bit puzzled by the question, which 

could be capable of being interpreted as a personal attack upon 

me.  I'm sure, I'm sure the member did not intend that.  I'm sure 

his preface to this question was simply to ask me the question 

of whether or not I knew that these provisions were in the Bill, 

in the Bills. 

 

As I stand here I'm sure I don't know what the four or five Bills 

are.  We'll be more than pleased to discuss them in the . . . 

when the debate comes up for the Bill, and I'll be pleased to try 

and address those questions at that time. 

 

I want to assure the member though that this government does 

not have as part of it's agenda, trampling on the rights and 

freedoms of Saskatchewan people.  To the contrary, we will 

protect their rights at every turn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, we all realize that you've been very 

busy on constitutional affairs and maybe haven't had the time 

to really keep up on what's happened within the front benches 

of your government.  But in addition to search without warrant, 

you have Bills before the Assembly, Mr. Minister, that deny 

evidence to the courts that might have an impact on a person's 

innocence or guilt.  Bill 13 provides, Bill 13 provides . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I've warned the member before 

if he's going to get into specifics of Bills I will rule his question 

out of order.  That is reserved for Committee of the Whole in 

detailed study of the Bills.  If the member continues I will 

recognize another member in the question period. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And it behoves the 

opposition to try to bring some of these facts to the public, and 

I believe question period is the period that most people really . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I think the member 

knows that that comment is out of order.  I ask him to get to his 

question.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  The question, Mr. 

Minister, was the fact of whether we're giving more authority 

to ministers rather than judges and our courts.  Mr. Minister, do 

you approve this action to make civil servants immune from 

testifying in a court of law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm speechless -- I am speechless.  I 

would love to answer the member's question.  I've tried hard to 

answer all of his questions today.  And I'm sure that when he 

asked that, he has reference to a particular Bill, and I will be 

glad to either answer that question myself or have the minister 

responsible answer when it comes before this House.  I look 

the member right in the eyeball and say, I'll be glad to answer 

that when I have a clear understanding of what the question is 

all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe it was mentioned earlier 

that we want to protect the children of the province, I believe 

the minister mentioned that.  We want to protect rape victims.  

We want to protect victims of crime, and in every one of these 

cases we . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Please just have order on both 

sides.  Let the member ask his question, let the minister 

answer. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in every one of the cases . . . and 

yes we will get to the specific Bills in Estimates, but in every 

one of the cases . . . many of the Bills coming forward, Mr. 

Minister, have things that really have caught our attention.  In 

every one of these cases we insist that the accused be 

prosecuted, that the guilty be prosecuted.  We do that by 

insisting that all the relevant evidence be available in courts.  Is 

it the position of this government that the best way of 

protecting children is to conceal evidence as we have seen in 

some of the Bills? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I must say again that I haven't the 

faintest idea what the member is talking about.  I want to 

say to the member that our approach to legislation is an 

approach which is based solidly upon all kinds of precedents.  

If we're talking about the powers of inspectors, and I gather 

from your question that that's one of the things you're talking 

about, then the provisions that we have included are based 

upon all kinds of precedents within Saskatchewan, within 

Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario. 

 

Many of the Bills . . . many of the precedents were created by 

the previous government of which the hon. member was a part.  

So I . . . without knowing exactly what the member is talking 

about or asking about I tell the member that we're not seeking 

to change things along the lines that he suggested, and we 

intend to be fully respectful of the rights and freedoms of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Are there any further questions?  Does 

anybody have any further questions?  I will not recognize the 

member from Moosomin. 

 

Effects of Budget on Livestock Industry 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister 

of Agriculture, I want you to admit to this Assembly that you 

didn't have the time of day yesterday to meet with the livestock 

association, the feeder association who wanted to tell you about 

their industry.  You wouldn't consult with them before you 

cancelled their programs.  You wouldn't talk to them after. 

 

Mr. Minister, they present a brief to you which clearly shows 

that you have threatened the livelihood of 1,500 Saskatchewan 

families because of your ill-advised measures.  I trust that you 

have had an opportunity to review that brief.  Will you admit 

that this estimate is right on the money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I described often 

enough the events of the discussions that were held yesterday.  

Our agricultural caucus, who is very familiar with the 

agricultural issues -- much more familiar than the members 

opposite -- had a good discussion with the livestock industry. 

 

I want to mention to the member opposite that this morning I 

met with another sector of the livestock industry who are 

making positive proposals about the development of further 

livestock industry in Saskatchewan; who want to take the 

responsibility themselves; who recognize that government, 

under the circumstances you have left it, is not in a position to 

take a role in other than a facilitating role.  And they know they 

can do business in Saskatchewan, are proposing methods of 

doing business in Saskatchewan, are organizing themselves 

with other elements of society to do business in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I hope the member opposite will join with those who 

positively want to work towards building a livestock industry 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you said in the Star-Phoenix 

yesterday, and I quote: Wiens said all of those numbers were 

wrong.  That's what you were quoted as saying.  And I want to 

tell you and the members of this Assembly that this brief was 

put together by Hartley Furtan, who you said was . . . all of the 

vital information as it related to GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) was right on the money.  So today are you saying he 

is wrong today?  Is Mr. Hartley Furtan and his numbers wrong 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't challenge the 

numbers of other organizations.  I said there have been a 

number of studies and a number of pieces of information that 

we will discuss together.  I think I did make reference to the 

fact that the manner in which the member opposite was quoting 

numbers seemed to be inconsistent with the truth, as I knew it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Publication Costs 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member 

from Kindersley asked me a question, to which I took notice.  

And he asked about the cost of the accounting initiatives 

briefing package production costs, which were produced by the 

Department of Finance.  Mr. Speaker, the accounting initiative 

briefing package was 10 pages long.  It was produced on April 

14, 1992.  It cost a total amount, Mr. Speaker, of $23.73. 

 

The member also asked me, Mr. Speaker, the cost of printing 

budget . . . budget printing costs.  Well I am pleased to report 

that I am able to provide the answer today on budget printing 

costs, Mr. Speaker.  In 1989-1990 under the former 

government the costs were $490,231.  In 1991-1992 the cost of 

printing the budget was $231,403.  I am able to say the costs of 

printing the budget and documents for this year under this 

government, Mr. Speaker, were $52,539. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, perhaps the reason that your 

budget cost so little to print this year is because you had half of 

it leaked before the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, would you not agree that that is 

the most partisan budget that has ever been delivered in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  And, Mr. Minister, I ask you now 

wouldn't it be more appropriate for the New Democratic Party 

to bear that $52,000 cost than the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the truth may seem 

like it's partisan to the member from Thunder Creek but it is the 

truth.  And the truth is that under the previous administration 

they paid no attention at all to how they managed the taxpayers' 

dollars.  That's why in 1989-90 they squandered $490,000 to 

print the budget to one advertising agency, untendered, and 

that's with similar 

 numbers in 1991-92.  But if you look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, 

this government has managed well and has basically reduced 

the cost almost to nothing compared to what the former 

government spent, and that's good management. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests who 

arrived during the question period. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 

50 grade 8 students from Silverwood Heights School in 

Saskatoon accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Carlson and Mr. 

Neufeld.  I trust that these students have enjoyed the question 

period.  I'll be meeting with them later, after they have a tour of 

the Legislative Building, for pictures and refreshments. And I 

would ask that all members join me in welcoming the students 

from Silverwood Heights School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  My point of order 

relates to the Minister of Finance who has been wilfully 

bending and twisting the rules and regulations of this House.  

And my point of order is that yesterday when the question was 

raised, he took great lengths to answer the question and then 

upon sitting down, said, I take notice of the question.  And you, 

sir, reprimanded him for doing that.  Today, sir, he gets the 

floor a second time to further answer that question.  I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that is an abuse of the parliamentary system of this 

House. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday during 

question period, the Minister of Finance clearly took notice of a 

question.  Hansard clearly indicates that and it was allowed by 

the Assembly. 

 

I think the real issue here is why the members are opposed to 

the Minister of Finance giving an answer?  Why are they 

opposed?  I'll tell you: there are times in life in this Assembly 

when the truth hurts and this is one of them. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: -- I've heard the member from Rosthern.  The 

member ordinarily would make a good point of order.  I had 

reprimanded the minister yesterday, but that was the first time 

it happened in this House during this session and if it does 

happen again in the future, I will 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

certainly not recognize a minister in answering a question.  I 

felt that the question was important enough that the member 

from Kindersley would want an answer to it.  And that's why I 

allowed it. 

 

But I think your point is well taken.  In the future, if a minister 

answers and then takes notice, I will not recognize the minister 

in giving an answer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a different issue, Mr. Speaker, so it's a 

point of order that occurred during question period -- of course, 

this is the first time that I have an opportunity to rise to address 

that point -- and I refer to the line of questioning that my 

colleague from Moosomin was engaged upon and although it 

was frustrating to get an answer -- but that's not my point of 

order -- you, sir, did warn him that not to get specific.  Now the 

question, Mr. Speaker, that he was getting at was because of 

the inability of the Minister of Justice to answer these questions 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That's not a point of order, that's 

a debating point, that's a debating point.  I want to clarify, 

however, my decision on the member.  I had warned the 

member at least two or three times not to get into specifics of a 

Bill.  I think everybody understands that.  The member did not 

adhere to that warning.  He went on another two or three times 

after I had warned him.  He did not heed my warning, therefore 

I thought he was not recognizing my decision and that's why I 

did not recognize him for another question.  And I will proceed 

in that fashion in the future.  That's a well established tradition 

in this House.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Point of order or point of clarification, Mr. 

Speaker, if I might.  I would suggest or I'd ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, to check the records as to the exact question that he 

asked prior to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've made my decision.  Order.  

I've made my decision. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan Savings Bonds 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise to 

report to the Assembly on an important initiative announced by 

the government today.  In the past few months, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Saskatchewan have had an ample opportunity to 

examine the current financial situation of this province and see 

clearly how we got to where we are today.  That is the 

important information.  But, Mr. Speaker, it is only one-half of 

the story.  The other half, and some would argue the most 

important half, is what we are going to do about it. 

 

Today our government has taken a major step forward in 

attacking our fiscal problems with the introduction of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds.  These bonds are more than just 

another financial instrument.  Saskatchewan savings bonds are 

the way to put our community spirit to work for 

our children and for our future.  Saskatchewan people deserve a 

positive investment opportunity and the means to do what we 

do best, working together to build a better future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these bonds are available exclusively to 

Saskatchewan residents in $100 denominations, have no 

maximum purchase limit, can be cashed annually at the 

investor's option for the full investment amount plus interest, 

are freely transferable within Saskatchewan, and will be on sale 

June 15 to July 3, 1992 at all authorized financial institutions. 

 

On or about June 11 the government will announce the interest 

rate for this years' bond issue.  It will be at a competitive rate.  

It is our intention to raise $150 million at a minimum through 

this year's issue.  For Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, these 

bonds are a simple, safe, secure opportunity to confront the 

province's financial difficulties head-on by bringing the debt 

home and by investing in building for our future. 

 

For the province, it is a means to reduce our dependence on 

outside investors and put interest payments into the pockets of 

Saskatchewan people instead of into the hands of outside 

bankers and bond dealers.  For our children, it is a ray of hope 

for the future.  And when all is said and done, the consummate 

duty of any government is to secure the future of our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

members of the opposition are pleased the government has 

decided to allow Saskatchewan people to invest in their future, 

invest in this province through the issuance of this bond. 

 

As everyone in the province is well aware, Mr. Speaker, the 

former administration realized the benefits of allowing 

Saskatchewan people to become involved in the financing of a 

great part of government's activities.  In that way Saskatchewan 

people had the opportunity to invest in Crown utilities such as 

SaskTel, SaskPower, and PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.). 

 

Each of these bonds met with immediate success.  Many more 

people than were allowed in fact, Mr. Speaker, would have 

invested in these particular areas.  Unfortunately some of these 

were stopped, I think, Mr. Speaker, for purely political reasons. 

 

The former administration saw the merit in introducing the 

community bond program because it did many of the things 

that the Minister of Finance just spoke about -- that rekindling 

of a co-operative spirit amongst Saskatchewan communities, 

pride in allowing people in villages and towns to use their own 

money in conjunction with others to benefit their particular 

area. 

 

I think the continuance of the concept through the 

Saskatchewan savings bond is an excellent idea and I commend 

the minister for it.  Indeed, I think our own Leader of the 

Opposition called for a such a measure on April 15 of this year.  

We must pay that type of interest, Mr. Speaker, to our own 

people rather than foreign banks. 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

However we are somewhat concerned and perplexed, Mr. 

Speaker, over the government's decision to cancel any further 

bond offerings in the Crown corporations.  One would think 

that the benefits of a Saskatchewan savings bond would also 

hold true for our utilities, as was certainly the case by the 

tremendous response in the previous administration. 

 

We sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, we sincerely hope that this 

wasn't a narrow-minded political response and we hope that the 

government reconsiders that situation as they begin to market 

the Saskatchewan savings bond in the province, and we wish 

them all the success in the world with that marketing. 

 

National Access Awareness Week 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to declare 

June 1 to 7 National Access Awareness Week.  This week we 

recognize the barriers faced by people with disabilities, barriers 

that prevent them from participating fully in all aspects of life. 

 

The idea for National Access Awareness Week came from 

Rick Hansen after he finished his man in motion tour.  It's a 

week to bring together in partnership and co-operation people 

with disabilities, community groups, business, labour, and 

government to foster changes, changes that will result in equal 

access and full participation. 

 

Many communities in Saskatchewan have improved the access 

to services and facilities, and many others are working toward 

this goal.  At a time when financial resources are limited, we 

have taken steps to address the need for improved accessibility 

for the disabled. 

 

Special allowances under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan for 

the disabled for food, clothing, and personal needs are being 

increased by 25 per cent.  The transportation allowance for the 

disabled will be increased by 15 per cent.  It will provide 

replacement vehicles and establish new services in some 

communities. 

 

The focus of National Access Awareness Week is on 

transportation, housing, employment, recreation and education.  

Communities are encouraged to understand what barriers exist 

in these areas to disabled people and to take action to remove 

the barriers. 

 

I want to recognize the vital work of all the organizations 

serving people with disabilities, groups like the Voice of the 

Handicapped, the Canadian Paraplegic Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association for Community Living and the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 

 

This week should serve as a reminder to heighten our 

awareness of the difficulties faced by disabled people every 

day and to challenge us to work together to help.  It is with 

great pleasure that I declare June 1 to June 7 National Access 

Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1430) 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Firstly I'd like to 

thank Madam Minister for sending me this here ministerial 

statement.  It's appreciated very much, Madam Minister. 

 

Firstly I'd like to thank you, and then I'd also like to thank the 

last minister of Social Services, the member from Rosthern, 

who did this same thing before.  I think it's a great gesture for 

the disabled people that we're honouring them and thinking 

about them this week of June 1 to June 7. 

 

I think that we should congratulate the disabled people and the 

handicapped in this province of Saskatchewan.  I've been quite 

involved with quite a few of them throughout my own life, and 

they're a great group of people.  I'd say nearly all of them, 

given a chance, are doing everything they can to make a life of 

their own.  And I really congratulate these people.  I've met 

some tremendous people that have done things to make life go 

well for them. 

 

I'd like to congratulate the communities throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that as I travelled 

throughout the province I see that they're trying so hard and 

making a good job when they build new buildings to make 

access for the handicapped.  And I'd like to encourage the 

government.  I thank them for this new money that has been 

announced recently for the handicapped, and I congratulate you 

for that, Madam Minister, and your government. 

 

But I encourage the government to do more and especially to 

encourage the communities, which I think are doing a good 

job, to help make more accessible for the handicapped.  And 

one main thing is to really encourage the people to make what 

they can of their life.  And I'm sure that all governments that 

I've been involved with throughout our great country of Canada 

have been doing this, and I'm happy about it. 

 

Just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly tell this 

Assembly about a man that proves beyond doubt the great 

potential of disabled people -- proof that if we are aware of 

their abilities instead of just seeing the disabilities, how much 

these folks have to contribute.  This man, and one of the 

greatest scientists in the past generation, was a fellow named 

Stephen Hawking.  This fellow was completely physically 

disabled.  He had the full use of his mouth and his mind, and 

with those two things he created a revolution in science.  Many 

people will be familiar with his little book called A Brief 

History of Time.  Mr. Hawking used his mind, and with a stick 

in his mouth, he used a computer to write that book and to 

write many papers that changed the theories and expanded the 

knowledge of mankind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to thank the minister for making this 

statement today.  And, Mr. Speaker, I again want to 

congratulate all disabled people and handicapped in this 

province for the things that they're doing to try to make a life 

for themselves.  And may God bless each and every one of 

them. 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Introduction of guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

welcome to the Legislative Assembly, to you and through you 

to the Legislative Assembly, my wife, Heather, and sons 

Cameron and Carson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The business before the committee is 

interim supply and the motion of the Minister of Finance: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $469,935,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I recalled and I'm being reminded 

that the member from Morse asked me a question during the 

last time the committee met about the special warrants for 

April and May.  And they are ready and they're coming over, 

and before the end of the day I'll make sure that he gets it.  But 

they're not here at this moment but they'll be here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the minister has a 

new official in today and I know the gentleman but some of the 

new members don't, so if you would . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, I thank the member 

from Thunder Creek.  I should have also done that when I was 

on my feet, and that is introduce the associate deputy minister 

of Finance, Mr. Bill Jones, seated on my right. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

I'm going to make a few remarks and I will indicate to the 

minister right now that the opposition is going to allow the 

Appropriation Bill to proceed this afternoon.  But I think there 

are a few things that have arisen during the debate, Mr. 

Chairman, that I would like to summarize because I think they 

are important for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as was noted time and time again during this 

debate, that probably before this Assembly rises you will have 

nearly half Saskatchewan's budget expended.  You have had 

two special warrants.  We have an 

Appropriation Bill before us today, an Appropriation Bill that 

the minister has indicated has several components that are more 

than one-twelfth.  They are in fairly large areas of expenditure 

in the province of Saskatchewan, everyone recognizes -- 

Health, Education, Social Services. 

 

Some of these areas do have requirements that are based upon 

agreements, that are based upon the time of year, that are based 

upon long-standing, traditional needs for third parties to 

finance themselves in the province. 

 

The opposition has never questioned, Mr. Chairman, that those 

third parties have needs.  But what we were questioning the 

minister . . . because this is the very first time, the very first 

time that the opposition has had the Minister of Finance in this 

Chamber since last December -- last December -- when we saw 

the minister come in and set aside the rules of this Assembly 

and put the members of this Chamber through a charade.  At 

that time the government wasn't willing to call Estimates, 

wasn't willing to have its ministers come before this House and 

answer questions. 

 

We have not yet completed one estimate in this House, Mr. 

Chairman.  A classic example, the Minister of Finance on 

many of the questions posed by the opposition said those are 

too narrow in scope; they would be better defined by the 

minister in charge.  Well the minister in charge of SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) was in this 

Assembly for a number of hours, having fairly narrow 

questions placed to him about the debt in SPMC and where it 

has migrated to.  And you know what?  The minister of 

SPMC's response was, well you'll have to ask the ministers 

involved with those individual areas. 

 

Now the Minister of Finance has indicated that he has taken 

$715 million in debt.  He has taken it out of SPMC, and he has 

rolled it into the Consolidated Fund.  And he says you'd be 

better off asking the minister responsible for SPMC those 

questions.  Well that was the exact point, Mr. Chairman.  The 

minister was asked, and that minister said no, you can't ask me; 

you've got to ask somebody else. 

 

Well the rule of thumb, Mr. Chairman, in Saskatchewan is that 

the Finance minister . . . that's where the buck stops.  That's 

who writes the cheques.  It's his officials that design the budget 

primarily.  It's his officials that have their John Henry on the 

cheque.  It is the Minister of Finance who has the ultimate 

responsibility for the expenditures of funds.  Therefore when 

we get the first opportunity in a long time to have this minister 

before the House -- admittedly spending, probably, by the time 

we're done this Appropriation Bill today -- he will have spent 

nearly a third of this year's entire budget without any questions 

being answered in the House. 

 

He has been able to take debt from all sorts of places around 

government: from the Crowns, from the line departments, from 

SPMC.  He has been able to take debt supposedly from all of 

these areas and roll it into a different format. 

 

He's changing the accounting systems of the province of 

Saskatchewan when it is politically expedient, and yet he 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

doesn't want to answer the questions, questions about what 

would certain amounts of debt be in 1992 dollars.  Questions I 

think that are very legitimate if Saskatchewan taxpayers are to 

make fair comparisons, not comparisons that are tainted with 

political rhetoric, but fair comparisons as to what the debt of 

the province of Saskatchewan is.  How much, by doing the 

changes that the minister has done, have those changes resulted 

in additional debt load?  By using those figures repeatedly in 

the public, has the minister in effect changed Saskatchewan's 

bond rating? 

 

The minister, I know, was warned very early on in his time as 

Minister of Finance to be very careful with public 

pronouncements and about the way that things should be done 

in the province of Saskatchewan vis-a-vis our necessity to 

garner revenue and funds, garner funds outside of the province 

of Saskatchewan in order to support our infrastructure. 

 

Yet this minister has always chosen the political route.  He has 

always used every opportunity available to him to accentuate 

write-downs, to accentuate the debt of the province because I 

think he felt he was scoring some sort of political points against 

the former government.  And I believe, Mr. Chairman, in effect 

what he has maybe done has scored some points against the 

Government of Saskatchewan which unfortunately he won't 

pay for, but Saskatchewan taxpayers will. 

 

We're at the point now, Mr. Chairman, where I notice in the 

paper of June 3, Leader-Post, where Saskatchewan's two major 

cities won't even buy Saskatchewan bonds any more.  

Saskatoon and Regina are prohibited by law from buying the 

bonds of the province of Saskatchewan.  And I honestly 

believe, Mr. Chairman, that some of the moves that this 

Minister of Finance has made has resulted in that very 

situation. 

 

(1445) 

 

Because this minister, all through the questioning which we 

placed to him, did not want to reveal answers.  The member 

from Morse asked a number of very pertinent questions about 

the beef stabilization fund which had accumulated a large 

deficit over a period of some 17 or 18 years.  The land bank, 

once again very large numbers accumulated over a period of 

nearly 20 years.  The Water Corporation, which as Mr. 

Chairman knows, is an amalgamation of departments back in 

1983 of various departments in government that were 

associated with the delivery and development of water projects 

in the province of Saskatchewan, tied to which are a number of 

very large debt related issues. 

 

All of these things had simply disappeared off the books of the 

province of Saskatchewan where they normally resided over 

that length of time.  And the minister has now woofed them 

over, he says, into a particular area; doesn't want to answer any 

particular questions about them, has obviously added to the 

debt on the consolidated side by doing so, has obviously 

incurred interest costs by doing so, has obviously meant that he 

will have to go to the money markets to get money to service 

that debt. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the questions are not answered.  And 

yet in reviewing the verbatim of similar debates from last year 

and the year before, going through over a dozen members of 

the former opposition personally -- I read some 200 pages of 

verbatim -- we found a very wide-ranging debate.  They went 

on for several days in fact. 

 

We had the member from Riversdale asking questions of the 

Minister of Finance about GRIP and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) and what the per capita cost was to 

individual Saskatchewan taxpayers and what was the cost in 

comparison to the province of Ontario and the province of 

British Columbia and other provinces.  The Minister of Finance 

answered those questions. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, this minister was very indignant that the 

opposition would ask those very same type of questions in his 

first opportunity before this House after expending a third of 

the entire budget without any answers.  It's sort of amazing, 

Mr. Chairman, to see the shoe on the other foot, to remember, 

as I do after seven years in this Assembly, all of the rhetoric, all 

of the talk about the evils of special warrants, all of the talk 

about ministers of Finance hiding things. 

 

And yet we went through three days of absolutely no answers, 

no relevance to what happened to the debt, no relevance 

between the accounting system that has been used since 

Tommy Douglas till present and what the minister is 

attempting to do.  There is no relevance because he refused to 

put the numbers -- there were questions -- the numbers into 

1992 dollars.  Because that is the only way that relevance can 

be achieved.  But he insists on mixing and matching his 

numbers all the time and, by doing so, confusing Saskatchewan 

taxpayers even more so than what they are confused at present. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Chairman, I suspect before this Assembly is 

done that we will have an opportunity for the Minister of 

Finance to come before this House with another special warrant 

package.  I suspect that will be the case.  And I would just say 

to the minister that when that next opportunity comes, and we 

still may not have that many Estimates done in this House, that 

he had better be prepared to come with some of the answers 

that were asked this time, because I can assure him that they 

will be asked over and over and over again the next time that 

we have interim supply brought before this House. 

 

Because until those things are clarified, until we get clear 

answers as to what has happened to hundreds of millions of 

dollars of debt, till we get those numbers put into 1992 dollars 

and until we get a clear picture from this minister, a clear 

picture and plan for the province of Saskatchewan, then we can 

only surmise, Mr. Chairman, that what the minister has done to 

present is purely a political exercise, a purely political exercise 

which he is using to try and get Saskatchewan taxpayers off his 

back. 

 

Because, Mr. Chairman, ever since the budget delivered in this 

Assembly when every promise of that minister and his 

government was broken a short six months after the promises 

were made, we have seen nothing but an attempt to blame 

everyone else in the world for the problems that he is creating, 

problems that clearly show no consultation with Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

The questions that have been arising in this House over the last 

few days concerning issues such as FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) and the destruction of the Saskatchewan 

cattle feeding industry is a good example.  We have fuel 

dealers all over this province saying to the minister, we are 

faced with another day of work each month simply doing 

paperwork because we were not consulted on the best ways to 

cut down on slippage in fuel tax.  We have sector after sector in 

our society today saying, you know, if you'd only come and 

talk to us we probably could have pointed out ways to solve the 

problem or work with you in solving the problems that you 

have fiscally in this province. 

 

And it doesn't matter if it's optometrists or chiropractors or the 

44,000 women in this province that don't have a pension plan 

any more.  All of them have said to this minister and this 

government, if you simply would have come and talked to us 

ahead of time.  You didn't have to give us details.  Just come 

and ask us about our opinion on the goals that you're trying to 

achieve and we will do our best to work with you. 

 

We would have the Saskatchewan Pension Plan modified to the 

point where maybe the government match didn't occur for a 

while, where we as single, employable people, where we as 

people who work in small business, where we as people who 

do not have benefits that many other sectors in our society 

have, can work with you to help the province of Saskatchewan 

achieve its fiscal problems. 

 

And yet during questioning in these interim supply Estimates, 

the minister has repeatedly refused to acknowledge the 

contribution of groups like that; their suggestions and their 

willingness to consult.  And I think it was only appropriate, Mr. 

Chairman, that we in the official opposition place those 

questions on behalf of people like the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan holders, like the fuel dealers, like the people involved in 

livestock feeding, like the thousands of farmers in the province 

of Saskatchewan today who are taking the government to court 

because they weren't sent proper notification on the GRIP plan. 

 

Literally tens of thousands of Saskatchewan families are being 

affected by the decisions of the Minister of Finance and his 

government -- decisions made without consultation and 

decisions which I say to you, Mr. Chairman, are destroying the 

ability of Saskatchewan people to contribute, to contribute in a 

meaningful way to solving the fiscal problems that are in this 

province. 

 

People without work, people without hope, people with no 

clear direction have a difficult time being contributing 

taxpayers to our province.  If the 1,500 families that are 

associated with red meat production in this province lose their 

ability to contribute, we in effect, Mr. Chairman, will have to 

go and borrow money to replace those 1,500. 

 

And that, Mr. Chairman, will go on through segment after 

segment after segment of our society because decisions have 

been made without any consultation from a government that 

said, we will be new, we will start the healing process, we will 

talk to anyone before we make 

moves that affect the lives of Saskatchewan people.  And I 

guess of all the promises that were made last October, of all the 

promises that were made last October, that's probably the one 

that hurts Saskatchewan people the most. 

 

It's like a gentleman from Bethune that phoned me over the 

dinner hour.  He fed 200 head of feeder cattle last winter.  He 

hired two young individuals from the city of Regina who were 

laid off from their jobs last winter.  Those two individuals 

worked in that feed operation all last winter, continued to be 

contributing people to our society, and said that they would be 

back next winter if he was going to feed another 200 head of 

cattle. 

 

Well he said to me today, because of the decision of the 

Minister of Agriculture and his colleagues, that those 200 head 

of cattle aren't going to be in his feedlot because his margins 

were between 65 and $70 last winter, and after you take $42.50 

a head off each one of those cattle, that margin isn't there any 

more.  And he can't handle it himself and he can't afford to hire 

those two young fellows from Regina again this winter because 

of it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you are going to see that go on and on and on 

and on.  And I say to you, that isn't the way that we're going to 

solve our deficit problems in the province of Saskatchewan.  

And those people don't have the opportunity to contribute to 

solving the problem because it will take each and every one of 

us putting our shoulder to the wheel to solve that problem. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Chairman, we asked so many of the 

questions that we did in interim supply.  We're going to have a 

third of the budget expended before a single estimate is passed.  

That third of the budget being expended is affecting the lives of 

people like my young farmer from Bethune.  And it's affecting 

it over and over and over again. 

 

And that's why I say to the minister, the next time we do 

interim supply in this House, I think it would be appropriate if 

he was prepared to come and answer those questions, because 

we will by that time have probably a half of Saskatchewan's 

entire budget expended and we still will not have been through 

the Estimates of this House. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the official opposition is going to be watching 

this minister very closely.  This minister went to Washington, 

D.C. (District of Columbia) with a shelf filing early on this 

spring, a shelf filing that has the potential to borrow a billion 

dollars, U.S. (United States).  It cost the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers over $400,000 to prepare. 

 

It's very clear, Mr. Chairman, that we need to watch this 

Minister of Finance.  We need to watch these borrowings, and 

we need to know what he's doing with the money.  And if he 

has already borrowed on that shelf filing, then next time we do 

interim supply, we will be asking him those questions also. 

 

With that, Mr. Chairman, the official opposition has no more 

questions for the Minister of Finance. 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to move the second motion that is required under this 

procedure.  The motion I'd like to move is that: 

 

 Be it resolved that towards making good the supply granted 

to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993, the sum of 

$469,935,000, be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first time and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the 

resolutions read a first and second time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- 

 

 That Bill No. 44, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

Ending on March 31, 1993, be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly and under rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 3:12 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Wills Act 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete 

Statutes 

Bill No. 22 -- An Act to amend The Doukhobors of Canada 

C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act to amend The Auctioneers Act 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1993 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:15 p.m. 

 

(1515) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 13 -- An Act 

to amend The Adoption Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We just had some 

Bills passed through this legislature, and I'm glad to see that.  

But there's been some new Bills that we were talking about in 

question period today, four or five that aren't quite the same, 

and this is one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I feel that the members opposite should be in a disarray over 

Bills like Bill  13.  It is not all right, Mr. Speaker, to place the 

minister and her office employees above the law, and that's 

what's happening in this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  They're placing 

themselves as ministers about the law.  It is not all right to 

leave, once again, at the discretion of a minister the entire 

personal details of someone's family life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trend we have all been talking about is just as 

evident in this Bill 13 as it is in several other Bills introduced 

to this Assembly by this government.  And that trend, Mr. 

Speaker, is slowly taking civil liberties away from the people 

and replacing them in the hands of the minister. 

 

Ministers, Mr. Speaker, should not have this power.  Why, Mr. 

Speaker, should ministers have more power than the courts?  

Not only does this Bill threaten . . . 13, sorry, this Bill 13 give 

additional powers to the minister, Mr. Speaker, it actually 

places the minister, any officers or employees from the Social 

Services Department who have worked on specific adoption 

cases, above the law. 

 

This Bill actually states that the minister or any person in her or 

his department in a court of law does not have to give any 

evidence whether by oral statement or written information that 

they may have in their possession pertaining to a court case.  

Mr. Speaker, this is wrong -- absolutely wrong.  I thought this 

day would never come in this legislature when we see 

something like this. 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

What's more, it doesn't have to even be a court case, Mr. 

Speaker.  The minister, her employees, don't even have to give 

vital information if there is a hearing or any other proceeding.  

And this is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the members opposite: scrutinize their own Bills before 

they bring Bills like this before this House. 

 

Let's talk about blanket legislation, Mr. Speaker.  What 

happens if for instance there is a case before the court 

involving adoptive parents and alleged child-abuse problems?  

If the minister's office has information pertaining to this case 

which could decide something as basic as whether the couple is 

guilty or innocent, whether we are talking about the minister 

herself, an officer or employee of the Social Services 

department, or all three, Mr. Speaker, they don't have to bring 

any evidence before the court. 

 

Now this Bill is especially threatening, Mr. Speaker, in the 

event someone has been wrongfully accused of child abuse or 

something just as serious and the accused is not guilty.  What 

assurances are left to the accused, Mr. Speaker, that they can 

disprove false accusation and in turn clear their names?  What 

assurances do these people have that they can receive fair 

treatment through the justice system when the hands of the 

judge are tied by the Social Services minister? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministers opposite would only just look 

seriously at what they're doing here, is taking the power away 

from the courts and the judges and giving it to the minister.  I 

can't believe this is happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What happens when a couple is turned down for an adoption on 

the basis of a letter written by a person wrongfully accusing the 

couple of a wrong-doing?  And there's been instances like this 

that's happened.  Since this Bill was tabled, Mr. Speaker, I have 

instances where people have come to me saying that when they 

went to adopt children, someone came forth with information 

to try to cause harm to these individuals and the adoptions were 

stopped.  And it turned out they were not true. 

 

And they had to wait . . . when you wait two or three years for 

adoption and something like this happens . . . But in the past 

they've been able to come forth and prove they're innocent.  

And they now have their families in the cases that came to me.  

But in this case, under this new Bill, it would give no chance of 

recourse of law for these people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If this couple is able to dispute the letter, to find out who wrote 

it and why, then able to proceed with an adoption.  And that's 

what's happening.  I'm just giving a hypothetical case.  But 

that's what could happen.  But it has happened, but it turned out 

all right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It doesn't look like it from Bill 13, though.  In Bill 13, Mr. 

Speaker, this can't happen.  In fact if there is any sort of a 

hearing or even an inquiry, nobody from the Social Services 

department has to say a thing.  No one in Social Services has to 

tell where this letter came from, what information it entails, or 

anything else about the details that will affect this couple's 

lives. 

Mr. Speaker, when the member sitting beside me, the member 

from Rosthern . . . this couldn't happen when he was minister 

of Social Services, but now under this Bill 13 these kind of 

things can happen.  And that's why we're getting calls in our 

office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think very, very few people in the province of 

Saskatchewan really know about these Bills.  It isn't out there.  

Because this government does like they do with all things -- 

they do not consult.  They'll consult and tell the people after the 

Bill. 

 

Now if this doesn't sound ridiculous to the members opposite, 

they aren't thinking about how many people they will hurt in 

this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, there are very serious considerations to 

think about -- very serious cases that could easily come up.  

That is why, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary to make some 

changes in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, before it becomes law. 

 

I for one cannot support a Bill that takes the rights of a just trial 

away from an individual.  Never before in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, have we had the rights of the court . . . of a trial taken 

away from you.  And this is the rights are taken away from an 

individual, and this is wrong. 

 

I also could never support a Bill that could hurt so many 

people, Mr. Speaker.  And there are other concerns as well 

within Bill 13, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also find it interesting the government has to start advertising 

for adoptive parents.  Where has this government been, Mr. 

Speaker?  Anybody that wants to adopt children, it takes 

several years.  Now they must not know this because now 

they're going to start advertising for adoptive parents. 

 

Why is it necessary to spend money on advertising when 

couples already wait sometimes several years to adopt a child 

of their own?  That means, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

opposite who put these type of Bills together, that they're not 

even looking into the real situation. 

 

Is it really necessary to start a "parents wanted" section in the 

paper?  And I don't agree with it.  You don't have articles in the 

paper by the government Social Services: parents wanted.  

There's parents out there.  There's no end. 

 

If we could just stop abortions in this province, it would help a 

lot more yet.  And if we had a government that believed in 

controlling abortions, there would be many more children yet, 

because there was a . . . it usually runs around 2,000 abortions 

in this province a year.  And you wouldn't have any problems 

finding parents, Mr. Speaker.  The parents will come to Social 

Services looking for children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other adoption agencies aren't mentioned in the 

same category.  Who does this government think they are, Mr. 

Speaker?  Who do they think they are that only they in this Bill 

are the ones that's going to advertise?  Why didn't they put the 

adoption agencies in same category? 

 

While the Department of Social Services can advertise for 

prospective parents, why doesn't the government 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

mention that adoption agencies may also advertise?  Maybe it's 

because the government has no intention to allow independent 

agencies to advertise.  I don't know what the answer to this 

question is, Mr. Speaker, but I do know it is not clearly stated 

in this Bill, unless adoption agencies are not intended to be 

included. 

 

And those are some of the questions that we'll be asking the 

minister when he gets into Committee of the Whole.  We want 

this very, very clear.  Maybe the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

want to even monopolize babies like they're trying to 

monopolize every other aspect of private life for Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it hard to understand why the government 

finds it necessary to advertise in the first place.  While we are 

cutting millions of dollars from health care and education, why 

would we spend any money on advertising for parents? 

 

And these agencies are concerned, Mr. Speaker, because I have 

talked to some myself, and this is one of the many concerns 

they had with Bill 13.  From my own investigation, I can see 

very clearly that once again this government did not consult 

with anyone who will be directly affected by this Bill. 

 

And that's what this government's guilty of, Mr. Speaker; 

they're not consulting.  No matter whether we're talking about 

agriculture or no matter what it's about, whether it's about these 

Justice Bills that we're talking about today - 

_ the member from Moosomin brought up comments and he 

was talking about four or five Bills . . . and that's what the 

trouble is, Mr. Speaker; the government is not consulting.  

They haven't talked to the adoption agencies.  I've talked to 

some of them, and they have not talked to them.  They haven't 

held open meetings including adoptive parents and others who 

have been adopted themselves, Mr. Speaker.  They've done 

nothing but satisfy their own caucus, and that's not right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Back in 1980-81 -- I forget the year -- but this same 

government brought in a Bill to change The Adoption Act.  

And I'm so worried that maybe this is something the same kind 

of a Bill, Mr. Speaker.  You can't . . . when they're giving the 

powers to the minister, anything could happen.  And when this 

happened before, this Bill almost slipped through.  I wasn't the 

critic for it, but I got involved in it.  And so we started having 

meetings and we advertised throughout Saskatchewan what 

was happening, that they could retroactively open up adoption 

contracts.  They could retroactively open it up. 

 

So we got the word out, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province 

of Saskatchewan, and we had . . . there was approximately 

10,000 letters came to the minister of Justice.  And the then 

minister of Justice who is now the Premier of this province, he 

was . . . done the right thing and he pulled the Bill. 

 

Now that's what has happened in this case, Mr. Speaker.  The 

now Minister of Justice needs to sit down with the now Premier 

and discuss what they did in 1980-81.  I'm not sure, Mr. 

Speaker, of that year.  But they pulled that Bill because it was 

going to cause too many hardships and unhappiness for people. 

We'll use some examples.  If you have people that . . . we have 

many people in this province that could be 50, 60, 70 years of 

age, and their parents still could be living.  They could still 

have a mother living.  And when they adopted, they had a 

contract that there was no way they were going to find one 

another, but then in later years it got changed.  In later years, it 

was changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what I'm saying is that they should not be having retroactive 

legislation that can affect the lives of so many people.  If you 

had a contract that you signed when you adopted -- say in last 

5, 10, 15 years -- and they were different, well then leave it that 

way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They should not go beyond today.  Whatever today's law is . . . 

if they want to change the law on adoption, at least the parents, 

when they adopt their child, least they'll know, Mr. Speaker, 

these are the rules that we adopt under.  But don't take it back 

to people that are maybe . . . been adopted 50 . . . half a century 

ago and start advertising for one another because that wasn't 

their contract.  And this is quite serious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is not the sort of matter that should be decided by one 

minister.  No one minister should ever decide about the things 

that I'm talking about.  The Bill provides for this, for a very 

small group of people, Mr. Speaker, in his department.  So 

much for open and consultative government. 

 

He keeps talking about open government.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

this is not open government.  This is giving the powers to a 

minister.  Bill 13, Mr. Speaker, is just another extension of this 

government shutting the door to democracy, shutting to the 

very civil rights each person in a democratic country should be 

able to count on. 

 

Well I say to the people in Saskatchewan: look out because the 

NDP government has no respect for your rights.  Instead this 

government will stop at nothing until the government controls 

the private lives of each and every one of us. 

 

Now I'm sure the members opposite will get upset and say, yes 

we do care about civil rights.  But, Mr. Speaker, cry as they 

may, the proof is in what they're doing.  The proof is in their 

actions. 

 

How can this government claim to care about civil rights when 

they're trying to give ministers the power to bust into any 

building or land he or she chooses?  Mr. Speaker, even an 

RCMP today would have to have legal permission from the 

courts or whatever to be able to go in on a drug bust.  They 

can't even go into a person's house without . . . or possession of 

his buildings, but now under some of these Bills they've got, 

they can just walk over anybody to do what they want. 

 

(1530) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to raise a point of 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes.  What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the rules in this Assembly 

require that individuals restrict the use of lap-top computers to 

the Committee of the Whole or Committee of Finance, and I 

notice the member from . . . the Associate Minister of Finance 

is using his.  I wonder if the Speaker would rule on that? 

 

The Speaker: -- The member just caught me in the act of 

writing a note to the Associate Minister of Finance and 

reminding him about the rules and procedures, Rule No. 17, 

which clearly states: 

 

 that lap-tops be permitted for use in Committee of the Whole 

and Committee of Finance only; 

 

and I ask the Associate Minister of Finance to please remove 

the lap-top computer from the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To continue, how 

can this government claim to care about civil rights when 

they're trying to give ministers the power to bust into any 

building?  I am repeating that, Mr. Speaker, because the point 

I'm making is that the present laws, the RCMP don't have as 

much rights to go and break into places, to search for drug 

busts and prostitution, things like this that are of a serious 

nature -- they have to have search warrants. 

 

Now under this new government and their Bills, some of the 

Bills they're bringing forth, they'll have the rights to go and do 

what they want.  It's not right, Mr. Speaker.  How can they 

pretend to care when they are giving ministers the right to 

release any personal information they feel like whether on 

television, radio, NDP Party letters, anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can they claim to care about individuals 

when they are putting legislation forward that will put 

retroactive laws into effect for almost 20 years.  I touch on this 

further in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and the first part of my 

remarks.  And this is serious.  You start bringing retroactive 

legislation where you can go back 20, 30, 50 years. 

 

Like I said, I know of cases of adopted people that are 60 years 

old, and we don't know, they could easily have a mother living, 

and their contracts were not able to go retroactive that time, 

and I don't think this is right.  I know in some cases people say, 

well we like to find our ancestors, and all that.  And it's quite a 

controversy.  But a contract is a contract.  And I don't think that 

this government should be allowed to go back and give the 

minister the full right to have a sweeping power over the 

people of Saskatchewan.  They may affect a lot of lives and 

cause a lot of unhappiness. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the public sees what is happening and the 

NDP are taking very serious steps.  I would like to warn the 

members opposite of their actions.  The people of this province 

don't like Bill 13.  That's just a few that we've talked to.  Wait 

till the whole province finds out about it.  They'll get their 

10,000 letters again. 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite already know they are a 

one-term government.  The member from Regina North even 

said so recently on a radio interview.  If you want to be around 

in 10 years or in 5 years, for that matter, if the career politicians 

over there still want to have a career, reconsider now what you 

are doing.  Only then, Mr. Speaker, will there even be an NDP 

Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking purely from the free enterprise point of 

view, it would be nice to no longer have any NDPers running 

this province.  But I'm sure the members opposite don't share 

that same view.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I guess the NDP can 

consider themselves forewarned.  And they can also expect to 

be receiving lots more angry phone calls -- many, many more. 

 

They will hear . . . They will not be able to put these Bills 

through.  They'll get them through.  If they have to move 

closure, they'll get them through.  They'll get them through, Mr. 

Speaker, and then they'll inform the people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I'm doing my best out there and that's why I 

asked for an adjournment a few days ago on this Bill, because 

I'm trying to get the word out to people.  And I haven't 

contacted anyone, not one individual or group of people, that 

believes that Bill 13 is the best for the private individual in this 

province of Saskatchewan, the best thing for their lives. 

 

Bill 13 is evidence of it, and there is much more evidence.  

That is plain to see for anyone, Mr. Speaker.  It is impossible 

for people who have fought to be able to live in a democratic 

society to watch their civil rights go down the tubes.  The 

people have to be the ones making their own choices, not an 

NDP minister. 

 

And I'm so afraid, Mr. Speaker, that once this Bill passes . . . 

And I don't believe for one minute that the Minister of Social 

Services means any bad intent by this Bill.  I don't believe she 

really does.  I don't believe that she really understands . . . She's 

been new, she's only been . . . never was elected till last 

October, and now she's the Minister of Social Services.  She's 

being directed by someone in the department.  And I don't 

think that the back-benchers around sitting in here today, if 

they got serious about this, would not want to give the right to 

any minister.  It may affect their own families and their own 

constituency.  It has to. 

 

If these people would go out and talk to their own individuals 

in the community and say: do you believe in retroactive 

legislation which could make retroactive adoptions come forth . 

. . The member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, nods his head in 

agreement . . . not agreement with what I said; agree that they 

agree with retroactive legislation.  So we have it on the record, 

Mr. Speaker, that they agree with retroactive legislation.  They 

believe it in the GRIP program, they believe it almost . . . many 

Bills have come down; they believe in it. 

 

Do they understand?  I'm going to give you an example, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'm going to tell you just what it means to my own 

family.  My wife is 58 years of age -- she doesn't probably be 

too happy with me that I just put her age out in the world today, 

but I don't think she'll mind -- but she's an adopted girl. 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

And they adopted under a contract that there is no way that her 

parents that brought her up and took care of her until they 

passed away . . . that there was any way of ever opening up a 

document to ever find her real mother.  Her mother . . . my 

wife is 58.  She could easily have a mother living in this city of 

Regina or she could be living in Manitoba -- she could be 

living.  It's not right that we see an ad in the paper asking for 

Helen Duff to come forth; your real mother wants to see you.  

That is wrong, Mr. Speaker.  And that's what this Bill will 

allow. 

 

And then another example in my family.  That's a contract that 

was made in 1933.  And then I have a son and a 

daughter-in-law that adopted one of their three children 11 

years ago.  The contract was different.  They will have the right 

-- they knew that when they signed -- that they know where the 

mother of their child is at.  They know what town she was at, at 

the time of the adoption I should say, Mr. Speaker.  And they 

know that if either one comes forth and they're both agreeable, 

that they can get together, the mother, after this child is of age.  

But they adopted under that law, under that contract, and they 

must live with that and they adopted that way. 

 

But I'll tell you, anyone that was under the old law didn't do 

that.  And this is breaking contracts and this is playing with 

people's lives.  This is serious, Mr. Speaker.  And I know that 

this is the same thing that this government was going to do in 

the early 1980s, just before they lost government.  And now, 

like I said before, the now Premier of this province, when he 

got all these letters, pulled the Bill. 

 

So I'm asking, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I'm asking that this 

government and the Minister of Social Services not bring this 

Bill back into committee until they go out and consult with the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan to see what their 

feelings are, to see what they want.  Please don't bring it back 

because we will be very upset on this side of the House if that 

Bill comes back into committee and more likely will go into 

committee today. 

 

We're not going to talk about it.  I have another colleague that's 

going to be talking about it.  And from what I understand, we're 

going to let it go into committee.  But I'm asking the Premier 

and the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Social Services, 

please don't bring it back into committee until they do their 

homework, please. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My colleague, 

the member from Arm River, has made some very important 

points today.  The Bill before the House today troubles me 

greatly.  Mr. Speaker, it also troubles many of the people that I 

have talked to in the past week which directly affects their lives 

which is directly affected by this legislation. 

 

Bill 13 confirms once again that this government, this NDP 

government, has no respect for individuals or individual rights, 

Mr. Speaker.  If they did, the NDP would have respected the 

wishes of individuals when they voted 

on plebiscites in the provincial election.  If the NDP respected 

the individual, Mr. Speaker, they would not be basing the gross 

revenue insurance program on an entire group of producers; it 

would still be based on each individual farmer.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, if he NDP had any respect at all for individual rights, 

they would not be doing what they are doing today. 

 

If the members opposite have any respect whatsoever for basic, 

fundamental rights, there is no way Bill 13 would be written as 

it is before us today.  Because this Bill throws the rights of the 

people of Saskatchewan right into the lap of the minister 

responsible for Social Services. 

 

The very basic right of privacy exists no longer because we 

have a government across the way today that doesn't think it is 

important.  Once again the bottom line is that the minister has 

the final say, period -- whatever she thinks is appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It used to be that a person in this province had a right to choose 

what private information they wanted to become public, if any.  

That's the way it should be, Mr. Speaker.  The right to privacy, 

Mr. Speaker, is a right no government, no one, should be able 

to strip away from any citizen in a democratic society.  But 

then again we are talking about the NDP Party and its MLAs 

who, when the freedom of information Act was introduced, 

voted against it.  They voted against freedom of information for 

individuals at first and then finally caved in to pressure. 

 

But the NDP through Bill 13 is trying to strip people from their 

right to privacy, Mr. Speaker.  Just think of those individuals 

who are adopted themselves, or parents who have given 

children up for adoption, who do not want any aspects of their 

private life exposed.  Just think of a mother who is 30 years 

old, who was an adopted child herself and is quite happy with 

her life the way it is and has no interest in knowing who her 

birth parents are.  She has no choice in the matter, Mr. Speaker, 

if the minister decides to divulge the information. 

 

Last week I heard from a woman that was one of the protesting 

parents the last time the NDP tried to pass this sort of 

legislation.  She is directly affected because she has two 

adopted children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 10 years ago this mother was so upset about 

her children losing their rights to privacy, and thousands of 

other parents and children too, that she took it upon herself to 

inform as many people as she could and hundreds of them 

signed petitions urging the government to change their mind.  

Over 10 years later, Mr. Speaker, she still has those petitions 

because she had heard the NDP would do the same thing again 

if they were given the chance to form government. 

 

Over 10 years later, here we are.  I guess it is true the NDP 

never change. 

 

When the NDP tried to pass very similar legislation when they 

were government way back when, they didn't do it.  There were 

groups and individuals concerned about this very issue that 

signed petitions and lobbied the NDP to reconsider.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, for whatever reason the NDP stopped the Bill back 

then. 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

Watching events unfold in this House today, I know it wasn't 

based on the rights of the individual, so it must have been 

something else.  Nevertheless, it did not go through.  That is 

exactly what should happen to this Bill.  As you can see, Bill 

13, if it passes as is, will cause hardship for many, many 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill 13 even goes a step further -- a step more dramatic.  I 

know that many people are concerned about the control this 

Bill places on the court's right to hear evidence.  It actually 

denies the courts in section 21.1 any access to evidence in the 

possession of the government that might bear on such basic 

questions as the guilt or innocence of an accused.  Instead only 

the member from Saskatoon Westmount, the minister 

responsible for Social Services, only she, Mr. Speaker, is 

trusted to be both judge and jury when it comes to the very 

personal aspects of other people's family life. 

 

(1545) 

 

It is hard to believe this makes sense to any person in this 

Assembly.  It is hard to believe the members opposite really 

have what is best for the people of Saskatchewan in mind when 

they are doing what they are doing.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, they 

don't have the people of this province in mind.  All the NDP 

care about is power -- more and more power for the 

government and less and less for the individual. 

 

Bill 13 is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker, a tragedy.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

if the NDP care at all about basic civil rights, this Bill should 

not pass as it stands.  I ask the minister to withdraw the Bill and 

consult with interested parties in this province.  If you will not 

withdraw the Bill, remove the offending portion of section 3 

which refers to the minister being allowed to release private 

information. 

 

Also remove section 21.1 which protects the minister and her 

agents from providing evidence to a court concerning any of 

their statements either written or oral.  Mr. Speaker, I ask that 

the minister withdraw the Bill and make the necessary changes 

to protect the individual rights of the people of Saskatchewan.  

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 14 -- An Act 

to amend The Child and Family Services Act be now read a 

second time. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

have a number of concerns about the amendments that your 

government is proposing in regards to this Act.  Now some of 

the members opposite say this is a good Bill and I didn't read it.  

Well I did read it.  And maybe when we get further into this 

Bill, maybe we can get answers and they will be right, but 

maybe not.  But from what I see, what I see about it, it's 

serious. 
 

The most serious concern is the fact that this amendment will 

give the minister responsible sweeping powers.  Now 

any responsible minister across the way believes giving 

sweeping power to the minister . . . same as Bill 13 and some 

other Bills that have come down in this House; sweeping 

powers to the minister.  I'm not suggesting that the minister 

responsible will abuse these powers but I will say there's a 

great potential for abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not clear on why the minister or any 

government minister would need, at his or her discretion, to 

release confidential information on a client.  What 

circumstances would necessitate such an action? 

 

This power could be extremely dangerous, Mr. Speaker, 

extremely dangerous.  The minister may not fear mistakes 

being made, after all he or she would be exempt from legal 

ramifications.  That's the problem with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

that no matter what mistake that the minister makes, and the 

same in Bill 13, Bill 14 that I'm involved in, if they make a 

mistake or their deputies make a mistake or somebody in the 

department makes a mistake, there's no recourse because they 

cannot be brought back to court or whatever.  There is no 

recourse to get at them.  This damage may not go deep; it 

merely caused some sense of discomfort.  But it may cause an 

individual much more.  What about the individual, never mind 

the concern it may cause the department people, Mr. Speaker, 

but the cause it could cause an individual. 

 

Will information that is not justified or proven be released?  

Those are one of the questions that we have to have answered 

and we will have answered, I'm hoping, when it gets to 

committee.  Will information that is not justified or proven be 

released?  Now that's a serious thing to an individual. 

 

If an individual has been wrongfully accused of child abuse, 

are they at risk?  What about the individual out there in 

Saskatchewan?  And I agree that if there's individuals that are 

abusing children, they have to be taken care of, arrested or 

whatever.  But we've got so many cases, and there's been so 

many brought forth to me in the last while, where this wolf 

question comes in here -- which is telling the truth and which 

didn't.  And there has to be far more serious . . . we're going to 

bring, when we talk further about this, we'll be bringing many, 

many incidents to the minister, Mr. Speaker, about what Social 

Services is doing today and not handling their own powers 

today right. 

 

If they're not handling the powers they've got today in a right 

and proper manner, then what in the world would happen if 

they get more power to the minister?  What safeguard would be 

in place if a situation such as this occurred?  What protection 

would there be for individuals who fall through the cracks? 

 

I do not have to inform the Minister of Social Services that 

horrendous acts such as child abuse are not always cut and 

dried.  A simple adoption case may not be cut and dried.  

Custody cases sometimes take an ugly turn.  People's children 

are on the line and a parent will attempt to protect their young 

by all means at their disposal. 

 

Animals -- there isn't an animal that God placed on this earth 

that won't fight for their young.  And it should be the same and 

is the same with parents.  And in some cases and 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

in many cases throughout the world, we have to deal with 

parents that are abusing their children.  We have to help them. 

 

But we're going to get into a lot of details here, Mr. Speaker, in 

this Bill.  Could a mother or father's life be ruined by false 

information being released by the government minister?  

They're giving so much power to the minister, Mr. Speaker, 

that what if some of the accusations that somebody makes turn 

out to be false and if it goes public then it could ruin them for 

life.  It is so serious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There's a case in Regina here last week.  I'm not going to get 

into details on it because to protect the names involved, but I 

had a case come to me.  There's a case come to the member 

from Morse.  And these are serious, serious cases where 

individuals are being abused by the minister's office -- when 

I'm saying the minister's office I don't mean here in this 

building, Mr. Speaker, I mean the department, and I call that 

the minister's office -- because they're not living up to their 

own rules and regulations. 

 

So if, Mr. Speaker, that we give this power to the minister, and 

they can't handle what they've got now, what in the world 

would happen if they had full sweeping powers?  Could a 

mother or father's life be ruined?  Yes of course it could.  False 

information could ruin them, ruin them for life.  So that's why 

we have to shudder here in this here room here to think what 

this is all about. 

 

We just can't have these Bills go sweeping through and not 

discuss it.  Because I'm going to ask all people, all people in the 

government's side, the back-benchers, to look at it very, very 

seriously to make sure they're right.  To consult -- which is not 

a habit of this government to consult -- consult the same as I 

said in Bill 13, consult with the people now, before the Bill. 

 

You heard me say, Mr. Speaker, how we . . . and I was the 

individual that got it going throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan in 1980-81.  And I give great credit to the now 

Premier who was minister of Justice then, that he pulled that 

adoption Bill, and it wasn't near as bad as this Bill.  These Bills 

give power to the minister. 

 

And I'm sure that if the members opposite will go back and talk 

to the people in their ridings and ask them and then go talk to 

the now Premier, who was minister of Justice, that these two 

Bills, Bill 13 and Bill 14, will be pulled.  I guarantee if they go 

and ask. 

 

But don't do like they did with the GRIP program, Mr. Speaker.  

They changed the GRIP program and then had the meetings.  

They had meetings throughout the province.  They started 

talking about changes in GRIP back as early as December and 

then they had the month of January, February, and March and 

then they started having meetings at the end of March and 

April telling the farmers of the change.  They should have had 

it before. 

 

The same thing in these two Bills.  They must, and I plead with 

them.  For our sake as a Tory caucus over here, it's better for us 

that they don't because it turns people against them.  But that's 

not what I'm talking about.  We're talking 

about the lives of people.  So I'd rather have the lives of people 

protected even if we had to leave you there for years, for ever, 

if you can protect the lives of people.  But you're not going to 

stay there if you walk over people like you are in these Bills. 

 

Another concern is how this information would be released, 

Mr. Speaker.  How would it be released?  A line to be added 

reads: "The information mentioned . . .  may be released in any 

form that the minister considers appropriate."  Well now that 

has got to be more than I can take, Mr. Speaker . . . any way 

that the minister sees appropriate. 

 

Now I do believe that the minister responsible for Social 

Services means no harm in this Bill.  But I do believe that, like 

I said for Bill 13, that she's inexperienced and their department 

people have brought the Bill forth. 

 

And I plead with them to go back and talk to the experienced . . 

. There's some experienced cabinet ministers in the front row.  

There is a few.  The House Leader, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Elphinstone is an experienced member.  We have the 

Minister of Justice who was here for four years -- not that 

much experience, but he has got some.  And he's an individual 

that should be sitting down and going through the details. 

 

But I doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this caucus is . . . It's such a large 

caucus that I wonder if it even gets to that caucus till it goes 

through the details.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they have a 

committee that goes through every detail in every Bill that 

comes and then reports back.  I wonder if they do.  I ask that 

question. 

 

Confidential information on someone may be released in any 

form that a minister considers appropriate.  Now if that doesn't 

bother the ministers and all the members opposite, well then it's 

more than I can understand.  How did they get elected if that's 

the kind of thinking they've got?  And if they keep on thinking 

that way, there is no way that they're going to get elected again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to bring this point in now . . . and I don't 

think it's the wrong time because I'm going to relate it to the 

Bills; it's the Bills like this.  I had an individual contact me 

yesterday and ask me to leave this Assembly and want to talk 

to me for an hour.  And she said where she lives in Regina, in 

some kind of a large housing area, and she said there was only 

two windows that didn't have NDP signs at election time.  And 

the people in that building today are organizing petitions to 

deal with this government because they are hurt.  They are 

angry.  And that is absolutely honest fact.  The lady asked to 

have her name not mentioned because she doesn't want it 

brought forth, but it will in time. 

 

If this amendment is passed and we are to see news releases go 

out on clients involved with Department of Social Services, is 

that what we'll see?  I ask the government members opposite, 

carefully consider what they are proposing.  Is it necessary to 

transfer all of this power to the minister?  Is it necessary?  If 

they've got some changes in the Bills that they want to change 

in The Adoption Act and in The Child Care Act, if they've got 

some changes, Mr. Speaker, make some changes and let's 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

talk about that.  But why give all the power to the minister? 

 

I know what the minister's going to say because they'll be 

talking to her. She'll get her advice.  Like I said, she's not 

experienced.  But she'll get advice from her fellow colleagues 

that are experienced.  And they're going to say, oh well.  Mr. 

Speaker, what they'll say is, we'll not use those powers. 

 

If they're not going to use those powers, don't put them there.  

They said, oh, we'll never use them.  Now I'm warning, Mr. 

Speaker, warning each and every individual in the province of 

Saskatchewan, what this government is doing is giving 

sweeping powers to ministers. 

 

The now Minister of Justice is a clever individual and I'm sure 

he's decent enough.  If he's the one that could understand this 

Bill . . . I'm absolutely sure that he's been so busy in this last 

few weeks . . . he's been so busy that where would he get time 

to go through the details of these Bills that give sweeping 

power to ministers. 

 

So I'm going to ask him, Mr. Speaker, to do what the minister 

of Justice did . . . to do what the minister of Justice did in 

1980-81.  As I said, I wasn't sure of those dates.  That when the 

letters came in from the country, the province of Saskatchewan 

-- approximately 10,000 phone calls and letters -- and the then 

minister of Justice pulled the Bill. 

 

So I'm going to ask the Minister of Justice: will he look very 

carefully at these two Bills?  He will look very carefully and 

consider, and, Mr. Minister of Justice, I ask you to look very 

carefully to consider how it affects the lives of people.  And I 

trust you to do that. 

 

(1600) 

 

These Bills, Bill 13, Mr. Minister, went into . . . is going to go 

into committee; we let it go.  This one here, we're going to ask 

you to hold onto for a while yet.  But we're asking not to bring 

it into committee until you've consulted with the people.  This 

is too serious.  You maybe affected the lives of people when 

you let . . . when you consulted with the people and the farmers 

over the GRIP program after the fact.  But in this case, please 

do not do it after the fact.  I want the minister to understand the 

seriousness of that Bill 13 and the seriousness of Bill 14.  They 

go hand in hand.  I ask the government members opposite to 

carefully consider what they're proposing. 

 

Have any third-party interest groups been consulted on this 

amendment?  Mr. Speaker, I ask them: have they consulted 

with third-party personnel on this amendment?  I doubt if they 

have.  But I'm pleading again very, very sincerely to consult, 

do what they haven't been doing on other things as government 

been doing, consult. 

 

Just don't stand up in this legislature and say that sweeping 51 

per cent of the vote gave us that power.  That 51 per cent of the 

vote did not give you the power to do the things you've been 

doing. You've changed and affected the lives of people.  Have 

the members opposite even asked one individual who has been 

adopted, who has been a victim of abuse if they agree with this 

amendment? 

If on any Bill, Mr. Speaker, consultation must take place, it's on 

this one.  It must.  The magnitude of what is being proposed is 

overwhelming.  Have you sit down . . . has the Minister of 

Justice and the Minister of Social Services sit down and discuss 

this with the RCMP, the people that are involved, all the 

personnel in Social Services that are involved day to day with 

child abuse? 

 

Because child abuse out there, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, I 

do believe it's serious.  And there's so many things happening 

in people's lives today.  The economy is affecting people and 

they seem to be doing things that they normally wouldn't do. 

And those people must be controlled for the sake of the 

children.  But what also must be protected is the innocent 

parents and the innocent people and the innocent children.  

They must also be protected. 

 

There has to be a balance, Mr. Speaker.  There must be a 

balance.  And it's not up to us on this side of the House to bring 

in the laws that does put that balance in place, it's up to us to 

pressure you to do it. 

 

So I ask the government opposite to bring in Bills that protects 

the balance of the people on both sides.  I'm not asking this out 

of distrust for the Minister of Social Services, not in the least.  

I'm not doing that.  I know that she is an honourable member.  

But I do ask this on behalf of those individuals that it will 

affect.  We've said what it may affect to all the members in the 

back benches and all the members that's in government, each 

and every one in this building because we'll be the ones 

contacted.  But on behalf of all the individuals . . . I know that 

the numbers will be large, Mr. Speaker.  I know they will. 

 

I would ask that the members opposite consider the potential 

harm that amendments such as this could cause.  I would ask 

that for a moment you put yourself in another person's shoes.  

Perhaps one of you may have experienced a situation such as 

this.  Perhaps one of you may have been wrongfully accused in 

some instance -- just think in your own lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite to think any time in 

your life if you've ever been wrongly accused, the feeling that 

it does to you.  How can it affect you in your community if 

you've been wrongly accused?  And as you'll be . . . some of 

you are new MLAs and some are experienced MLAs that have 

been here for a while.  You must know what happens yourself.  

When you're wrongly accused out there publicly -- because 

you're in the public's eye -- think how you feel.  Now think 

how people that we may feel that . . . the instance that we'll 

bringing forth, the member from Morse and myself and the 

member from Rosthern.  I know we've all got cases that we'll 

be bringing forth where parents and families were not handled 

in a right and proper manner.  I want you to know how they . . . 

think how they might feel. 

 

Perhaps any one of you may have experienced this situation.  

I'm sure you have in your life, and I ask you to consider very 

carefully.  Consider in your heart just what this may do to 

individuals.  Would you want the confidentiality of this 

information to be at government ministers' discretion? 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

If you have something out there, Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite have something happen that they're wrongly accused 

and it gets to be public information, and you've got no recourse 

through the courts to come back to protect yourself.  The 

minister has it all.  Just like we say the member from Canora 

sitting there or the member from . . . or any place, that if 

something happened in their life, in their own constituency or 

in their community, and they're wrongly accused by the 

minister's office -- something that's happened -- they have no 

recourse to come back to protect themselves because the 

minister's office has got more power than the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, on Bill 13 we let go and we'll discuss 

it in committee, but we ask them not to bring it back until 

they've consulted.  And now, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill I'm 

asking for a second adjournment on this amendment until 

appropriate consultation has taken place.  I'm asking them to 

adjourn it again until we have consultation from the people 

opposite. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have to remind the member that there 

is nothing in the legislative rules that permits one member to 

adjourn twice, so either the member continues to speak, or 

another member, or the question will be asked. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand the 

rules, and so we'll have many questions to ask in committee.  

Mr. Speaker, we'll have many questions.  We'll be asking in 

committee many, many questions, but I want to leave it this 

way.  Please, on Bill 13 and Bill 14, don't present it back in 

committee until you've gone out and consulted and come back 

with the answers. 

 

But more so, I want to close with this statement.  I'm asking the 

now Premier, who was the minister of Justice in 1980, and the 

new Minister of Justice to talk it over with the Minister of 

Social Services and pull Bill 13 and Bill 14. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 19 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 19 -- An Act 

to amend The Contributory Negligence Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 20 -- An Act 

to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 23 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 23 -- An Act to 

amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 24 -- An Act to 

amend The Queen's Printer Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members will recall from the last 

week that the official sitting beside me is Ms. Shiela Bailey, 

chairman of the Public Service Commission.  Behind her is 

Ray Smith, who is executive director of employment services, 

and behind me is Mary Kutarna, who is the director, 

administrative information services division.  Those are the 

officials. 

 

I have as well, Mr. Chairman, the response to questions raised 

by the member at the last session.  And I will . . . thank you.  

I'll ask the page to give me some assistance, if I could.  Table 

those. 

 

The Chair: -- Is item 1 agreed? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You would wish.  You will wish. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the minister opposite 

would just wish that I didn't get to my feet. 

 

The first question I'd like to ask him, Mr. Chairman, is you're 

responsible for the SPMC and also Public Service Commission, 

and it may not be appropriate but I want to ask the question 

why we didn't finish SPMC that night and we just . . . I just quit 

asking questions and all of a sudden in come PCS.  Why did 

that happen, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You are right, it's not appropriate.  

But I will answer it anyway.  The members opposite will know 

that traditionally just opposition members ask questions in 

Estimates.  But any member of the Assembly, government or 

opposition, can ask questions. 
 

I had been told earlier that some members of the government 

benches wished to ask questions and I adjourned the . . . and 

they weren't here that night when we finished, so I just 

adjourned them to permit the 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

members to bring forth their questions at a time when they 

were present. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  I just was wanting an 

explanation for that.  Mr. Minister, I was a little bit surprised 

that night because we asked our last question and all of a 

sudden PCS was there.  We didn't go through the books. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And we've got lots more now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So now after this . . . now we've got so 

many questions that we'll have to take that long again because 

I'm sure we can come up with several hundred more questions.  

But the minister answers questions so good that won't be a 

problem. 

 

And forgive me, Mr. Minister, if I ask you the odd question, 

because as you can see I had two Bills this afternoon and PCS . 

. . I went and got my folder and I haven't got the Hansard and I 

didn't get a chance to read . . . I may ask you the odd question 

that was asked before. 

 

But I'm sure I did ask you for your minister's staff and I'm sure 

you gave that to me.  And then I asked you for a list of . . . I 

didn't ask you for their titles, and salaries, job descriptions, or 

education, employment history, including their last place of 

employment.  I don't think I asked you that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You did ask that and you've already 

been supplied with that information. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I don't think I got their employment history, 

Minister, was on that list. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Okay, good. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll go through our 

material.  As I said, I may be asking you some questions on the 

start here that I do have the information for. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you have any persons working on personnel 

service contracts? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  The Premier stated this 

government's position on that.  People who work and assist 

ministers will be in the minister's office, accounted for 

appropriately in Executive Council, as is the appropriate case.  

We will not, as you people did, have all kinds of people 

squirrelled away working on contracts.  There are none for me.  

And I can say, Mr. Minister, for the benefit of your colleagues 

who may come on subsequent Estimates, there are none in this 

government. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well you can say that, Mr. Minister, but as 

you know, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, that you did 

change your stories quite a few times the other night.  You're 

the one that said it was absolutely never was a political firing 

or political hiring, and then later on that same night you said 

well . . . When I got you backed into corner, Mr. Minister, you 

know very well that you said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well, we all know.  We heard the House Leader yesterday.  He 

said, well it's common 

knowledge, common sense that we all know that we have some 

political hiring.  Well we know that.  We all know that.  All 

governments have done that.  But what did you misrepresent 

me for so long by saying we didn't have any.  We didn't have 

any. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate, Mr. Chairman, that when 

I'm asking questions that the minister wouldn't keep answering 

as I'm talking.  He will not keep quiet.  If he wants to have the 

floor, let him talk the clock out. 

 

But what I'm asking, Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate that 

he's not answering while . . . He'll get the chance to answer.  

Please let me ask and not always keep chirping away from his 

seat.  I know he's so anxious and so full of vim and vigour 

because he was kept out of cabinet.  And he was so down he 

couldn't smile around here, and all of sudden he doesn't need . . 

. his feet don't even touch the floor any more when he walks 

around this building.  He's happy.  You see him smiling there 

now.  And I know that he wants to get up and talk, so I'll ask 

you questions and please give me the chance to, all right. 

 

Now to the rest of the Public Service Commission I want a list 

of the actual names of any persons who were terminated, their 

salaries, and the standard information about those individuals.  

Now you gave me that list.  You gave me some of that list, but 

there are some things that I didn't get, I don't believe I've got 

because I ask . . . I said I'd apologize if I do double up on 

questions and your staff will know whether I've already got it 

here or not.  And I'm sorry that if I do double up. 

 

But as you know, that night we were only in here 20-25 

minutes, and we got into a little bit of discussion and kind of 

threw us all off kilter.  So we don't know what we asked, what 

we got or anything that happened. 

 

You understand what I'm asking for is not at all a difficult 

matter.  In each case where we discuss an individual, I want 

you to provide me the job title that's on all that list.  I don't 

believe all the stuff is on there, and I don't expect you to give it 

to me today because I've got a long list that I want to read off 

here.  And you're pretty near going to have to . . . I can give 

you a list in writing.  When I'm through with this, I'll have 

them just give you a photocopy, or you can wait till Hansard 

gets out to get it back to me or whatever. 

 

A job title, a job description, complete compensation details 

including salary, expenses, allowances, special payments, and 

so on; the length of time employed including the date the 

person first started to work for the department.  If a new 

employee, the employment record including the last place of 

employment, employment qualifications including education.  

Where contract exists, copies of those contracts, the physical 

location of the person's place of employment, where they 

actually did their work.  If a new employee, the name and some 

details for the person they replaced.  If terminated, why this 

position was terminated as opposed to some other position.  

What was the process and the resulting rationale for getting rid 

of the employee or individual or person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm quite prepared to 

do my job.  I do object to having to do the 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

work of the opposition as well, which is what the member is 

asking me to do. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh, yes.  The member's asking . . . 

the member's repeating his questions.  The very least one 

would expect is that the member would know what he's got and 

go from there and not repeat the questions. 

 

In part you've got . . . We have given you the information from 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  If you're 

wanting details with respect to who was deleted, why they were 

deleted, who was terminated, why were they terminated, etc., 

etc., that will have to be asked of the department.  That's not 

information within the purview of the Public Service 

Commission.  You'll have to ask that with respect to each 

minister who comes forward.  We just don't have that 

information.  We don't have all the information you ask. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't want the minister 

opposite getting up and say we should be reading our material 

when he just tabled the information.  It was handed to me while 

he was talking. 

 

So don't be so ignorant, Mr. Minister, to say that we aren't 

doing our business right.  And I mean absolutely ignorant -- 

that you would have the . . . You could see that the page took it 

over and left the information there.  Then you stand up and 

says, why don't the members opposite read their information?  

Do your homework.  Well then it's handed to me while you're 

talking. 

 

How do I know what's in this information?  I very nicely gave 

you the information I wanted.  Now I don't know whether it's 

there or not because I didn't read that long list off the other 

night.  There's no way I did.  Might have had some of it till we 

got into the other discussion.  But we'll go through this.  But 

you'll also have it . . . When I get through with this page of 

questions and I'll table it and you'll have the information or 

wait till Hansard comes out tomorrow. 

 

For those individuals terminated, Mr. Minister, I understand 

there are no job relocation assistance or counselling assistance.  

This, Mr. Minister, is a fundamental function of the Public 

Service Commission.  Why was this service denied the 

individuals in question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if we could just get 

someone to read the Hansard from last night's proceedings 

because we're going over this . . . There's no point in us 

standing up; we might as well just have someone read 

Hansard, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, those questions were asked and were responded 

to last night.  Now I regret . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In 

great detail; that's right.  A great deal more detail, I must say, 

than your government ever responded to those questions. 
 

I am happy to respond to them once.  I do get a bit testy when 

you ask the same question again and again and again.  I don't 

know whether the member is short of material or what you're 

short of, or whether you have not . . . but the questions were 

answered.  I say to the 

Opposition House Leader, he asked those questions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Fifteen minutes is all he had with you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't care how long he's had with 

me.  He asked those questions the other night; the information 

was provided in so far as we could.  And we've given you . . . 

we've given you what of that information we can.  So as I say, I 

don't mind, I don't mind answering questions.  But when the 

member repeats the questions, you can't expect me to respond 

in a very gracious fashion. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

you know that when we started that I told you that I would 

apologize if I had to double up on questions.  So don't go 

blaming me that I get your . . . just a few moments ago . . . 

there's no way that I have, when I'm asking the questions, that I 

can go through that and see if you really did give us the 

information or not.  Because in SPMC you said the same thing.  

We go back to our office and check through it, and you've 

answered about half the questions right.  You just answer what 

you want to answer.  That's all you do. 

 

Don't stand up here and try to think you can make fools of us 

because you can't.  You have tried it before in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, and it backfired before, and it will backfire again.  

Don't try to make fools of the opposition.  Don't try to make . . . 

don't try to make a fool out of me, Mr. Minister, by saying that 

I should've already . . . You think I've got a photographic mind 

that's supposed to be able to read this as it's passing through me 

and sitting on my desk? 

 

And I very nicely . . . We don't need to be arguing, we don't 

need the members back there yapping their head off either, 

we'll never get any place.  Mr. Minister, I'm trying to do this in 

a right and honourable manner, and I expect you to do the same 

thing.  If you treat me properly through these Estimates, I will 

give you the same . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we 

won't go too far on that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Will you provide, Mr. Minister, a list of all positions created 

since November 1, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am told by the officials that it is the 

Department of Finance that creates new positions, and the 

question should be asked of them in their Estimates, not here.  

So I'm told by the officials that's a proper question.  That's a 

proper enough question, but it should be asked in Finance 

Estimates. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker.  We're in the 

same snowballing that we got from the Minister of Finance on 

The Appropriation Bill.  If you think that . . . We're going to be 

down to one person pretty soon.  We'll go through all the 

Estimates, go through everything, and we're down to one 

person who answers it all, because you wouldn't answer 

anything. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I want to make it very 

clear, very clear that my colleagues have gone through the 

Hansards and you are the one that's mixed 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

up.  You're getting mixed up on questions I asked on SPMC 

because I did not ask those questions in PSC (Public Service 

Commission).  So you stand up and maybe get somebody to 

read your Hansard for you, Mr. Minister, and then apologize to 

me.  Will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I said with respect to the member's 

last question, there's nothing improper about the question.  It's 

reasonable enough except that we don't have that information.  

It's not PSC's job or responsibility.  That is the responsibility of 

the Department of Finance. 

 

If you want the list of people who were terminated and the 

reasons why they're terminated etc., etc., I said previously that 

must come from the departments themselves.  It's not 

information that PSC has. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, that isn't the last question I 

asked you.  In case that I was doubling up too much here 

because you were trying to confuse me, I turned the entire 

page.  I turned the entire page and so give my colleagues a 

chance to see if I did ask those questions because one thing that 

I will say, I have a good memory.  And I know that there's 

some double-up of questions.  There will be in all the 

Estimates. 

 

Those questions asked of SPMC -- you tried to insinuate that I 

asked them in PSC.   They have checked the Hansard and I did 

not.  So I asked you if you would apologize to me or give a 

comment of why you said that we didn't do our homework and 

you give me all that information.  Because I have four pieces of 

paper here with some names on; that's all I ever got the other 

night.  And then what was handed to me today.  And it's not 

was asked before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay, I may have misunderstood the 

member.  If you want a list of the positions deleted for PSC, 

that's what we gave you.  If you want a list of positions created 

in PSC, I'm told there haven't been any since November 1. 

 

I'm sorry.  I thought the member was asking for these questions 

government-wide.  If you're simply asking it with respect to the 

staff of the PSC, that's different.  I misunderstood the member's 

question. 

 

I think you've got the list of the positions deleted that was 

provided to you earlier in the day.  There have been no 

positions created in the PSC since November 1. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can 

you tell me whether Janet Abells was hired through the Public 

Service Commission or whether she was hired independent of 

the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- She's not an employee of the Public 

Service Commission and does not . . . was not hired and then is 

not employed by the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When the minister asked for individuals to 

come forward, did the Public Service Commission provide any 

alternative names for her to consider, or did she only consider 

the one? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm afraid I don't follow the 

member's question.  Did we only consider one position with 

one person with respect to what position? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The minister's assistant to the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You'd have to ask that of the Minister 

of Education.  We wouldn't have that information at all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you have any information as it relates to 

Duane Adams, deputy minister of Health?  Did that come 

through the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Department heads are order in 

council appointments.  You would have to ask that of the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about Mr. Garry Aldridge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did the Public Service Commission have any 

involvement in his hiring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- None at all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about Don Axtell, special advisor to the 

Minister of Health? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No he is . . . You'll get a chance to 

ask that.  There are Crown Investments Corporation or Crown 

Management Board Estimates.  He is working in the Crown 

Management Board, and in due course when those Estimates 

come forward -- as they will; there is a statutory grant to CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) -- you can 

ask those questions under CIC. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could you give . . . or maybe you have 

already given the response already.  If you haven't, I'd like to 

have it for Shiela Bailey, and whether she was initiated from 

within the Public Service Commission or whether she came 

from outside. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- She's worked continuously for the 

government since 1976.  If I'm not mistaken, we did give you 

the employment history of Ms. Bailey the other night. 

 

I'm told that that information was not . . . we did not give you 

the employment history.  She's worked for the government.  

But if you want to know where in the government she worked, 

there's no problem with that, and we undertake to supply that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We'd like to have 

that.  I'd also like to have . . . if there was any connection with 

the Public Service Commission dealing with Janice Baker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Can you tell us which department 

she's in. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Chief electoral officer. 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  We would have no connection 

with that.  That would be Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about Mr. Gary Beattie? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- He had a contract.  He was the acting 

chairman of the SPMC.  Again the Public Service Commission 

would have no connection with that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about Gary Benson, SEDCO executive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we would have no connection 

with that.  SEDCO is a Crown corporation reporting to Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about Reg Boyle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- He doesn't work for the Public 

Service Commission; that's all I can tell you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I'm asking is: does the Public Service 

Commission do any of the selection for hiring for the ministers' 

offices in any of the ministers that we have here today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, the Public Service Commission 

is not involved at all with the hiring of the ministers' personal 

staffs, either secretaries or ministerial assistants. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the Public Service Commission do any 

of the hiring or inquiring about the heads of Crown 

corporations or the heads of various departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, department heads are order in 

council appointments normally hired . . . the hiring process is 

through Executive Council.  The heads of the Crown 

corporations are hired through Crown Investments Corporation 

which as I stated earlier does have a statutory grant and will 

have Estimates, and you can ask those questions then. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I know that when I was 

the head of a Crown corporation, the Public Service 

Commission did in fact do the inquiries in relation to the 

investigation and providing names to bring forward for Crown 

corporations.  Is that a change of policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I'm informed by the staff that 

that policy has changed.  The presidents, CEOs (chief 

executive officer) of the Crown corporations are now hired 

under the supervision of Crown Investments Corporation.  PSC 

is not involved. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you give me a copy of that policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it's not their policy.  If you want 

to ask again in the Crown Investments Corporation whether or 

not there is a written policy to that effect, I will get the answer 

for you.  And if we have, we'll supply it.  But it's not something 

these people have . . . it's not something these people have; 

they're not involved at all. 

Mr. Martens: -- Well it's interesting, Mr. Minister, that you 

just mentioned earlier that there was a change in policy from 

the Public Service Commission.  And I wanted to know 

whether they had any letter that said that there would no longer 

be that involvement by the Public Service Commission. 

 

The second point I want to make is that Public Service 

Commission has generally been considered to be the 

non-political arm.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the kind of thing 

that you're possibly misrepresenting to this Assembly on the 

basis of what you've just said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh indeed, we all know how 

religious you people were about keeping politics out of the 

Public Service Commission.  It was an absolute article of faith 

when you were in office.  We all know that. 

 

I say in answer to your question, as distinct from your 

comment, there was no written policy that there wasn't . . . that 

the PSC was not going to hire people for Crown corporations.  

It is the approach of this government that that should be done 

in a thorough and systematic fashion, and there is a structure 

set up within Crown Investments Corporation to do that. 

 

Contrary to the approach you people took when we did your 

Crown Investments Corporation Estimates, when you didn't 

know the time of day -- And that's almost true; we didn't get 

any information from you.  When Crown Investments 

Corporation come before the Assembly this time, I intend to 

answer all of your questions.  So contrary to the way you 

treated us, we're going to be forthcoming with you when that 

comes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you said you were going to be 

forthcoming with the questions that we asked.  I'm going to ask 

you the question that you raised last Monday about the fact . . . 

when you were sitting there you waved the piece of paper that 

you later on tabled and a letter.  You said you had more 

information.  Would you table that too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't that I would . . . I would want 

some comment from other members of the Assembly, 

particularly the member for Arm River, before that's done.  

There are other material.  I'm not sure what's there.  I don't 

think I will undertake to table that without a discussion with the 

member from Arm River. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask 

you whether you would provide that to the member from Arm 

River, being that those are his personal files and that you would 

provide them to him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we'll certainly provide him with 

copies; we'll certainly provide him with the material. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, Mr. Minister.  We want the ones that you 

have provided to him, not copies.  We don't want it copied 

either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If you're asking for the material that 

we have, we can certainly return that to the member.  I think 

there's already been copies made, but we'll return 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

the material to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can we have that assurance that you'll do it 

within this week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We'll do it within this week. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll defer back to the member responsible for 

the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

my colleague from Morse asked a question about an individual 

I understood had worked for or was working for the 

Department of Education, and you said you had no knowledge 

or no connection with any hiring of the Department of 

Education.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If my memory serves me correctly, 

the person worked in the office of the Minister of Education.  

Those are not hired through the Public Service Commission at 

all.  The minister's personal staff is hired through a process in 

Executive Council, which I'm sure the Premier will be happy to 

share with you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I asked you a list of all 

positions created since November 1, 1991, and you said there 

were none.  So let's just change that from not to a list of all 

positions, of all personnel created since . . . or not created. 

 

We'll say you give me the list before of all the people that have 

been fired, replaced or whatever, gone or whatever.  I've got 

that long list here between 3 and 400.  Now there must be 

somebody taking over those jobs.  Can you give me how many 

positions got filled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The positions were -- I'm having a 

great deal of difficulty with this -- the positions were deleted, 

as I explained the other night.  Nobody filled them; the 

positions are gone. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Are you saying that the positions are gone in 

every single case, that there hasn't been one person hired in 

PSC to replace the individuals that you deleted?  There hasn't 

been one person hired in PSC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Nobody has been hired into the 

positions which were deleted, I think, by definition. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well then did you hire some individuals in 

new positions then?  Did you hire anyone period in PSC 

(Public Service Commission)?  Did you hire any new personnel 

at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In the PSC the only people we hired 

were two summer students. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- In Public Service Commission, Mr. 

Minister, how many people or personnel are involved in 

hiring?  Say going through resumes, whatever, how many 

individuals over there are involved in the complete 

department? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Twenty-six.  I gave you the answer 

but perhaps you didn't hear me.  There are 26 

people working in the Public Service Commission, all of whom 

in one fashion or another directly or indirectly are involved in 

hiring. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- In those 26 positions that are involved in 

hiring, looking at resumes or whatever, were those 26 people 

there prior to October 21, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Without exception. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could we have a list of those 26 names? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, their statement says that your 

government is having all job applications for senior 

government positions directed to the Premier's office rather 

than to the Public Service.  What is your reason for doing this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't think your information's 

accurate.  That would only be for the permanent heads and 

perhaps the associate deputy ministers.  But that is not accurate 

with respect to the hiring below that level. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that no 

senior -- my question was senior bureaucrats, senior civil 

servants, whatever -- that none of them are going through the 

Public Service Commission.  They are going through the 

Premier's office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I'm saying exactly the opposite.  

I'm saying with respect to order in council appointments, those 

quite properly go through Executive Council.  But it's only with 

respect to order in council appointments and none other.  

Otherwise they're being done through the Public Service 

Commission, as they ought to be and as the legislation 

provides. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- What about a senior position in Department 

of Education, Agriculture, or any department you want to think 

of.  Are you going to tell me that those people are not hired and 

put their application to Rural Development, to any department 

you want to think of, Environment, those applications must be 

coming through PSC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's correct for once.  

They're coming through PSC. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Maybe I'm correct for once, but I think 

you're wrong because you didn't answer me right or else you 

didn't understand me, Mr. Minister.  Because my question was . 

. . not orders in council.  I never said that.  My first question 

was on this topic that your government is having all job 

applications for senior government positions . . . a senior 

government position would be someone that's in the deputy 

minister's office of Agriculture or in senior positions in . . . The 

government's full of senior positions in every department.  

That's what my question was.  That is that going through your 

department or through the Premier's office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, I have difficulty figuring out 

whether the member is being wilfully obtuse or whether this is 

sincere. 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

The premiers and the Executive Council are involved in order 

in council appointments.  The out-of-scope employees are hired 

by the permanent head in discussion with the minister, as has 

been quite properly the case in this government and in the 

Blakeney administration but was largely violated when the 

members opposite were in office, I want to say.  In-scope 

employees are hired under the terms of the collective 

bargaining agreement, as what has been the case under the 

Blakeney administration, as is the case now, and as was 

sometimes violated when the former members were in office. 

 

We are following the prescribed rules.  There is no patronage 

system in this government.  Members opposite persist in 

believing that we're as bad as you are.  I say to members 

opposite that . . . 

 

(1645) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No one could be as bad. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Exactly, you took the words out of 

my mouth.  No one could achieve that pinnacle.  That will 

stand as a low-water mark for all time. 

 

You seem to be struck with the notion that we are doing the 

same thing you did, only you can't quite catch us at it, because 

-- your reason why you can't quite catch us at it -- because we 

don't engage in the same tactics you do.  We happen to believe 

in a professional, competent public service.  We are trying to 

build and create a professional, competent public service which 

is free of patronage. 

 

I know members opposite don't believe in those concepts and I 

know you never tried to achieve that.  But you really must try 

to get over your view that the whole world is as bad as you are.  

As the member from Quill Lakes quite properly said, no one 

will ever again achieve that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple of 

points here in relation to the observation just made by the 

minister, deputy . . . the toy minister. 

 

I'm going to ask you a couple questions about patronage.  What 

does the name Abells mean in patronage?  What does the name 

Archer mean in patronage?  What does the name Atkinson 

mean in patronage?  What does the name Banman mean in 

patronage, Mr. Minister?  And I'm only beginning.  This isn't 

even finished with the first page. 

 

You, Mr. Minister, and all of your colleagues are telling the 

whole world that you have no patronage. In your document 

which you had read here by the Lieutenant Governor, you 

talked about 580 people in boards and commissions.  What is 

that?  Is that patronage, or is that patronage?  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is what you keep putting down.  You said you weren't 

going to do it.  We never ever indicated to anyone that we 

wouldn't do it.  You said over and over and over and over again 

in the election that you would end patronage. 

 

As a matter of fact I has a poll captain for the NDP call my 

office in my constituency and ask me for a name of an 

individual who would provide for her an opportunity to 

represent herself as an application on one of your boards and 

commissions.  Have you ever sent that paper out to the 

province to investigate an opportunity for them to sit on boards 

and commissions?  When and where?  Why didn't you provide 

it to one of your own workers?  Why would she have to call my 

office? 

 

And then the second question is, Mr. Minister, when you did 

that, why didn't you allow the members of this Assembly and 

every member -- the member representing the Liberal Party, 

the members representing the Conservative Party -- become 

involved in that kind of thing.  You have over and over and 

over again mentioned in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, that you 

are not involved in patronage.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a 

direct contradiction to what you asked the Lieutenant Governor 

in this province of Saskatchewan to read in this Assembly. 

 

And you read it for yourself; 580 is the number that you said 

there.  And you said that over and over and over again.  We 

have lists and lists of people where there's public patronage of 

every sort all over the province.  And do you know what else 

you did?  You fired them all.  And if the officials adjacent to 

you were not a part of a political appointment that we left in 

this government over the years . . . and, Mr. Minister, over the 

years we left those people.  And I had deputy minister of 

Agriculture in this province who was a member of the public 

service since 1974.  He was actively involved in running the 

department and I never, ever questioned him.  Did I can him?  

No, sir, I did not. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'll tell you something else.  The associate 

deputy minister was exactly the same way, exactly the same 

way.  And, Mr. Minister, he served us in a serious fashion 

every day of the day that he worked for my department and 

each of the departments that were involved.  And that, Mr. 

Minister . . . He was hired in 1971 and if you want to dispute 

that, you go ask him. 

 

And I will say to you that the heads of the branches of every 

one of the Department of Agriculture were employed as a part 

of your administration.  And that, Mr. Minister, is also a fact, 

and I want to point that out.  We didn't treat the kinds of things 

. . . the public service the way have treated the public service.  

We didn't treat them that way. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I believe you need to owe the public of 

Saskatchewan an apology for that because you don't have any 

idea what you're doing to the public.  You go and can over 400 

people. 

 

You want to talk about patronage.  Let's talk about the Koskie 

family which you hired seven of them, I believe, in the time 

when you were government.  And you said, no, Mr. Minister, 

no to the people of Saskatchewan.  We will not allow 

patronage as a part of this . . . the symbol of employment in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  You said that over and over again, 

and you were elected on that basis.  And, Mr. Minister, you're 

totally wrong, and you're assuming that the public of 

Saskatchewan aren't fed up with it.  They are. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister . . . and I want to mention the member 

from Quill Lakes, his family is probably now on 



June 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

the dole again in the public service of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're 

talking about.  You're being hypocritical in every one of the 

points that you make about patronage.  And I want you to 

understand that we recognize this, and the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan recognize that also.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 

River, but before I do, I ask the co-operation of the House in 

maintaining order so that those who are making comments can 

be heard. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can't believe 

that we have the member from Morse stand up and give you 

the exact truth of what's happened in this province and you 

didn't even, you wouldn't even stand up and answer it. 

 

You and I were going to get along very well here tonight.  We 

were doing well until you got sarcastic about us and our 

political patronage.  There's never been a government since I 

was born as bad as you people have been in this last few 

months on political patronage.  It has never been anything like 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I was the Crop Insurance minister for three 

and a half years, and I'll tell you there was only one person that 

got removed from that department, and that's because of 

insubordination.  He absolutely wanted to be fired and picked 

himself $115,000 severance pay.  And the rest of them stayed 

there. 

 

I did exactly what the member from Morse did.  We didn't go 

clean them out.  Course there were some, and we admit it.  But 

you guys are just going blanket.  That would be all right.  You 

wouldn't get remarks from us if you wouldn't have said you 

wouldn't be doing it and said you're not doing it now.  You did 

it back in 1971.  The now Premier of this province was minister 

of Justice in 1971.  And a person that was my campaign 

manager to help me get elected was a person by the name of 

Jack Nichol, who some of the older people will know here.  He 

used to work for Ross Thatcher, the premier of this province, 

an EA (executive assistant).  And he was given 15 minutes . . . 

his picture was on the front page of the Leader-Post when Roy 

Romanow -- sorry, Mr. Chairman -- the member from 

Riversdale, the then minister of Justice, had someone go to his 

office, take his keys away, and was told to have it removed in 

15 minutes.  And that happened over and over again. 

 

And that happened since we've been . . . since we've lost 

government this last fall.  You've done that very same thing.  

You've gone in there with no heart whatsoever, and we did not 

do that.  We did not do that.  Now, Mr. Chairman, they can 

holler and they can chirp, they can try to out-holler me, but it 

did not happen. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  One 

of the advantages of committee is that all members have every 

opportunity to ask questions and make 

comments, and so we should pay respect to those who are 

speaking. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, members opposite, in 1982 when we did . . . we 

were talking about students the other night when we got into an 

uproar.  And the now Speaker of this House, his daughter or 

son had a job in a park in North Battleford, and I had an 

individual, a student job being appointed to that position, and I 

was asked:  do we remove his child or his student from that 

position?  And I said no, we won't do such a thing.  And I did 

not do it. 

 

When we took over government in 1982, Mr. Blakeney's . . . 

one of his children had a job in this government.  Did we fire 

her?  No, we did not. 

 

Did you give Mr. Taylor that same consideration?  Mr. Taylor 

should have lost his job, he was a political appointment.  I have 

no qualms with that.  But don't in the same day get a 

daughter-in-law of his, that wasn't even in the Taylor family 

when she got the position . . . she married into the Taylor 

family and you fired her without cause. 

 

Don't tell me that you aren't a bloodthirsty group of people, and 

you could care less.  And we wouldn't be making this here 

accusations over here, Mr. Chairman, we wouldn't be doing it if 

you wouldn't so sanctimoniously sit over there and said, we're 

not doing it.  We're not doing it. 

 

How long do you think you're fooling the media?  All you've 

got to do is read the papers every day.  They're talking about 

your . . . it's full of it about your political patronage.  It's full of 

it.  Read your own papers if you don't know what you're doing 

yourself. 

 

I have never seen anything like it in my life, of the 

misrepresentation that you people have done in this last few 

months you've been in government.  It has never happened 

before in history of this province.  It has never happened. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister . . . we could have got well on to 

the way of many questions being answered, we were doing 

quite well.  But he's not capable, he's not capable about that 

sarcasm coming over here.  I said to you, I will treat you like 

you treat me, and we will get the job done. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you just couldn't keep your political mouth 

shut.  You had to come after us and talk about how you Tories 

treated people.  Well, it's not true, it is absolutely not true.  We 

are condemned, I was condemned in the constituents of Arm 

River: why didn't you clean up those mess of bureaucrats?  

Why didn't you fire them?  Why didn't you get control of PCS?  

Why didn't you get control?  We didn't get control because we 

didn't believe in getting control like you people did.  You got 

control in 1971, you lost it in '82.  But you've admitted to me 

that 26 people that were hired in . . . that hired and fire people 

in PSC, you said that they're the same people that we left there.  

You've left that group of people there.  And I'm sure that when 

we get the answer from you that most of them were there 

before, unless they were retired because of their senior age.  

They were there prior to 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1992 

1982. 

 

You go over to the Department of Agriculture.  Go to the 

Department of Environment.  Go to Rural Development.  Go to 

Urban Affairs.  You go to all these departments and give us the 

list.  Either give us the list of all the people we fired in 1982 . . . 

and naturally I'm not going to be down on anyone, no 

government.  And I think it's right and proper.  I agree with the 

member from Elphinstone, the House Leader, that stood here 

yesterday and has said, of course we do political hiring.  Let's 

face up to it. 

 

He said he wants political people of his philosophy in his 

office.  Of course he should.  It's like an NDP that came after 

me in 1982.  Why have you fired 150 people -- 150 people.  He 

said, why did you do such a thing?  And I said, if you sold your 

farm and the hired man goes with that farm, and the philosophy 

of that farm was to cultivate six inches deep, and the new 

owner says three inches deep, well I'll tell you, the hired man 

either goes on the philosophy of the new owner or he's gone.  

And I agree that it should be that way in senior positions.  I 

agree that it should be. 

 

Your philosophy is a socialistic philosophy.  And you have 

your right to change them.  But don't have the arrogance, 

absolute arrogance, to say you're not doing it.  That's all we're 

talking about is your absolute arrogance. 

 

Now when we come back on -- we'll be back on in a few days 

or a few weeks or a month -- we'll be back on to Public Service 

Commission.  And I give you my word, I give you my word 

that you and I can finish it.  You talk about dragging this House 

on.  We got condemned yesterday about holding up the 

Appropriation Bill, for goodness sakes.  You bring it in two 

days before then, we had the Minister of Finance stand up here 

and say, we had cheques that couldn't get mailed on the 31st.  

That was an absolutely misleading the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan because he had to stand up and says yes, the 

payments went out. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 


