




















































Hansard: July 24, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1719 

 July 24, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it's my pleasure 

to introduce to you, and through you to other members of the 

Legislative Assembly, a young man from Kelowna, B.C. 

(British Columbia) who's in Regina checking out the 

University of Regina journalism course.  It's anticipated that 

Mr. Sinclair, Murray Sinclair, who's seated in the west gallery, 

will be entering the journalism course here at the University of 

Regina, an excellent course.  And I ask all members to help me 

and welcome our guest from Kelowna and hope he enjoys the 

journalism course here in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, two 

constituents of the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency.  Marianne 

Thurmeier of Tisdale and Kathy Ryan of Hudson Bay, and I 

would ask that everyone join with me in welcoming them to 

Regina today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

want to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 

the Assembly, some members of a student organization called 

AIESEC, the International Association of Students in 

Economics and Commerce from Regina and they're seated in 

your gallery.  David Steen who's the vice-president of 

corporate relations; and Steven Leibel, the vice-president on 

special projects; and from Yugoslavia, Mila Markovic who is 

here in Regina on a traineeship with the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool. 

 

Founded in 1948, Mr. Speaker, this organization is entirely 

student managed and is the largest non-profit, non-political and 

multi-racial student organization in the world.  And I'd ask the 

members to join with me to greet these special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Treaty Land Entitlements 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

morning is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, in 

reviewing your statement yesterday in the House on the treaty 

land claim settlement, I've been able to review the Hansard and 

I'm afraid, Mr. Minister, what I wasn't able to hear at the 

beginning of your statement yesterday troubles me somewhat. 

 

In it you asserted that the aboriginal community rejected the 

September land entitlement agreement.  Mr. Minister, every bit 

of information that I have shows that assertion to be a 

falsehood.  And I ask you today to clarify the facts that 

you laid out in your statement yesterday that the September 

agreement was rejected by the aboriginal community and not 

by the NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well to deal with the very last part of 

the question first, we have not rejected the agreement.  We 

have accepted the agreement of last September.  It took us a 

while to do that because there was a lot of analysis that we felt 

had to be done before we could become comfortable with it, 

but we formally accepted it. 

 

Probably the verb "reject" is not the right verb to cover the 

situation.  It would be more accurate to say that there were 

grave concerns expressed, and one of them that I recall was the 

fact that the . . . was that there was no protection from inflation 

so far as the value of the package was concerned.  And this was 

a very difficult problem for FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations) and for the entitlement bands. 

 

There were other issues as well but that was the main one that I 

recall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it is 

absolutely necessary that we get this clarified because in 

cabinet documents that were raised in this legislature in the 

December sitting, it was clearly outlined that the provincial 

government did not like certain portions of the deal and that 

there would be renegotiations going on; that there would be a 

certain amount of filibustering going on; that the government 

was not happy with the deal. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, it is very unfortunate that you would 

stand in a ministerial statement in this House yesterday and lay 

that off on the aboriginal people in this province.  That clearly 

if there was any slow-down going on, if there was any 

renegotiating going on, it was your government, sir, and not the 

aboriginal community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I certainly didn't mean to imply 

nor I think did I nor have I ever that the entitlement bands or 

the FSIN were in any way responsible for the . . . (inaudible) . . 

. And I was quite open about it at the time, Mr. Speaker, that 

we were reviewing the agreement and we did have misgivings 

about it.  But in the final analysis there was no question about 

the fact that we accepted the obligations of the government 

under the September agreement. 

 

The subsequent negotiations that have taken place after that 

were in an attempt to meet the concern of the bands as to the 

protection of the package from an inflation point of view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, yesterday in your 

statement we weren't talking about the fact that inflation was a 

deal-breaker.  It was the fact that the negotiations took place on 

a 70-30 basis with certain requirements in the future over the 

life of the agreement to be proved up 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

by the federal government. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, if you're now saying that it is the 

inflation agreeing parts of the thing that FSIN were against, 

then you should clarify that in your statement yesterday and not 

go back and say that we've now come down to the question of 

northern reserves as being the statement.  And I think, Mr. 

Minister, you're misleading the public when you use a 

statement like that when in the next day in the House you say 

something else.  Would you clarify that, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I certainly would not mislead anyone 

with respect to what was happening.  I've acknowledged to the 

minister that "reject" may not have been a completely accurate 

verb to have used in that context and I acknowledged that in 

my previous answer. 

 

It was the concern about inflation and the damaging effect that 

that would have on the package for the entitlement bands that 

led the negotiators for the bands, supported by us, that the term 

of 15 years should be shortened because obviously if the term 

is shortened, then the ravages of inflation are ameliorated to the 

extent that it is shortened. 

 

So an attempt was made at the table to shorten it to 10 years 

and that wasn't acceptable to the federal government, but in due 

course we did agree upon a term of 12 years.  And the 

subsequent negotiations that have taken place and that 

eventually led to the difficulty I tried to describe yesterday was 

one of the consequences of shortening the term from 15 to 12 

years.  And that's how we got into that situation.  I hope that 

clarifies the situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

unfortunately the record of your government in negotiating on 

things like upgraders, AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), 

Promavia, public service agreements, GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program), leaves somewhat with a queasy feeling on 

your ability to follow through. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, the ravages on our society and 

the aboriginal community of not doing the September 

agreement will pale, will make the stuff with inflation pale in 

comparison.  And I say to you, sir, given your track record on 

other agreements, you need to assure this House today that 

you've got what it takes to follow through on this one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm just not going to 

respond to the provocative part of the member's question to me 

about the other negotiations that he referred to.  We'll deal with 

those in due course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I want to say now is that we didn't try and open that 

September agreement.  That agreement was opened because of 

the legitimate concern of the entitlement bands as to the value 

of the package and the effects of 

inflation on that package.  And we thought they were making a 

good point. 

 

And for our part, considering our responsibilities under that 

agreement, the 30 per cent of the general costs of the package 

and the turning over of the savings where northern 

communities are converted to reserves, we were prepared to 

compress that into a 10-year time frame although it would 

obviously involve the payment of larger amounts of money 

each year.  But we didn't initiate that, if you understand.  We 

were trying to support the Indians in their attempt to shorten 

the time frame.  And all of the negotiations that have taken 

place since then have taken place in that context, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation Policies 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this is in your other portfolio of 

Labour.  Mr. Minister, we're seeing most of the major projects 

that have been ongoing in this province winding down.  That 

obviously means that a number of people are going to be 

unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wonder if you could tell us this morning where trade 

employers, union and non-union members, are going to be 

employed in the near future.  Are you saying, sir, that because 

your government has a lack of an economic agenda that you as 

Labour minister are going to have to try and find other ways to 

stimulate employment in this province?  Are you saying that, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take the 

opportunity to explain to the member opposite that contrary to 

his statement that there is no job creation in this province, that 

the simple fact is is that we have the lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada.  We have taken away from the large emphasis on 

megaprojects that was the only emphasis of the previous 

government.  That is true. 

 

Because we believe that many of the projects that you did and 

the way they were done has simply led to the bankruptcy of the 

province and the very reason that we're in the problem we are 

with the budget and with the huge deficit that we have in the 

province. 

 

What you'll see from this government is a continuation to try to 

attract people from outside the province obviously to come 

here to set up industry and business, and we're doing that.  But 

the simple fact is that the vast majority of job creation in this 

province over the past 10 years should have been promoted by 

your government in terms of small, local industry.  And you 

failed miserably in that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you say one thing but the opposite is true.  The numbers are in.  

You're down 18,000 jobs from this time last year. 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

Now, Mr. Minister, you talk about small industry.  You take 

SaskTel, spend $7 million of the public's money on 25 clerical 

jobs, getting involved back in businesses where you shouldn't 

be.  At the same time the meat-packing industry is in to visit 

the Minister of Agriculture.  We got 2,000 unionized jobs on 

the line in this province in Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, North 

Battleford, Saskatoon, Yorkton. 

 

You know what, Mr. Minister?  Seven thousand . . . or $7 

million to FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) would 

ensure that those 2,000 unionized jobs remain healthy and 

viable and paying taxes in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want you to tell the families in Moose 

Jaw and Saskatoon and North Battleford that you are going to 

have the same dedication to the meat-packing industry and 

their jobs as you have shown to SaskTel and 25 clerical jobs in 

the city of Regina.  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as the member knows, the 

government is very concerned about employment and is doing 

a great deal to help stimulate employment in the province. 

 

The simple fact is, is that your attempts to get jobs by giving 

hundreds of millions of dollars to out-of-province companies is 

not going to create the wealth and the base in the province for 

ongoing development.  That's not the way it can work. 

 

We believe, and the statistics show, that the vast number of 

jobs in this province and in Canada over the next 10 years will 

not be created by the large projects that you talk about.  In fact 

most major employers will be down-sizing, and that is a fact. 

 

The fact is that the most jobs will be created by local 

individuals with jobs and employment numbers under 50 

people, and many of them will come as a result of the influx of 

women into the entrepreneurial area and starting up their own 

businesses.  That's where we're going to be concentrating.  And 

I'll tell you, sir, that your record on job creation and the 

hundreds of millions of dollars that you put into bad deals -- 

and I'm not going to get into the long list of the GigaText and 

many others where you wasted money -- is at an end in the 

province and we're going to be working with local 

entrepreneurs to a much greater extent than was ever the case 

under the past 10 years under your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I say to the 

minister, in the last half dozen years the union hiring halls in 

this province have been empty because everybody's been out 

on a job site.  Today they're on the steps of the legislature, Mr. 

Minister.  Today they are on the steps of the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll ask the members to please 

calm down and let the member ask his question.  And while I 

do that, if the member could direct his 

question through the Chair, it may also help. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development and Trade.  Mr. 

Minister, the fact is that people in this province see no future 

for jobs, no future for employment, and in fact a lot of them are 

moving to Alberta. 

 

The question I asked you, sir, is, there are 2,000 unionized -- 

maybe more -- jobs in the red meat industry in some of our 

major cities and they impact on our province in a big way.  The 

question was, you had $7 million to get back in the business of 

cable television, the same as you did in the '70s.  That $7 

million guarantees those 2,000 union jobs.  Sir, what are you 

going to say to those employees in the cities in which they 

reside? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a 

moment to explain to the member opposite why many union 

people in this province are meeting with the government, 

consulting with us.  It's got very little to do with our record.  

But it is to try to influence our government to have legislation 

and working conditions for workers -- union and non-union -- 

that are different than what they were for the past 10 years 

under your administration.  That's why they're rallying out 

there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And the Minister of Labour 

addressed the group today on the steps of the legislature who 

were here to support the government in changes that would 

take away from the regressive legislation that your government 

and your then premier instituted and drove labour people out of 

the province for the last 10 years.  That's what it's about. 

 

I want to say, when it comes to employment the statistics for 

the month of May to June in the province, the numbers of 

employed people rose by a thousand.  These are the statistics.  

The unemployment rate was the lowest in Canada, well below 

the 11.6 that has been arrived at as a result of Conservative 

management at the federal level.  And I want to say in some 

areas you're right, unemployment is down; in many areas it 

rose.  For example, manufacturing over the past month rose by 

2,000, construction is up by a thousand, finance and insurance 

and real estate up by 4,000.  So I want to say to you that the 

doom . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Good for you minister -- 1,000 down, 17 to go 

-- just to get you back where you were last year at this time. 

 

Mr. Minister, you brag about 700 companies coming to this 

province.  You talk about new legislation by the Minister of 

Justice to help out people in unions.  Well there's no point in 

having a new law in this province, Mr. Minister, if you don't 

have a job to go to.  You can give the people in the  trade 

unions all of the legal protection they want.  If nobody's going 

to come and build and work and do things here, sir, then we've 

got a big problem. 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

You are short 17,000 jobs.  Your Minister of Agriculture is 

threatening another couple thousand jobs of union people.  Will 

you rethink taking $7 million, Mr. Minister, and investing in 

the cable TV (television) business, and redirecting that into 

some union jobs that mean a whole lot for the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I want to say to the member 

opposite, that after 10 years of attacking unions, I want to say 

that the mood in Saskatchewan is changed.  That we're not 

going to allow you from your seats in opposition to continue to 

put the wedge between the farmers in the province and the 

working people, the unionized people in the province.  That's 

over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Order.  Before I allow the next 

question, I must ask the people in the galleries to please not 

participate in the activities on the floor.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this minister does not 

want to talk about the employees in the meat-packing industry.  

And, Mr. Minister, I say to you, if you want to take Moose Jaw 

Packers and Canada Packers in Moose Jaw, I would guess that 

probably half of the employees live in my constituency.  Those 

are  almost all unionized employees, sir, and I want to make 

sure that those meat-packing jobs and this $200 million in 

spin-offs continue to work in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I simply said to you, you had $7 million to put into the cable 

TV business for 25 clerical jobs in the city of Regina.  Your 

Minister of Agriculture threatens 2,000 unionized jobs in the 

meat-packing business.  Will you repriorize your $7 million 

and ensure that those 2,000 jobs are here this time next year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just for the member's information, 

so we keep the record straight, I want to indicate to him that 

when their government got rid of the hog program, SHARP 

(Saskatchewan hog assured returns program), and the beef 

stabilization program, and went to the tripartite program 

federally, which we were opposed to and told them it was a bad 

idea, beef feeding and slaughtering in Saskatchewan went from 

400,000 to 240,000, almost a 50 per cent reduction.  It went 

down from 400,000 to 240,000, and you know that.  You 

destroyed the beef . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I'll give the minister another 10 seconds to 

finish his answer before I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member knows very well 

that the biggest impact on the beef industry in this province in 

the past 10 years has been the change from beef stabilization to 

the federal tripartite program.  You did that, sir, against the best 

advice of the farmers and the beef industry in this province.  

And I think, sir, you're making up a very, very phoney issue to 

try to cover your tracks in what you're saying here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Record in First Nine Months 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, it has 

been now over nine months since the election, and it has been 

nine months since the people of Saskatchewan believed you.  

They elected you because they believed what it is that you were 

telling them.  Those same people are now looking back and 

they're wondering how their lives have improved as a result of 

that election. 

 

Given that you are now reaching your three-quarter mark of 

your first year, will you give the people of Saskatchewan, the 

landlords of this legislature, a third-quarter report detailing 

what you think it is that you've accomplished. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for her question, and I'm pleased to answer it.  The government 

immediately, when it took office, put in place an independent 

commission to open the books to see what the finances of this 

province were like.  We made that public.  There was a detailed 

report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did the same thing with Crown Management 

Board, engaging Ernst & Young to do an analysis of the 

financial situation of the Crown corporations.  That report was 

provided, and it was provided in detail to the public and to this 

legislature. 

 

There has now been a budget introduced in this legislature 

which begins the correction of the disastrous management of 

the last 10 years under the provincial government, and that is 

more detailed than any budget document in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, in that budget we made a 

commitment to this legislature and to the people of this 

province that in November we will have a mid-term report, a 

paper which will be published and made public to indicate 

where we are at with the budget which we announced on May 

7, initiatives that have to be taken to make any necessary 

corrections.  And at that time, Mr. Speaker, it will once again 

be the first time in the history of this province that that kind of 

information will be provided. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Premier, anyone living in this province in the last nine and a 

half years under the corrupt and inept government of those 

years, knew exactly what kind of a fiscal mess there was in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So if you indeed have a vision, which is becoming 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

apparent that you do not have, it is not making life better for 

anyone in this province the things that you have done since you 

have come to power:  14,000 fewer people are working in 

agriculture; vehicles sales are down by 29 per cent except for 

of course luxury Lexus vehicles; 3.4 per cent of young adults in 

this province between 20 and 24 years of age are unemployed, 

the people we need to stay in this province; our overall labour 

force is down by 18,000 people, and 2 per cent more people 

simply quit looking for work. 

 

Now I think it's about time that the people of this province 

actually heard the vision of this new government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the record is 

very clear.  The job losses that have taken place in 

Saskatchewan have taken place because of the kind of 

economic development strategy, which my colleague talked 

about before in the previous questions, that the former 

government had in place. 

 

And the job losses that took place last year was as a direct 

result of the policies of the GST (goods and services tax) and 

the kinds of policies which put hundreds of millions of dollars 

into megaprojects, to corporations from outside of the province 

of Saskatchewan, that's created very few jobs. 

 

I am pleased to report to the member from Greystone that that 

is now being corrected.  We have got the finances of this 

province under control.  That's one of the reasons why between 

May and June there was an increase of employed people in this 

province by 1,000. 

 

I think it is clear that we are in the right direction.  The 

situation that we inherited was not an easy one.  No one 

suggested it was easy.  There are some difficult issues that we 

have had to deal with -- and we're going to deal with them.  

We're going to deal with them openly, honestly, and we're 

going to account for them.  Because it is not only today that we 

have to be concerned about, and the member from Greystone 

ought to know that.  I ask her to join us in making sure that we 

also be concerned about our children and their children and 

their future as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'd like leave of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce some guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- If I may, as long as the member doesn't 

introduce them all one at a time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1030) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, in all of the galleries of the 

legislature this morning we have representatives of the 

Saskatchewan provincial building trades. We recognize them 

because they're all wearing the white sweaters with the logo of 

that organization on the front. 

These people, Mr. Speaker, have just finished participating in a 

large demonstration in front of the legislature and it was my 

privilege to say a few words to them.  And I would like now to 

introduce them through you to members of the legislature and 

ask that we welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join 

with the Minister of Labour on behalf of the official opposition 

to extend a greeting to all the folks in the gallery today.  It is a 

time-honoured tradition in this province that groups of citizens 

gather on the steps of the legislature to speak to their elected 

officials and I'm glad to see that the folks from the trade unions 

took that opportunity today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, question 46, I would ask the 

question be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

question 47, I hereby provide the answer. 

 

The Speaker: -- Answer tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of the amendment to The 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.  This amendment is 

intended to conserve agricultural . . . Saskatchewan's key 

remaining natural areas of Crown lands.  These lands are 

important to many species of birds and animals.  The Act will 

also protect and co-operatively manage ongoing agricultural 

production on the lands. 

 

An additional 1.5 million acres of wildlife habitat on 

government-owned agricultural land is proposed to be 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

designated under The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.  

With this addition of land, The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act will contain 3.4 million acres of natural areas 

that are valuable to wildlife and those who enjoy them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative helps fulfil recommendations by 

provincial, national, and international conservation 

organizations to conserve some of our remaining natural areas.  

At meetings like the recent Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, 

there was much concern over cutting of the rain forest.  In 

truth, it is likely man has already had more impact on the great 

plains than the rain forest will see for many years. 

 

In protecting a total of 3.4 million acres of government-owned 

land, The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is the most 

cost-effective habitat program this province has.  The taxpayer 

pays nothing, and we all know that it's cheaper to conserve our 

natural areas than to try to resurrect them later. 

 

But we do not want our farmers and ranchers, already under so 

much economic pressure, to pay for these natural areas.  We 

will not impair their ability to continue with current agricultural 

practices.  The lands to be placed into the Act are found mainly 

in the south-west and along the forest fringe, with small parcels 

scattered across the rest of the province. 

 

These lands will be administered by Saskatchewan Rural 

Development.  Although this government presently sells 

agricultural Crown lands for agricultural purposes, lands 

providing critical food and shelter for wildlife are restricted 

from sale and have been for eight years.  All of the lands that 

are designated as critical wildlife habitat land will continue to 

be used for grazing, haying, and petroleum activities.  But 

alternatives which are harmful to wildlife on these lands will be 

controlled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of 

wildlife to Saskatchewan, to the Saskatchewan people, and in 

turn the relatively high importance of Crown lands to wildlife 

survival.  In the latest figures Statistics Canada tells us that 84 

per cent of Saskatchewan residents said maintaining abundant 

wildlife was important, while 86 per cent favoured efforts to 

preserve endangered wildlife.  In a recent poll 77 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people view the protection of the environment as 

very important; 87 per cent of these people agree the provincial 

government should protect Crown lands in their natural state 

for wildlife. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in agricultural regions less than 25 per cent of the 

land remains in a natural state.  These natural areas continue to 

shrink.  There are 15 endangered or threatened species in 

Saskatchewan.  Along with these species, populations of many 

game birds and other wildlife species have been or could be 

reduced by any further loss of habitat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Crown lands involved here are of strategic 

importance to wildlife in Saskatchewan and to the vast majority 

of the people who appreciate wildlife.  In total these lands form 

only 5 per cent of the agricultural region, yet provide one-third 

of the critical upland 

wildlife habitat.  The government recognizes that any further 

loss of this critical wildlife habitat would have serious effects 

on bird and animal populations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that wildlife habitat will be 

saved without having any significant negative impact on 

agricultural use.  These lease contracts are not disturbed.  Also 

this government's commitment to make agriculture Crown land 

available for sale to the farming community is not affected, as 

the majority of Crown land administered by Saskatchewan 

Rural Development remains available for sale.  This Act will 

not impair a lessee's ability to assign the lease to their children, 

heirs, or others who purchase their operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

ensures that both wildlife and agricultural interests will be 

protected for the benefit of present and future generations. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 

of pleasure to give second reading of the amendment to the 

Bill, The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are definitely 

some things in this process and in the Bill that have raised a 

significant amount of questions.  In my part of the province and 

in the member from Maple Creek and significant others -- in 

Shaunavon and throughout the south-west -- the concern has 

been raised, Mr. Minister, in the general context of a very, 

very, I believe, serious misconception by the people who 

promote wildlife and that is that the natural grasses will 

enhance the wildlife across the province.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, in my humble view, is not a fact.  It's not a fact. 

 

And what's propagated by the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

across this province that says that if I keep this land exactly the 

way Mother Nature had it, it will continue to produce wildlife 

that is in abundance across this province in excessive of what it 

has already done. 

 

And you know what I've learned?  I've learned for my period of 

time in the agricultural industry, in the ranching industry, I've 

learned some very important things about understanding nature 

and it's involvement in my ranch and the community I live in. 

 

I want to extend it beyond that.  When the pioneers came to 

this province, in the province of Saskatchewan there was 

actually very, very little opportunity down in the south-east 

part of the province for wildlife to exist.  And what has 

happened over the past 75 and 85 years is that trees have grown 

in those parts, around the pot-holes, and all through that 

south-east part of this province.  And today there is wildlife 

there in abundance, in excess of anything that has ever 

happened before. 

 

And you know why, Mr. Speaker?  Because there is an 

opportunity for them to graze and there is an opportunity for 

them to be protected by the people who cultivate and who 

promote agriculture in those rural communities. 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

And as I went travelling in the central part, on the east side of 

this province, where we have considered -- because I'm only 50 

years old -- where we have considered, Mr. Speaker, that trees 

have been in existence in the east side of this province for ever 

. . . And the member from the east side of Canora and Pelly 

should understand this.  If he would go and ask those people 

who have lived there and are over 75 years old, he will hear 

them say this as they told me - 

_ when they came to that part of the province of Saskatchewan 

there were very little trees and underbrush for these animals to 

expand their numbers.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 

 

And why has it happened?  It's because the people in rural 

Saskatchewan have placed an emphasis on providing an 

opportunity for wildlife to procreate and get their increase in 

numbers.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  And by putting a 

law in this Assembly to continue to protect may increase it 

some more. 

 

But I will tell you and I will tell the member from Shaunavon, 

the member from Shaunavon who was almost run out of his 

constituency at a number of occasions and a number of 

meetings because of The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member from 

Shaunavon may not know, being a new member, but I know 

the member from Morse does know, that he can't have a debate 

between two members in the House unless it's in Committee of 

the Whole.  But the member from Shaunavon now does know 

and if he wants to get in, he should stand and I will recognize 

him. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will say this to the members of 

this Assembly, that agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan 

has enhanced the opportunity for wildlife to exist here. 

 

I'm going to explain something else to the members here, and 

there are a lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan who 

have on occasion visited The Great Sand Hills in the 

south-west part of the province of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I have some of those in my constituency.  And I have 

some of those ranchers who have been there for four or five 

generations, starting at about 1895 and on.  And I have visited 

with some of those people over my life and I have talked to 

them about what existed when their grandparents came to that 

part of the world. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  Over and over and over 

again, I hear this simple, straightforward logic, and that logic is 

this: there was no water in The Great Sand Hills, Mr. Speaker.  

Where would the deer and antelope play?  Down along the 

river, but not in The Great Sand Hills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you men and women in this Assembly can spoof 

about what you're doing, but you are seriously curtailing the 

involvement of agriculture and ranchers in the province of 

Saskatchewan by putting this regressive kind of legislation in 

on the books here today. 

And I'll tell you why.  The people in The Great Sand Hills are 

the most adamant about protecting the soil, protecting the 

plants, and protecting the animals that live on their property. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to continue the point I was going to 

make.  Many people in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

especially urban, do not understand that in The Great Sand 

Hills prior to 1910, there were no deer because they didn't have 

an opportunity to have water in those places. 

 

And you know what the ranchers did?  They put down a well, 

put up a tank with a windmill and put water in there, and you 

know what, Mr. Speaker?  Today, today, I will grant you this, 

that that is the best mule deer and white-tail deer hunting in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1045) 

 

And do you know why, Mr. Speaker?  It's because the ranchers 

decided to do something with their livestock in the same places 

that the people now want to say, I got to protect that.  I got to 

put my arm . . . society has to put its arms around it to protect 

it. 

 

And you know what the ranchers say?  We've been doing it all 

the time.  For the first time you've begun to understand what 

the world is really all about.  They have, Mr. Speaker, been 

providing that protection to the wildlife, because you know 

what?  They understand the existence and tough times in those 

locations and I know that they are very, very seriously 

concerned about this. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker?  They are so concerned about it 

and the process that was used in delivering this that they are 

prepared -- and I've talked to . . . I have over 100 of these that 

are affected by this legislation alone.  I have over 100 in my 

constituency.  And they are telling me -- and I'm just telling 

this to you so that you clearly understand the kinds of things 

that are going to impact here -- that if you, Mr. Minister, bring 

forward this legislation and pass it here without some very, 

very significant consultation, they're going to close their 

borders to every hunter in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I will lay this before you too, sir, that that is wrong for you 

to implement this without serious discussion.  And since it first 

was suggested in the throne speech, I know that the member for 

Shaunavon has been down in his constituency and visited with 

farmers and ranchers there, and they were not happy.  The RM 

(rural municipality) of Val Marie, for example -- and needless 

to say I will perhaps point out the name of the secretary 

treasurer of that RM, and I'm sure he wouldn't mind . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Barry Dixon. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Barry Dixon -- right on -- has focused his 

attention on this very Act as being very, very destructive.  And 

why, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister?  It's because he 

understands the ranchers and farmers in that community that 

have provided habitat ever since they became involved in the 

land in the first place.  And there are more deer there today 

than there were 100 years ago.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

And I want to point out to the members of this Assembly that 

when you think that you are going to protect wildlife by putting 

this Act in and saying you cannot sell this land, that's a fallacy, 

Mr. Speaker.  That is absolutely, totally wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people have said this over and over 

again. 

 

Earlier this week we had an invitation to attend the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers executive meeting here and had a 

beef barbecue that they sponsored -- and the minister was 

there; I compliment him for being there -- and they told me, 

and I know they told him, that the role of the minister and his 

responsibility . . .  And he made a commitment to them, he 

made a commitment to them that he would not pass this 

legislation for at least a year until they felt comfortable about 

it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, if you do that . . . if you 

don't do that, there's going to be some very serious problem in 

managing the wildlife in the south-west part of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I'm not telling you something that you 

haven't heard from them before. 

 

But I want it on the record in this Assembly that there is very, 

very serious concern about what's going on with the 

Department of Natural Resources and this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in rural Saskatchewan not only 

understand the value of agriculture, they understand the value 

of allowing this natural habitat to continue to exist as it has for 

centuries.  And, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, I know that 

the people in the south-west part of the province are very 

concerned -- very concerned. 

 

Ranchers have called me from along Diefenbaker Lake and 

into the Sand Hills and said, what are you going to do with my 

land?  And they have told me if this passes with the kind of 

process that was involved in dealing with it when you started 

out, Mr. Minister, they're prepared to close their leases off from 

hunting -- their land, everything.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

where you have to walk a balance in not only providing 

responsible government, but responsible attitude in relation to 

those producers who are growing that wildlife on that land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to point out something 

to the general public, that the financing and raising of this 

wildlife on agriculture land is completely financed by 

agriculture.  It's completely financed by agriculture because 

every one of them eat on my land, every one of them nest, 

every one of them have fawns, every one of them have young, 

and it's on my land that they do it.  And every rancher has that 

sensitivity to the kinds of things that he does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, these people have those deer 

walking across their lawns, standing on the front porch.  And in 

fact if you went down and talked to Mr. Watson he would tell 

you this story.  How a deer saw his reflection in the patio door 

and butted the deer and knocked the patio door out of the 

house. 

 

And that's how these farmers and ranchers deal with the kinds 

of livestock and animals that they have on their 

place.  And you want to go challenge me on that story, you go 

talk to him yourself.  And as a matter of fact, if you'd have 

been in Swift Current when the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) had their convention 

there, you'd have been able to talk to him yourself because he's 

a councillor for that division of that municipality. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, before you implement anything in this 

process here, you need to seriously evaluate what impact you're 

going to have on the hunting in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Because I think if you implement this quickly, you are going to 

have a very serious problem.  And that, Mr. Minister, is not a 

threat; it's not a warning; it's a plain, simple fact. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do then?  Are you 

going to put in a law that says you can't stop people from 

hunting on your land?  And what are you going to do then?  

Are you going to herd these deer and antelope onto other 

people's property so that you can shoot them and do away with 

them -- destroy them? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you are going to have to deal very, very 

seriously and very, very consciously with a great deal of 

respect in relation to the people who live on those leases, who 

have deeded land in that area because you are going to have a 

serious problem with this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because of all of what I said, and the 

member from Rosthern who is responsible for the Natural 

Resources department has more to say on this yet, I therefore 

ask for adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act respecting Certain Services with 

respect to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  This will be a 

rather brief set of comments, Mr. Speaker.  I'm moving on 

behalf of the Minister of Justice who is, as members of the 

Assembly will know, occupied with a group that were here 

earlier. 

 

I rise to move second reading of this Bill.  The existing 

co-operative credit union legislation provides for fees to be 

charged for various services and functions the registrar's 

required or authorized to perform.  These include fees for 

registration, examining or obtaining copies of documents, and 

reserving names. 

 

Additional services are provided by the corporation's branch 

for which there's no authority to prescribe fees.  For example, 

each year many telephone requests for information on specific 

businesses are received.  Responding to telephone inquiries 

provides the public with quick access to information.  It is, 

however, a major claim upon the time of the staff, and it has 

been determined that it would be appropriate to charge for it. 

 

The department will be distinguishing between an individual 

who might call from the community of Moosomin from a law 

firm who might call in Moosomin.  The latter, it is felt, should 

pay for the service, the former 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

would be more of a nuisance.  So we will be distinguishing 

between those two services. 

 

Requests are also received for various reports such as names 

and locations of certain types of business in a geographic area.  

This type of service too, satisfies public demand. 

 

This Act provides for regulations to charge fees for these 

services provided by the corporation's branch.  In the case of 

The Names of Homes Act, this Act, I should say, Mr. Speaker, 

is almost exclusively used by rural people, and is used, really, 

to name farms and not homes.  In the case of The Names of 

Homes Act, the amendments will remove the amount of 

registration fee from the Act and provide for regulations to 

establish fees.  This is consistent with the approach taken in 

other legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of this Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I sense that this Bill 

might be more a housekeeping Bill, but I also, as I was 

listening to the comments from the minister, it sounds to me 

like it's also a Bill that is going to requisition more money from 

the taxpayers.  And certainly, I think, we must take a few more 

. . . another brief look at it, even though I possibly could 

suggest we move it into Committee of the Whole where we 

could get into some of the intimate details for what might have 

. . . the normal process is to go through second readings.  So at 

this time, I'll just adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I recognize the minister, I want to 

recognize the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  Why is 

she on her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you.  I'm going to ask leave to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your patience 

with me bobbing up and down.  But I did want to get these two 

guests introduced because they're long-time members and 

supporters of our party.  And they're here visiting in Regina 

today, in your gallery.  They are Joe and Ilene Degenstein from 

Battleford.  And I'm sure that many of the members know Joe 

and Ilene, and we'd like to welcome them here today and say 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Pelly on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: -- To ask leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the 

House, a constituent of mine who is seated up in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bruno Mriva.  Mr. Mriva is a neighbour, a 

very good friend of mine, and a fellow farmer.  And Bruno is 

down here today to take part in the labour demonstration 

because he's also a member of the ironworkers' union.  And I'd 

ask all the members to welcome Bruno down here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1100) 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll make a 

few comments on The Land Titles Act amendment (No. 2), and 

then I will thereafter move second reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my comments are going to be a touch more 

detailed on this.  There's no way to summarize the amendments 

to this legislation in a quick fashion. 

 

A number of changes are being made.  These are changes of 

enormous interest to the legal profession and the banking 

community and, I suspect, not of broad interest otherwise. 

 

After the Bill gets third reading, we will be following a practice 

established by the former member from Qu'Appelle Lumsden, 

Mr. Lane, and we will be mailing out copies of the legislation 

and explanation to all members of the Saskatchewan bar and 

the banking and credit union community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill contains a number of amendments to The 

Land Titles Act.  It includes some reform mortgages, mortgage 

priority, building restriction caveats, duplicate certificates of 

title, and the assurance fund.  Most of these amendments, I am 

satisfied, would be welcomed by members of the bar, of the 

commercial bar, of whatever political complexion they might 

be. 

 

Presently, Mr. Speaker, in each case the entire mortgage 

document is registered in the Land Titles Office.  What has 

happened over the years is that an enormous bulk of paper has 

accumulated which is expensive to store and of little value.  In 

most cases the documents are extremely repetitious.  

Documents of several thousand words are typed out by 

secretaries in a few seconds because there's only a few words 

changed from one document to the next. 

 

The effect of this will be to provide a summary-form mortgage 

so that the mortgage has two parts. One is a summary form that 

contains interest rate, land description, mortgage amount, 

repayment dates, etc.  That will be part number one.  Part 

number two is all of the usual forms. 

 

In almost all cases, each bank, credit union, has a form that it 

uses.  These forms are simply torn off a pad and filled in.  The 

effect of this amendment will be that the credit unions and 

banks and mortgage companies and the Farm Credit 

Corporation and so on can file a copy of all 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

the terms.  And they've only got to do it once. 

 

Then anyone who wishes to search the mortgage can get a copy 

of the summary form.  If that doesn't provide all the 

information you need, you can also get a copy of the file terms.  

It will save quite a bit of expense. And in due course I expect 

the savings would be in the hundreds of thousands of dollars 

for this.  This is a fair expense. 

 

The registrars will still accept the other form of mortgages.  

Mortgages are occasionally used by individuals. It is not very 

common, but occasionally used by non-financial institutions.  

And these will still be accepted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reforms will also affect building restriction 

caveats.  These are as obscure as they are troublesome to the 

system.  Building restriction caveats typically restrict the type 

of building activity that can take place on property.  These last 

an enormous length of time, almost always outlast the building 

they were designed to deal with and then become a terrible 

nuisance to get off the title. 

 

Currently a court order, the only way to get these building 

restriction caveats off.  This amendment will allow the registrar 

to remove the building restriction caveat if on its face it is 

expired, and sometimes that's the case, or if a half a century has 

elapsed. 

 

A registered owner of land benefitting from the building 

restriction will be able to withdraw the caveat provided that the 

requirement for removing and easements are followed. And I 

won't get into this in detail.  I suspect the audience for this 

detail is going to be awfully limited this morning.  I see some 

agreement in that subject. 

 

The members, I think, will be familiar with duplicate 

certificates of title. Traditionally these are called deeds. They 

are used by farmers almost exclusively.  Financial institutions 

will accept duplicate certificates of title.  It's a form of a 

mortgage.  And that's the only purpose to which duplicate 

certificates of title are used. 

 

I won't get into detail.  I suspect members will forgive me if I 

don't give them the detail of the alternative arrangements which 

have been provided.  Suffice it to say that it has been worked 

out between the Land Titles Office and the financial 

community, the banks and the credit unions really, an alternate 

system for hypothecating the title.  The duplicate certificates of 

title when this is proclaimed will be an historical anachronism.  

Landowners who want to retain their title may do so. 

 

My father has the original deed from the original grant from the 

Crown back in the last century still in the family, as is the farm 

on which the land's been farmed.  So if you want the deed as an 

historical document you may have it; otherwise they will 

disappear from the system. 

 

One other comment on which I'll touch briefly and that is the 

assurance fund is being abolished.  It has been a very long 

period of time since the assurance fund served any purpose 

except to provide work for a few bookkeeping staff and 

accounting staff.  Otherwise it serves little purpose.  The 

assurance fund will be consolidated with 

the Consolidated Fund, and the assurance fund will also pass 

into history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments are consistent with the Land 

Titles Office systems ongoing objectives to update and clarify 

existing legislation, serve the needs of registry users, operate 

the system more efficiently. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Land Titles Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in just a 

few minor responses to the comments and regarding the Bill 

brought forward by the minister. 

 

And I can appreciate the fact that the minister's suggesting 

much needed . . . to look at ways of maybe eliminating some of 

the paperwork that is necessary in transfer of titles.  The 

minister also indicated that they will be notifying the bar, the 

Saskatchewan bar and the financial institutions about the 

change once the Bill is proclaimed. 

 

But I'm also wondering if it wouldn't be appropriate to maybe 

inform the realtors association of Saskatchewan as well, as it 

sounds to me like this type of information is something that 

they would be very aware of or would like to be aware of and 

made aware of as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Another one of these Bills which is of interest, this time, to the 

business community, the retail business community and the 

financial community and not much else. 

 

The Bulk Sales Act was enacted in 1911.  A primary method of 

financing for businesses for ongoing credit -- not capital 

monies, but ongoing credit -- is to take security against 

stock-in-trade.  The purpose of the Act was to protect 

wholesalers and bulk suppliers against retailers who sell their 

stock in bulk without paying creditors first.  The Act requires 

the purchaser of stock in bulk to ensure that there are no debts 

owing on the stock before the sale is completed.  There is a 

method of doing this in the Act; one obtains a declaration to 

this effect from the retailer. 

 

The legislation also provides that obtaining a sworn declaration 

from the retailer frees the purchaser from any liability for 

retailers' debts.  The protection offered by the Act is based in 

part upon the assumption that even though a retailer might be 

intending to defeat the claims of his or her creditors, he or she 

would not swear a false declaration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this assumption makes evident the inherent 

weakness in the Act.  In addition too, changes in the primary 

method of financing businesses have limited the usefulness of 

the Act.  Today's financial institutions 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

provide financing for the establishment of retail businesses.  

Financial institutions secure their claim to businesses by 

registering security agreements in the personal property 

registry pursuant to The Personal Property Security Act.  

Unsecured creditors rank behind the secured creditors during a 

sale of the business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Saskatchewan joins a number of 

provinces who have repealed, or who are considering 

repealing, this legislation.  British Columbia repealed its bulk 

sales legislation; Alberta and Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, are 

reviewing these respective recommendations from their 

respective law . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . they are, from 

their respective law reform commission. 

 

The Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan has 

commented on The Bulk Sales Act as follows: it is legislation 

which has outlived its usefulness, has become an impediment 

to the facilitator of a good business practice. 

 

In addition, members of the Saskatchewan branch of the 

Canadian Bar Association have agreed this Act should be 

repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I move second 

reading of an Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in light of 

the exuberance shown by the House Leader toward the Bill, it 

might be appropriate that the opposition just take a little closer 

look at the Bill prior to its receiving second reading.  So at this 

time, I would adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1115) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if the minister would introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my left 

is Fred Renihan, the ADM (associate deputy minister) from the 

Department of Education; and seated directly behind him is 

Robin Johnson. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I welcome all of your officials today and yourself. 

 

Given the financial difficulties facing the province, it's 

imperative that -- I think all of us in fact agree -- that we 

quickly have to find some solutions to our economic 

woes.  And one of the things that's been mentioned by 

everyone is the need to do more with less. 

 

In the throne speech, it was stated that there was going to be an 

organization entitled the Saskatchewan Education Council to 

advise on improvements to our educational system. 

 

Can you tell us the status of this particular group? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the member about the Saskatchewan Education 

Council, which was committed to in the throne speech, we're in 

the process of putting together the . . . what will constitute the 

establishment of the council, making sure that all of the sectors 

and stakeholders in education, including students and parents, 

will be represented. 

 

There are . . . at this stage we haven't got names yet, we're just 

consulting with the various stakeholders and organizations to 

make sure that when the council is established it will have the 

appropriate representation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, who will be determining the specific objectives of the 

council? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there will be terms of 

reference established.  We do already have them in draft but 

they haven't reached the approval stage yet.  And what we see 

the process being is . . . as the member will be aware, there are 

a number of reviews ongoing, being the SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) review, the 

review of the university panel.  We have a review of distance 

education, of the high school curriculum, a very comprehensive 

look at all of the sectors of education, and it's very important. 

 

It's such a complex system in a way that when you change one 

thing, for instance if you make changes in the high school 

curriculum without consulting the post-secondary sector, then 

you have a problem with articulation. 

 

So our objective is to do a very comprehensive overview of the 

components of the education system and then to have the 

results of those reviews before the Saskatchewan Education 

Council for their consideration in developing in a collaborative 

way a whole new vision for education for the province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I guess one of the things that 

I'm most interested in is to have access to what the objectives 

of this council will be.  And if they're in draft form, I will 

indeed be most pleased to be able to even see that.  But when in 

fact it's determined what the objectives are, would you be 

willing to share that information with me? 

 

And before I end with that one question, there are corollary 

questions.  I would like to know what . . . if in fact you're going 

to have some form of measuring whether or not the objectives 

are being met, if you would share the information of who, 

when they are chosen, are going to be on the council, what 

their qualifications and credentials are, and what remuneration 

will be attached 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

to their participation on the council. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would certainly be 

pleased to have a meeting with the member from Greystone at 

any time and would be delighted to receive her input and 

suggestions as to the make-up and mandate for the council.  

And it's very appropriate now that it is in draft form so that 

ideas can be . . . new ideas and new perspectives can be 

incorporated into that exercise. 

 

We feel it's going to be very important for all of Saskatchewan 

people, and it is planned at this stage -- as I say, it is in draft -- 

but it is planned that the council . . . the supervision of the 

council and their perspective will be an ongoing exercise so 

that there will be from this point on, as you might say, a 

perpetual review and critique of the education system. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, is it being considered as part of the mandate of this 

council to actually have the authority to give direction to 

government about where they believe money should be 

directed in order to have the opportunity to focus it on where 

they identify people need help most? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the roles, as I 

said earlier, for the . . . that's seen for the Education Council 

will be to develop a vision for education for the province in all 

sectors, and in conjunction with that to develop a clearly 

enunciated strategic plan which would be revisited on a regular 

basis. 

 

And it would be an advisory council only, but certainly I think 

when we have an opportunity to have a discussion and the 

member from Greystone can see how the make-up of the 

council is proposed, that certainly the government is setting it 

up to take advice and to act on advice. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, just to go back for one moment, you had indicated in 

your previous answer -- not this one, but the one prior -- that in 

fact you would like and you would appreciate some input from 

myself with regards to the draft that you presently are working 

with.  Can I assume from that that you'd be willing to share that 

draft with me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, at this point it 

would be a working paper and is subject to revision and 

change.  But I would certainly be prepared to have a meeting 

with the member and go over it in detail. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I appreciate that very much. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, it's been . . . in many different 

committees we've of course been able to look at the work that 

had been done by the previous government and also ways in 

which expenditures were hidden.  One of those ways was 

actually found in the departments, like the Education 

department, by creating seconded positions. 

 

I'm wondering if in fact there are any seconded positions 

remaining, and if so, how many are we talking about, what 

amount of expenditure is involved, and what is the rationale for 

providing such positions now? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as we had indicated in 

an earlier session I believe, among the approximately 60 

positions that were in the department that are not there now, 

there were I think approximately a third.  We are checking for 

the exact number of secondments.  I think that . . .  And there 

still are some. 

 

In '91-92 there were 71, and for 1992-93 there are 57.  

However, we are doing within the department an internal 

reorganization exercise with the assistance of an outside 

facilitator.  We want to have the department organized in a 

different way with a more horizontal organization chart, if you 

like.  And the staff in the Department of Education is not only 

aware of it, they are fully involved in the reorganization of the 

department. 

 

Now in some cases secondments are used, for instance in the 

curriculum-writing area.  We might bring a teacher in, an 

experienced teacher with a certain kind of expertise to be 

involved in the writing of a certain curriculum.  Then when that 

job is finished, normally the teacher would go back.  I think 

what we did see was a number of long-term secondments; 

secondments that had been renewed over a very long period of 

time. 

 

And that's not, as the member knows, that's not the purpose of a 

secondment.  A secondment is, the person who is seconded 

remains the employee of the board or the area of the system 

from which they come and are permanently employed.  So 

they're supposed to be borrowed and then returned when the 

job is over.  And there were a number of those long-term, 

extended secondments. 

 

And that's one of the things that we're looking at in the 

reorganization, is to minimize those positions.  And if a 

position is indeed permanent, then to describe it as such.  But 

secondments do have that use, and that's a valid use.  So we 

certainly will continue to have secondments in certain positions 

from time to time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, are there specific measures in place in order to ensure 

that abuses are being avoided?  And I also had asked what sort 

of expenditures are being incurred at present with secondments.  

Where I understand what you're saying is that you're evaluating 

these, the numbers have changed from 71 to 57, is my 

understanding; 57, to some people, would still seem like a very 

large number.  And while some of those are justified, I think 

that they all should be able to be justified. 

 

And I'm wondering what is in place to assess the purpose of 

these secondments and the monies associated with them to 

ensure that, in fact, the citizens are getting their money's worth. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to outline 

where the current secondment staff is located, in which areas of 

activity.  And as I said before, that curriculum writing is one of 

the main areas.  And out of the 57 . . . these are the old 

numbers; out of the 71, there were 19 in curriculum and 

instruction and three in evaluation and student records. There 

are seven in regional offices.  We have the regional offices of 

the department 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

throughout the province.  And the OMLO, the Official 

Minority Languages Office, has 18. 

 

This is one of the things that we hope to achieve in the 

reorganization of the department and the involving of the 

department staff in that new structure, is so that permanent 

employees and people who are on temporary assignments 

through secondments will all know exactly how they fit, what 

their place is in the structure. 

 

And I hope that at the end of that time we will have a 

mechanism to monitor the number of permanent employees or 

casual, versus the number of secondments.  And in the interest 

of open and honest government, that information will at all 

times be public. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, in your Estimates, you're providing monies for school 

construction. And I'd like to know how much of the money that 

you are proposing to spend is devoted to actual construction 

and how much is devoted to retiring debts from past projects. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no current, new 

construction this year, but there is approximately $65 million 

shown in the Estimates as being capital expenditures.  That is 

this year's current commitment to construction that has already 

occurred. 

 

Normally there's a 10-year time frame to pay for a new school. 

And the shares of the province and the local board are 

contributed and so forth.  No part of current construction, if 

there is any, is ever shown in the current budget.  Like, if a new 

school was built in '91-92, there would be no cost shown.  The 

cost would be the amortization over the following 10 years 

including this one.  So this year's contribution of $65 million is 

mortgage payments, if you like, on past construction. 

 

(1130) 

 

And if we didn't undertake any new construction whatsoever, 

that would be, the $65 million would be a diminishing amount 

over 10 years.  And by the end of a 10-year time frame, it 

would be zero.  But we do certainly propose, once we finalize 

our plan for the allocation of capital to begin as our financial 

resources allow, to of course invest in capital in our education 

system again. 

 

The other amount that would be shown in the Estimates being 

$14 million all together, 3 million of which is designated for 

post-secondary institutions and universities and leaving $11 

million for repairs and maintenance and emergency 

construction, of which 8 million-odd, I think about 8.8 million, 

has been allocated and announced in firm projects already.  So 

there is a certain contingency amount there for 

occupational-health-and-safety factors that need to be corrected 

in the balance of the year. 

 

That's the explanation I can provide for the capital amounts 

being divided into contributions for past construction and this 

year's current maintenance, which is always shown in the 

current budget. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I know that this has been raised previously, but I have 

received so many letters about this that I would like to have 

your response to this question to me specifically. 

 

Approximately $1.6 million is going to be spent on a school in 

the town of Loreburn.  And when this addition is completed, 

the K-6 school at the town of Elbow is going to be closed.  I'm 

wondering why these monies are being allocated for 

construction when the school at Elbow could be kept open with 

modest renovations. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member 

opposite understands, I know, this kind of decision is the 

responsibility of the local board, the division board which is 

duly elected by the people that they represent.  But there is 

some background to this situation in the form of a note that I 

have here.  It's fairly recent, dated June 16, and I would be very 

pleased to table it and provide a copy to the member so that she 

may have the details that supports the board's decision. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I appreciate that very much.  I'm going to 

move to universities, and I'm wondering if you would be 

willing to provide the names of persons who are members of 

the inquiry into universities and outline their qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd be very pleased to 

do so.  There is a three-person panel that has been named.  The 

chairman is Mr. Al Johnson, who is currently a professor 

emeritus at the University of Toronto and was, at one point, the 

president of the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), 

among many other professional and academic activities that 

he's had in his life. 

 

He is currently in South Africa on a CIDA (Canadian 

International Development Agency) project, advising the South 

African government on the integration of black people into the 

public service.  So I think once he finishes that, he shouldn't 

have a lot of problem with the situations in our universities. 

 

He is supported by Gwen Randall who is . . . I should mention 

also that Dr. Johnson was born and raised in Saskatchewan and 

educated here in Elbow.  And although he's from out of the 

province now, he is a Saskatchewan native. 

 

Gwen Randall is also a Saskatchewan native who is a lawyer 

now, engaged in private practice in Calgary.  She is Queen's 

Counsel.  She was formerly, as well, a member of the board of 

governors of the University of Regina. 

 

Brian Tinker is a Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy).  He is now 

retired, lives at the west coast.  But I think the member will 

recall him as a member of the administration at the University 

of Saskatchewan and, prior to that, at the University of Regina.  

He did serve some time, just prior to his retirement, on the 

administrative staff of the University of Calgary.  So he 

certainly has a good insight into the administrative workings of 

universities and is familiar with the Saskatchewan scene. 

 

And I think all these people will understand the philosophy of 

Saskatchewan and how Saskatchewan 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

people see the universities playing a role in our society and our 

economy.  And that is the kind of credentials that we wanted, is 

people that would be in a position to take an objective view, 

because they're not part of the current university community in 

the province, but people that were born and raised here and 

have spent some of their working life here and their 

professional life and that truly understand how Saskatchewan 

people feel about the goals and role of their universities. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Mr. 

Chairman, I hope that one of the things that won't happen . . . 

when people come from a very traditional way of 

conceptualizing universities, it means that they may in fact 

have very innovative ways of beginning to look at new ways.  

It's just not . . . it doesn't become part of their paradigm, if you 

will. 

 

And one of the realities is that when the Premier of Manitoba 

ends up signing an agreement with the Governor of Minnesota 

to in fact not only have requirements for entrance to be at par 

but to have tuition at par, to have research and development 

dollars shared, and we don't seem to be able to reconcile our 

differences between the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan, I only pose to you that I hope that 

what we will do is to see some very useful ways of being able 

to look at the ways that universities can share in research 

dollars or do some things that may be quite different, in 

looking to what's been happening in Manitoba and Alberta and 

Saskatchewan universities, doing more in joint ventures with 

them.  That's just a comment.  And I do wish to go on to 

another area because I seem to be monopolizing your time 

today. 

 

There's been a lot of discussion about testing of Saskatchewan 

students.  And I don't know if you know about my background, 

but of course before my life as a clinical psychologist I did an 

enormous amount of testing.  In fact taught at university, 

specific classes regarding diagnosis and remedial work, 

prescriptive teaching of children with learning disabilities. 

 

What I'm interested in here is the fact that we bring in foreign 

tests which are extraordinarily expensive and really do not 

provide an adequate measurement for the kinds of children that 

we have in our province or even for that matter Canadian 

children at large. 

 

And I'm wondering if you're considering providing funds, 

indeed if you are providing funds, for the development of solid, 

locally based tests that are founded on basic subjects, that are 

going to eliminate the use for foreign, expensive tests? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could answer the 

first comment first.  I think that the member will be encouraged 

to know, as I am, that as a result of the western premier's 

conference, which was held at Williams Lake in April, one of 

the communiques that came from that conference was a 

directive for the western education ministers to meet and to . . . 

the objective being to see whether there were areas where we 

could share resources. 

 

As another side note, you mentioned the University of 

Manitoba and their arrangements with the U.S. (United States).  

And I'm not sure whether you're aware; I just became aware 

recently myself that the Government of Manitoba set up a 

review panel very similar, with a very similar mandate to our 

universities review panel.  Theirs is headed by, I believe, their 

former premier, Duff Roblin.  And I'm not sure who the other 

members were.  But the mandate was very much the same. 

 

So we had this western education ministers' meeting just this 

very week -- it was on Monday and Tuesday.  And it was the 

ministers from Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 

Columbia.  Alberta and British Columbia both have 

departments of continuing education and K to 12, so there were 

the two ministers from each of those provinces.  Saskatchewan 

and Alberta have only the one department.  And then the 

Yukon and the Northwest Territories were represented as well. 

 

It was just an extremely productive meeting.  The time . . . I 

mean, everybody is feeling the fiscal pinch, and so people are 

prepared to talk about sharing and doing things co-operatively 

and collaboratively in areas that a few years ago they probably 

wouldn't have discussed in depth. 

 

So one of the things that was on the agenda was post-secondary 

education, and there will be follow-up to this meeting.  Each 

province or territory sort of went away with a task to develop.  

One of the provinces is going to develop an interprovincial 

assessment and recommendations on the more efficient 

delivery and sharing in distance education.  One is looking at 

the universities. 

 

And to their credit, the leaders of the western Canadian 

universities have been meeting independently of the ministries 

on their own, talking about ways of sharing research dollars, 

centres of excellence, and looking closely at models like the 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine which is funded, as 

you know, core funding by all the provinces, and looking at 

those models. 

 

Another area that will be pursued is the development of 

aboriginal content in curriculum, which is a concern for all of 

us.  And really it doesn't seem sensible for four provinces and 

two territories to all be having people working at this 

independently.  It's true that in terms of the French governance 

and that component of the curriculum and the aboriginal 

component there are regional differences.  But it doesn't mean 

we all have to do our thing, that surely there is a core that could 

be established, and then people could put the appropriate 

flavour on it for their own jurisdiction. 

 

So there are those important areas that will be pursued.  

Another one was the transfer ability of credits and of teaching 

credentials from one jurisdiction to another.  So we will be 

taking really a comprehensive approach in looking at these 

issues on a regional basis and we will be meeting again.  So I 

think it is probably one of the most productive efforts that has 

happened for a long time, and the people that were there were 

very sincere in following through. 

 

On the second, the testing, I know that you will be 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

encouraged by our efforts to develop a provincial education 

indicators program.  And I may as well refer to it myself before 

I get the question, but Saskatchewan did participate in the 

international assessment of education progress.  This was the 

international test.  There were some press releases surrounding 

the results of this earlier this year, I think about February.  And 

Saskatchewan students did rate very well comparatively in 

those tests to students from other countries and also to students 

within other provinces of Canada. 

 

(1145) 

 

Then earlier this year we declined to actively participate in the 

school achievement indicators project, which is a Canadian 

one.  But the reason for that . . . and we took our decision not to 

stay out of it for ever, no decision is ever green, I guess in that 

sense.  But we think it is so important, especially when we're 

developing a new curriculum, to have a provincial evaluation 

system that evaluates what we are doing.  It establishes a 

baseline from where we are now and measures our progress on 

that.  And that once we have that established and we're doing 

that in a collaborative way involving parents, involving the 

business community formally through the chambers of 

commerce and the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, so that they will know what we're doing and how 

we're addressing the issue of accountability . . . That exercise is 

becoming fairly intense.  It started a number of months ago. 

 

And once we're satisfied that we have a good internal method 

of measuring -- and throughout that exercise we will be 

monitoring the Canadian indicators project -- and if we feel at 

some point that they can dovetail together or they can support 

each other, we would be willing to review the decision.  But in 

the meantime we're concentrating on developing our 

home-grown test. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Madam Minister, I couldn't be more delighted by your response 

regarding the way in which there's going to be more 

co-operation between the provinces, particularly when it comes 

to post-secondary education. 

 

To refine a bit my question on standardized testing, you know 

one of the things that we truly need to acknowledge in this 

province is the fact that 68 per cent of our young people, native 

young people, are under the age of . . . 68 per cent of the native 

population is under the age of 23. 

 

One of the things that I found in my professional work that was 

truly tragic was, because of the kinds of standardized tests that 

were used in our province, as foreign tests standardized on 

white middle-class American children, that our native 

population, our children in this province of native ancestry, 

were never diagnosed with specific learning disabilities -- 

never.  They were diagnosed as educably mentally retarded.  

And it was simply because of the standardized tests that were 

used. 

 

And that's one of the aspects that I'm hoping that the 

Department of Education will look at and be committed to, is 

the development of our own tests, looking at our specific 

population and the needs that are going to be required to ensure 

that we have specific education 

programming that is going to allow our young people, 

regardless of background, to be able to learn well and become 

full participants in our society. 

 

I'm pleased to hear that there is a commitment to local 

standardized testing, the development of it.  But I'm quite 

interested in knowing the time lines for this.  As you know, 

being able to end up doing this kind of work and coming out 

with the kinds of results that we're going to need are going to 

be longer term.  And I'm wondering what portion of the 

education budget is being allocated to the development of local 

standardized tests. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again this would 

be one of the areas where when, to go back to where we talked 

about secondments, this is becoming an intense exercise 

because we realize the importance of it.  And so there are some 

people that are seconded to work on this project.  We certainly 

share the concern with respect to the performance of and the 

opportunities for aboriginal students in our system.  And we've 

had numerous conversations with leaders in the native 

community.  We know that we have to do a better job in our 

education system. 

 

One of the evidences, I guess, of our commitment to this is the 

five-year agreement that we recently entered into just within 

the last few weeks with the Gabriel Dumont Institute, 

specifically for curriculum development that has a Metis 

content.  And of course an evaluation system to correspond 

with that content would be very important.  There have been 

agreements with Gabriel Dumont Institute prior to this, but 

they were always one-year, and it made it very difficult for 

them to plan ahead in a more comprehensive way. 

 

To the question on the assessment and evaluation, how much 

we've budgeted for it, we have, in this year's budget, $640,000 

on the assessment and evaluation.  And then under the 

provincial exams and student records, the amount budgeted 

there is 1.226 million. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, I'm wondering if you could give to us the 

names of those individuals who will be involved in creating 

locally standardized tests, and if you could state their 

credentials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we can certainly 

undertake to provide the specific individuals rather than giving 

you a list of all of the people that work in the evaluation 

department, the people that are assigned to this particular task, 

and we will -- and their qualifications -- and we will undertake 

to do that. 

 

As well, as I referred to earlier, there is an advisory committee 

composed of people from the education stakeholders, the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), LEADS (League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), 

the business community, the home and school association, as 

an advisory committee to this body. 

 

This is a fairly long-term project because the tests are 

developed in this collaborative way to correspond to 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

specific curriculum that's being developed and then the 

curriculum and the testing system then are tested in a pilot by 

teachers in the field.  And then the results come back. 

 

So it's certainly more than a one-year project.  It's a term 

project, a matter of developing the curriculum, developing the 

tests to go with it.  So it couldn't be really described as a 

standardized test because in each case it will conform to the 

curriculum and can be adjusted regionally.  For instance, like 

for northern students. 

 

So it's a longer-term project.  I don't mean to say off into the far 

blue yonder, but two or three years until it's completed and 

refined. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I think one of the things that I 

was making reference to that is a little different from the 

broader standardized testing to which you are referring, is the 

need for more specific standardized testing that addresses what 

we are facing now and will be a growing challenge as the years 

go on. 

 

I refer specifically again to native children in our province.  It 

requires an enormous amount of expertise to develop 

standardized tests.  It requires even more expertise to develop 

standardized tests for children who are special-needs children.  

And I guess one of the things that I'd like to do is to simply 

remind the minister that I have spoken to her and written to her 

about one of the few individuals that lives in this province who 

not only started the Institute for Child Guidance and 

Development, not only was the head of the Department for the 

Education of Exceptional Children, not only has written books 

that have been recognized internationally, but has developed 

standardized tests and in recent years has been one of the few 

individuals who has gone from one reserve to another to begin 

to look at and address this very, very important area. 

 

And I do hope that Dr. John McLeod will be, at some point, at 

the very least consulted in these matters. 

 

My next question is regarding Saskatchewan's two universities 

because they produce now up to 900 teachers a year.  And in a 

recent study that SSTA published -- in fact it was in their 

Estimates -- that through the balance of this decade, there are 

only going to be, as they predict, 400 jobs available for these 

university graduates each year.  I'm wondering, for every one 

that we train to be a teacher in this province, it appears that 

we're educating another to teach beyond our borders, and that . 

. . or the even worse alternative, which is to line up in the 

unemployment lines. 

 

I'm wondering when there's going to be an allocation of 

resources to be used more effectively so that money is going to 

train our students for jobs that are going to be available within 

our own province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member, I'd like to assure her that I did receive, and we had a 

conversation about, the attributes and qualifications of Dr. 

McLeod, and I certainly appreciate them.  And I do want her to 

know that the department is working very closely with Dr. 

McLeod on a specific project in Prince Albert at the moment.  

And we certainly 

do intend to employ his expertise wherever possible, and we do 

recognize that his credentials are more than sound in this area.  

So we appreciate -- I appreciate personally -- the reference to 

him and the correspondence from the member recommending 

him to us. 

 

On the matter of . . . I guess you would call it supply and 

demand of teachers, this too was the subject of our 

interprovincial meeting of ministers earlier this week, where 

some provinces are importers of teachers and some are 

exporters.  This is one of the subjects that will be addressed, or 

certainly falls within the mandate of the universities review 

panel.  So we hope that they will deal with this in consultation 

with the universities and the education community and that 

they will have some recommendations to make in this respect. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, would you be willing, when you receive some 

information about their recommendations, would you be 

willing to share those with me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I certainly expect at 

this time that the recommendations and the report of the 

universities review panel will be completely public. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, one of the things that's 

become evident is that we really are not, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, competitive in the fields of science and 

technology.  And I'm wondering what resources are going to be 

devoted to training persons in this particular field. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I am 

assuming that, or I'm more than assuming, I'm expecting that 

this will be one of the areas that's looked at by the universities 

review panel. And I know that, in recent years particularly, 

Saskatchewan and Canada have not devoted enough in terms of 

financial resources and encouragement to science and 

technology and research in this country and in this province. 

 

But we certainly do have a very solid base and a 

world-recognized base of science, technology, and 

bio-technology in Saskatoon at the university there, together 

with the medical college, the hydrology centre, the SRC 

(Saskatchewan Research Council), the establishment of the 

NRC (National Research Council), and VIDO (Veterinary 

Infectious Diseases Organization), Biostar, and last week the 

addition of a company from Denmark that is establishing here 

that is active in the field of bio-technology. 

 

We certainly do have some scientists whose expertise is in 

demand in the world.  So we certainly don't have to take a back 

seat to anybody in that area.  We will try to increase, depending 

upon or in keeping with the recommendations of the review 

panel, people into science and technology. 

 

We had in 1988-89, 85 scholars attracted by the Industry, 

Science and Technology Canada bursary program, 117 in 

'89-90, 108 in '90-91, and 106 in '91-92.  So that the numbers 

of people, students that are attracted into those faculties, are 

gradually increasing.  But I think too that we are not doing 

enough and that looking to the needs of the 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

future, that we certainly will try to find ways to improve our 

expertise in this area and to attract more students into those 

fields of endeavour. 

 

(1200) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I guess one of the things I'm really seeing here, what I 

was trying to present, was the dilemma that I see.  It's an 

imbalance.  Let's step out of education for just a moment and 

I'll use a different example. 

 

When we're talking about the training of nurses, what we're 

finding is that they are being trained in how to deal with 

specific treatments of people that are really not based on 

preventative medicine or specialty areas.  We're spending a 

whole lot of money graduating nurses who are not going to fit 

into what has been presented by your government as a 

particular model of health care.  So that's monies wasted, and a 

lot of these individuals are going to have to go elsewhere or be 

trained very differently. 

 

On the other hand, in education we now have 900 people who 

have graduated -- the projection is that this is what's going to 

be happening each year -- with only 400 jobs available.  And 

we have a deficiency in certain areas where we very much need 

to be able to have a growth in our population of young people 

who can be employable.  The latest statistics, in fact those that 

have just come out this month, have shown that the one area 

where unemployment is rising the most is with young people 

between the ages of 20 and 24.  And it's up 3.4 per cent. 

 

So obviously we are not seeing where things are headed here.  

And I think that if there are two areas which are absolutely 

crucial for the future of this province, it happens to be in 

education and training.  So what I'm wanting to really 

understand is where the strategy is going here.  And I applaud 

your efforts in wanting to involve a wide range of individuals, 

but what we need to do is to have some prompt intervention 

here that's supposed to be leading somewhere. 

 

And I think that it's the responsibility of government to have a 

vision too, and to provide for people what the overall vision 

will be, unlike people who live and work in isolated disciplines 

who don't have a responsibility nor do they have the capacity to 

see the overall picture.  They're one component part, and they 

in essence have to be viewed as a special interest group.  And 

they have to be plugged in as a part of the collage that fits into 

the overall vision. 

 

And that's not what I'm hearing.  Okay?  That's the part that's 

missing here, is a sense of where the province is going in 

education.  And people who are out there need to hear.  

Universities need to hear.  And people who have responsibility 

for K to 12 have to understand that if in fact the government's 

saying we're reducing education costs by 2 per cent this year 

and 2 per cent next year and 2 per cent the year after, but we're 

consulting with everybody . . . what are we going to end up 

with?  What's the picture going to look like for the province of 

Saskatchewan in four years time in education? 

 

And that's really where I'm getting at here, is that I 

applaud your efforts to involve people, but I want to know 

what your plan for education is.  What can the people of 

Saskatchewan expect their education to look like in four years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the member from Greystone, in the development 

of this vision or the absence of a vision I guess, is exactly what 

has prompted us to institute these reviews of the system.  And 

as I said earlier, it's very difficult to tinker with a part of it 

without causing a problem somewhere else.  So it's necessary 

to take the time to do a very comprehensive review of each 

component and then bring those together to develop that vision. 

 

So we would think that the time frame for all of this . . . If I had 

it on a graphic I could show you how it all fits together.  We 

don't just have a bunch of balls in the air.  We really do have a 

plan for the results and the recommendations of all the reviews 

to feed into the Saskatchewan Education Council, and then 

with assistance they will develop a vision and a strategic plan. 

 

And this is not projected to take years; this is projected to be . . 

. well it'll never be complete because it'll always have to be 

reviewed and changed as conditions change because we're 

living in a very dynamic era.  But we certainly see something 

that will be in the public forum by very early in 1993, and 

certainly in time for us to incorporate some specific 

recommendations of the review panels and the council into the 

budgeting process for '93-94.  So we do expect some relatively 

early results, but an overall picture that can be shared with the 

people of Saskatchewan by very early next year. 

 

And it does take . . . We have a unique model of an education 

system in Saskatchewan.  I guess I never really quite 

appreciated it myself until I had contact with ministers of 

Education from across the country.  Some people think that, 

well we do all this consulting in Saskatchewan.  We consult 

with the SSTA, with the teachers' federation, with the league of 

administrators, with the business officials, and we've developed 

over the years a collaborative model. 

 

So we have a situation, and it's a tradition in Saskatchewan, 

that there isn't somebody that goes around and says, this is the 

way we're going to do it in Saskatchewan.  Some people think 

this is cumbersome.  I don't share that view.  And after seeing a 

little bit of the inside of what happens in other provinces, 

where for instance the trustees' association provincially will 

take one view and the teachers' federation takes the other view, 

and the post-secondary takes one view and the K to 12 takes 

another, and then legislators sort of move in the middle and 

please some of the people some of the time and you have strife 

and strikes and it affects the quality of what happens in the 

education system and . . .  We don't have that. 

 

And I think it's well worthwhile for us to preserve that 

co-operative spirit within the education community.  And from 

time to time when there can't be a consensus, yes, government 

has to take leadership.  But I think it is important that we use 

those links and those bridges that 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

have been built traditionally in Saskatchewan between the 

stakeholders in the system to draw everybody in so that they 

feel part of the result. 

 

So that's approximately the time frame and that's the reason for 

it taking maybe a little bit longer than some people think it 

should.  It certainly takes longer than hiring a consultant and 

giving six weeks to come up with a new vision for the 

province.  But with our tradition in Saskatchewan of personal, 

holistic involvement in our affairs, I think that the process that 

we have under way is really more in keeping with that. 

 

And specifically you mentioned the training, the changes that 

are going to be required and the training for health care 

workers.  And, Mr. Chairman, the member will be encouraged 

to know that we have some concrete results already.  We have 

been consulting between the Department of Health and the 

Department of Education, with the medical professions, with 

the nursing, with the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 

Association), and the CNA (certified nursing assistant), the 

established groups, on how we will change the training of 

health care workers to correspond to the wellness model and 

the extension of home-based care. 

 

And in fact just within the last few days the Department of 

Health has entered into a specific contract, one that I'm aware 

of, with SIAST, to train in a specific area.  And there will be 

more of this.  And that one program is the result of 

consultations that we have taken with exactly that objective in 

mind.  And we certainly are continuing to do that and will build 

into the training and education component for health care 

workers the requirements they will need to meet the demands, 

the different, certainly the changing, demands of what we see 

as the wellness model and home-based delivery of health care 

services. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I of course concur with you that in no way would I 

want to see some consultant brought in to review things for six 

weeks and then give us what our vision should be for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I say with great respect that people 

supposedly voted for your government because they believed 

that you did have a vision for Saskatchewan.  And that's what I 

see lacking here.  I think that it's very important to consult with 

the groups that have provided an enormous amount of valuable 

input and guidance into the way our education system has 

developed in Saskatchewan. 

 

But it is only the government that has the opportunity to look at 

everything under the umbrella.  And it's the responsibility of 

those who are governing the people of Saskatchewan to have a 

mission, to have a particular mission statement, to have 

principles in place that are going to be required to be met in 

order to reach that mission statement. 

 

And it is the groups involved to which you are referring who in 

fact are involved much further down the process, and those 

individuals are part of the objective development.  But the 

overall mission, there has to be some mission that this 

government wishes to have. 

 

And the reason I'm saying this is because, how do we 

know how education is going to fit into economic 

development?  How do we know how education is going to fit 

into the overall health care needs of this province, or science 

and technology, in the way that we're going to have people 

helping to develop our needs as far as energy are concerned or 

biotechnology is concerned? 

 

What are we . . . what is the way in which we can understand 

education fitting into such things as agriculture when we know 

that agriculture can't simply stay the same way?  I mean when 

we began the world wheat trade, we were only one of four 

competitors.  Now there are 59 of them.  I mean we can't 

simply continue to be an exporter of grains and oilseeds.  I 

mean the point being that we have to become a centre of 

excellence on agricultural technology.  We're going to need the 

people with that kind of ability to be able to fit into what it is in 

the future that we want to become. 

 

And if we want to have centres of excellence in, you know, 

becoming a centre of excellence on energy options and 

conservation or the centre of excellence on agricultural 

technology, to end up exporting to the eastern European 

countries or whatever, and teaching them, giving them our 

knowledge instead of simply our products, then there has to be 

a plan for all of this. 

 

And that's what I'm most frustrated by, is that there really . . . 

What I'm hearing from you is that there is a process involved of 

including people, but I don't know what the mission statement 

is, the way that the government is saying, this is where we want 

to go.  And so when we're dealing with economic development 

or economic diversification and trade or health care or 

agriculture or education, these are how all the component parts 

fit. 

 

Now I'm sure that we could go on for even longer than what we 

have.  Let me give a very specific question and this might 

expedite the process here.  Like many other areas, education is 

experiencing some innovative challenges.  And one of these 

areas of innovation is the introduction of work study or what is 

often termed co-operative education in both secondary and 

post-secondary levels. 

 

The federal government sponsors a lot of the programs like this 

at the secondary level, but their declining funding formula 

often prevents our local school boards from being able to bring 

forward many of these types of programs.  My question to you 

is: what such programs does your department sponsor?  And 

how much, if any, is expended on them? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to go back to address 

the first part of the member's comments with respect to a vision 

and a strategic plan.  It's interesting to note, and the member 

may be aware, Mr. Chairman, that there is a strategic plan for 

the K to 12 system that was initiated by our former 

administration.  The collaborative work really started on it in 

the late '70s. 

 

The strategic plan is called Directions.  It was developed with 

all the stakeholders in the education system, including teachers.  

And I know that there are times when, 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

if you can't have a consensus or if it takes too long to have a 

consensus or somebody has to take the leadership . . . but I 

think it just wouldn't be appropriate to develop a strategic plan, 

for instance, without involving the people who are going to 

deliver it. 

 

The strategic plan called Directions involved the teachers 

closely and had their support so that they felt a part of the 

vision.  Some of the plan did get derailed.  It formerly was 

unveiled and started, I guess, really about 1984 with the 

development of the core curriculum.  It was supposed to be a 

10-year project. 

 

It's a resource-based curriculum, so it is expensive.  And by 

resource-based I mean that, just in general, instead of a student 

having one text for grade 5 for one subject, the intent of the 

core curriculum is to teach students, first of all, the basic skills 

in to be literate and skills in numeracy, the three R's, so that 

they know the basics.  But to also teach them to look for 

information, to be critical thinkers, and to be self-reliant 

learners so that when they exit the school system they are in a 

fit condition to adjust to whatever changes may come.  Because 

we have no crystal ball, we have no idea.  People would never 

have guessed 20 or 25 years ago what our high school 

graduates and university graduates would be facing today. 

 

So the intent of the strategic plan that was begun to be 

developed in our former administration in the late '70s is really 

well under way. 

 

We've revisited it recently knowing that we will be operating 

and . . . this K to 12 system will be operating under fiscal 

restraint for the foreseeable future.  We wanted to make sure 

that if there were cut-backs made or corners cut that they were 

done . . . that there are savings made still keeping the vision in 

full view.  And that the objective of the strategic plan that we 

called Directions wasn't compromised because of lack of 

funding. 

 

That we may have to . . . and we have announced that we will 

slow down the pace of implementation.  We've added another 

two years onto the time frame for completion of the 

introduction of the core curriculum and the testing system that 

will accompany it.  So we felt, we still feel, that it's the right 

thing to do. 

 

But if it is the right thing to do it's important, more important to 

do it right than it is to do it quickly.  So we've extended the 

time frame to make sure that boards have got the resources to 

give teachers the in-service time for professional development 

so that they can become familiar with the curriculum and so 

that the resources are available at the class-room level. 

 

But that is . . . basically the objective is to teach students to 

think for themselves, to search out information, not to learn 

things by rote, so that they will be able to make the adjustments 

and the transitions in their future education when they leave the 

K to 12 system, and in their adult working life as conditions 

around them change and the sands shift, that they will be 

self-reliant people who will be able to make those adjustments 

and transitions. 

 

So that's part of a strategic plan that really is already there, 

that was initiated by our administration and I guess, fair to say, 

within our philosophy, which means accessibility by all people, 

equality of opportunity and education no matter where in the 

province a student lives, and responsiveness of the system to 

the current and changing needs of people for education and 

training. 

 

And there have been some dramatic changes, Mr. Chairman, as 

the member opposite will know, where in our society in terms 

of the fitness of students who arrive in the class-room to learn. 

 

Even when we started the development of the strategic plan we 

call Directions for the K to 12 system in the late '70s, it would 

never have been contemplated, I don't think, by anybody in 

Saskatchewan that one in five children would live in poverty, 

that 30 to 40 per cent of children would arrive in an elementary 

class-room in a not fit condition to learn because of emotional 

problems, hunger, poorly dressed in severe weather. 

 

And so we are initiating what we're calling an integrated school 

model.  We'll have approximately a dozen pilot projects 

running this year in September already.  It will be a 

co-operative model that will involve the departments of Health 

and Social Services and Justice and Education with resources 

in terms of dollars and energy from those departments all 

within the school, using the school as a centre. 

 

Because in cases like this, you could have the very best 

curriculum in the world, and if the children arriving in the 

class-room are in a not fit condition to learn because of other 

situations, these can't be expected to be solved, all the ills of 

society, by the education dollar and the class-room teacher. 

 

So this is another initiative that we've taken in response to 

some current conditions that we hope to improve as the 

economy improves.  But they are with us today, and we have to 

face them.  We have to make sure that those students are not 

disadvantaged when they leave the education system. 

 

In response to the questions about the work-study programs, 

like the co-op programs . . . And I think the question was with 

respect to joint federally funded programs.  There are a wide 

variety of programs and they are declining.  In fact, there was 

in this current fiscal year, there would be $218 million less to 

the education system cumulative from the federal transfer 

payments.  This is a very serious problem, the off-loading of 

federal responsibility to the province.  But it is continuing, and 

it's something that we're trying to adjust to, and to take 

advantage of as many federal dollars as there are available. 

 

We do have the Canada student loan program.  It desperately 

needs changes.  And we're making representations on a regular 

basis, together with the other provinces, in that respect.  But it 

is $52 million in the '91-92 loan year that's repayable, most of 

it repayable, assistance to students.  But that's federal money 

that's available. 

 

There is the Canada-Saskatchewan training agreement on 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

labour-force development.  That emphasizes the need for a 

co-ordinated approach to training and labour-force 

development.  It has been stable at 75,000 -- $75 million, sorry, 

in each fiscal year as against the provincial contribution of 122.  

So the federal funds in that is less than the provincial, but it is 

there; it's available.  And that's one of the programs that's not 

decreasing. 

 

Funding for literacy projects through the Secretary of State's 

department is in 1992 half a million dollars. 

 

There is another training program that is available too. I'm just 

looking for the amount here.  This is a cost-shared program for 

apprentices.  It's not available to all apprentices; it's tied to the 

unemployment insurance fund.  And I'm sorry I haven't got the 

numbers for that one here.  I think it's not a budgeted one.  It's 

probably a capped one and it depends on the qualified 

applications that they receive. 

 

There is the Saskatchewan skills extension program.  The total 

amount in that one is $4.2 million.  There are federal seat 

purchases within that offered by the regional colleges which 

would amount to about between 25 and 30 per cent of that 

amount. 

 

Then there is in the area of languages, there is an agreement, a 

protocol, fully reimburseable federal funds -- $10 million in 

1991-92.  Just somewhat over 10 million.  That was in '91-92. 

 

And we don't budget that figure.  We do that through orders in 

council because we don't know which institutions will qualify 

and exactly which amounts each institution will get.  So it's a 

bit cumbersome, but we spend the money and then we have it 

fully reimbursed.  But that's why it's not shown as a budgeted 

item, because we don't . . . there is no provincial money net, in 

the end.  It's that we have to pay the money in order to get it 

back. 

 

The other one is a subsidiary agreement which relates to the 

enhancement of francophone minority instruction and 

governance, and there was $27 million available in the 1988 

agreement.  It was a 10-year agreement.  Some of it was 

forfeited by the previous administration by their not instituting 

the French governance model.  But there is approximately $13 

million left, and we're attempting to renegotiate it back to its 

original level. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Vice-Chair, and Madam Minister, I do 

want to make a brief comment about your remarks earlier and 

that is about the one strategic plan that you have from the 

1970s.  I guess that's part of my concern, as much as the 

concept of Directions has been good and is of value. 

 

If one takes part in something like the Aylmer conference in 

Quebec and other places, that's part of what the problem is, is 

that we can't anticipate many, many of the changes in the 

future.  And unless we get to thinking in very different ways, 

conceptualizing the future and anticipating changes, we aren't 

going to be ready, our people are not going to be ready, for 

what happens. 

 

Just one clarification on what you were saying about work 

placement or co-operative education programs.  Am I to 

take it from what you were reporting that we as a province do 

not singularly fund any of these work-placement programs or 

co-operative programs, that they are all joint-venture programs 

with the federal government? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not quite sure that I 

understand the member's questions.  I thought that her question 

related to specifically which programs were funded at least 

partially by the federal government.  And so those were the 

ones that I outlined. 

 

But of course we do have the partnerships between SIAST 

programs and the business community where there are work 

placements.  We've got the programs at the University of 

Saskatchewan within the College of Commerce which has their 

co-op program.  We have initiatives ourselves within the 

department to fund literacy programs in the work place, to fund 

co-operative programs.  So yes, there are a large number, and I 

certainly hope there'll be a growing number. 

 

And I should really address, Mr. Chairman, the member's 

comments about the need for the updating of the strategic plan 

because we did . . . I thought I mentioned it, but I might not 

have been clear to the member.  It was just last week I believe 

that we had a press release relating to the review that we did to 

update the strategic plan.  The update was initiated, well, early 

this year, very late last year, I think about December, because 

we realized we were already into the budgeting cycle.  We 

realized that the fiscal realities that this province is facing was 

going to have an impact on education.  We wanted to make 

sure, as I said, that the strategic plan, the vision in the strategic 

plan, wasn't impaired by decisions that would be made in 

response to funding questions. 

 

(1230) 

 

So we had a committee do an intensive review of the strategic 

plan directions, and they gave us a report last week.  We did 

issue a press release with respect to it and a written response 

that I made to their recommendations which we do intend to 

implement. 

 

So indeed we do have a very recent, in fact only days-old, 

comprehensive review and updating of that plan. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would like to introduce 

to members of the Assembly some guests that are in the east 

gallery: my wife's sister Gloria and her husband Barry and their 

children Sarah, Amy, Maggie, and Matthew are in town today 

and just dropped in to watch some of the proceedings.  And I 

would like all members of the Assembly to greet them here 

today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins the member in recognizing 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

and welcoming the special guests and recognizes the hon. 

member for Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Vice-Chair.  I 

was wondering if you would be willing to table the information 

that you just spoke about, the updating of the strategic plan, 

beyond what's available in the news release. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be pleased to 

provide the member -- I don't have one with me at the moment 

-- but I would certainly be pleased to provide her with a copy 

of the complete report and the recommendations and my 

written response and a copy of the press release. 

 

There has been -- we don't get much time to listen to the radio 

in this job -- but there has been considerable interest by the 

press.  I don't know what they've used, but I have done quite a 

number of interviews with respect to the study that is called 

Into The Classroom.  So I will make sure that you do receive a 

copy of the report and the response. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- One of the parts of my question . . . I'll 

actually restate my question and you do not have to answer 

specifically what the programs are.  But my question was:  

what such programs does your department and only your 

department sponsor and how much, if any, is expended on 

them? 

 

It was not what the federal government was spending.  My 

comment was merely that it appears as though there's ongoing 

diminishing of funding for education from the federal 

government. 

 

I think that you concur with me that this -- when we're talking 

about work study or co-operative education -- that these are 

really significant types of programs.  They have an important 

role to play when we're talking about the development of the 

people of our province.  So I was most interested in whether or 

not the government has reduced or increased its expenditures in 

this area. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, which I think I understand now, that the member is 

asking for the provincial contributions to these types of 

programs, and I do have an extensive list.  And in the 

information previously where I referred to federal 

contributions, in all of those programs, I think without 

exception except for the minority languages which is fully 

refundable, there is a provincial contribution as well, in most 

cases very substantial. 

 

Then we have a total of 14.97 million that is under the subvote 

name, training programs.  And then there's one that is a total of 

6 million that is under the subvote, education outreach fund.  

And I won't read the whole list, 

but it includes amounts of which the member will be aware, 

like the VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons) 

program which is $3.2 million. 

 

There have been in some cases slight adjustments, but in most 

cases the amounts are very similar to the prior year.  There is 

apprenticeship upgrading and special skills, which is 585,000.  

We have out of the province training agreements, like where 

we buy seats in other universities or technical schools where 

we don't offer the course in Saskatchewan; that amounts to 

341,000.  Then we have a northern training program which is 

2.7 million.  There are other programs here like our support of 

the NORTEP, the northern teacher education program, and the 

urban native teacher education program, SUNTEP 

(Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program). 

 

There are a wide range of programs that the province supports 

in literacy, on-the-job training, on-the-job adult upgrading, 

skills extension.  We do support a number of programs and we 

do consult with organizations, with the Provincial 

Apprenticeship Board, for example; with the organizations that 

represent disabled people.  We try to determine what needs are 

greatest so that we can allocate our limited resources to the 

most appropriate places.  Granted, it's not enough; we'd like to 

do more.  But I think our record in this area is one that we can 

be proud of. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, do the 

numbers that you're talking about represent an increase or a 

decrease in expenditures? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member is 

referring to the amount budgeted for this year versus the 

amount actually spent last year, in most cases, the amounts are 

very similar.  There is some small reductions probably in 

keeping with the global reduction that we had to third parties.  

We reduced third-party grants to the universities by 1 per cent, 

to the K to 12 system by 2 per cent, to SIAST by 3 per cent, 

and to the regional colleges by 1 per cent. 

 

So what we did when we worked on the balance of the line 

department budget -- and the other, which could be described 

as third-party programs -- was to try and keep them at the level 

they were last year or a reduction of not more than other third 

parties would have received. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, we have a 

lot of dedicated school professionals in our province.  And they 

have I think been very open about understanding the financial 

crisis that we're facing, and have been working very hard to 

reduce the costs in their respective schools. 

 

Unfortunately I think what we're doing is beginning to ask 

more and more and more of our schools.  I'm wondering how 

you see them being able to cope with their added duties, given 

that their funding is going to be reduced this year and they 

know that their funding is going to be reduced next year. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question about how to do more with less, this is one of the 

reasons for our development of the pilot projects in the 

integrated school model where we will be looking at 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

collaboration between the departments of Health, Social 

Services, Education, and Justice in having a co-ordinated 

service to children with needs in the class-room, to make them 

more receptive to learning and to share that responsibility so 

that it's not completely the responsibility of the teacher. 

 

The other things that we are doing is asking . . . and what we 

did do when we announced the third-party grants was we asked 

the education community to look very closely at their 

administration systems and to try to make sure that as many 

dollars available for education as possible find their way to the 

level of the class-room and the teacher, because that's the only 

place where education happens. 

 

And some school divisions in the province, particularly some 

of the rural ones, are very thin on administration already.  And 

so I wasn't saying that they all have a bureaucracy that they can 

do away with.  Some of the rural divisions already are staffed 

at a very low level, and they really don't have administration 

that they can reduce. 

 

But some of the larger school districts and certainly the 

department . . . that is the reason that we reduced our 

establishment by approximately 60 people.  We reduced our 

administrative budget, our global administrative budget, by 12 

per cent because we were trying to send a message and set an 

example to others in the system that we must make sure that 

our resources get to the student, who is the client of the system, 

and that we don't use it up in administrations that spend their 

time having meetings with each other and never get near a 

class-room or a class-room teacher. 

 

And I think there is more that can be done.  We are in the 

process of talking to the stakeholders in the education 

community about setting up a group that will look at the 

governance question because there certainly are some areas in 

Saskatchewan -- some rural, some urban -- who feel that they 

can provide a better level of service if they do things 

co-operatively.  And it doesn't necessarily mean a formal 

amalgamation.  It just means a way of doing things better. 

 

We have talked to all the partners in education about that 

exercise, and they do all want to become involved.  It's summer 

holidays for a lot of people now, not for us.  But we're planning 

to start that exercise in the beginning of September -- just 

talking with people and listening to people about how school 

divisions can work together to reduce their administrative costs 

and see those dollars at the class-room level. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, what impact do you think the cuts -- the 2 per cent 

cuts -- are going to have on our ability of our school boards to 

implement the core curriculum? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we addressed 

that.  We knew that it was possible that there would be an 

impact, in fact, likely that there would be an impact.  What we 

wanted to be sure of was that the impact didn't derail the vision 

and the objective.  So we did appoint a review committee.  It 

was a subcommittee of EPPAC (Educational Program Policy 

Advisory 

Committee), actually that was chaired by Dr. Sam Robinson, 

who is the assistant dean at the faculty of education at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

And they did submit their report last week which was called 

Into The Classroom, and I have undertaken to provide a copy 

of that report.  And certainly one of the main reasons for setting 

up that review and asking for it to be done and asking for 

specific recommendations was that reason that we wanted to 

know what the impact was, how it could be measured, and how 

the effects of it could be softened in terms of the 

implementation of core. 

 

Because the education community and certainly the teachers in 

this province that have piloted those programs, that have 

worked on that curriculum are very much committed to it.  And 

we wanted to make sure that we employed their efforts and the 

results of their efforts in the most productive way. 

 

So I think that you may feel assured when you do see a copy of 

the study that they've done and the results. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, as you know, there's legislation that requires school 

boards to provide services to children with special needs.  And 

I'm wondering if you can tell us if you're allocating sufficient 

funds that is actually going to allow school boards to carry out 

this requirement. 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, we do have a fund, 

SNPF called, you know, called the special needs program fund, 

and we are reviewing the formula with the advent of a greater 

amount and a greater emphasis on mainstreaming, which we 

support.  It became necessary to review the way the allocation 

is made.  And we did make some changes in it.  It seems to be 

working. 

 

And another recent special adjustment was a different 

allocation, or an adjustment in the allocation for special needs 

children who are in foster care.  Because there was a time when 

the funding formula recognized students up to a certain 

number, but if the number of special needs students in a school 

jurisdiction was more than average, there wasn't an appropriate 

recognition. 

 

And this would happen, for instance, in the area around Prince 

Albert where there might be a disproportionate number of 

special needs aboriginal children in foster care.  So we did 

refine that formula and we did make an additional allocation 

for that kind of circumstance.  It seems to be working well. 
 

The other aspect of the special needs student that we have paid 

attention to is a different approach, if you like, a team approach 

in terms of the consultants that are available to provide services 

at the class-room level.  And it's in a state of transition as 

certain individuals who were assigned certain jobs in the 

department before have been replaced by teams.  I know from 

the mail I've received that there are some people that feel like, 

oh the support has been removed because this person isn't there 

any more.  But I think as people get accustomed with the new 

approach they will realize that the allocation of resources to 

meet 



July 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

the needs of their child in their class-room will actually be 

enhanced by the new system. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, I know that 

in my experience in years past in special education, that every 

time a formula was changed it was changed in order to save the 

government money, and fewer children were being able to 

actually qualify for those special needs dollars.  So I hope that 

doesn't change if there's going to be a change . . . that isn't the 

case if there's a change in formula again. 

 

I'm wondering, is there any consultative support available from 

your department to help rural schools with the few resources 

that they have to address the needs of seriously handicapped 

children?  I of course am as interested as anyone in ensuring 

that these children can be served as close to their homes as 

possible.  And if you in fact have some support I'd like to know 

the nature of it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

allocation in this current estimate for special needs children, it 

amounts to 38,890,000-odd dollars.  And that is up from 

approximately 25 million in 1989.  So I don't have all the 

numbers for the intervening years but it certainly is increasing 

at a regular pace.  The budget was not cut; it was one of the 

areas that was increased. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, in the Estimates that I have there is actually a 

cut-back in support in the form of field services to rural boards.  

And I'm wondering how that can be justified in cutting back 

that kind of programming when you still hope to preserve the 

education system that strives to give people quality education 

regardless of where they live in the province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, this would represent 

some of the reductions that I referred to in the establishment of 

the department itself in Regina.  There wasn't a reduction of 

staff in our field offices that are out in various parts of the 

province, but there were five positions abolished, if you like, 

within the department that related to those people in the field.  

And that was done following a very careful assessment as to 

whether those people were needed. 

 

So even though it says field services in the subvote, it wasn't 

people that were out in the field.  It refers to positions that were 

in the department that are not there now. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It's 

interesting, because I do have a network of people with whom I 

consult on such things as Estimates. And in this case many of 

the questions that I'm raising today have been brought forward, 

and in this case by a director of education of a rural school 

board.  And in his experience, of course, one of the concerns 

that he has is that he says it's becoming almost impossible to 

provide quality education in a rural area when you've already 

been a highly responsible person as a director of education, and 

you've ensured that you're not top-heavy in administration 

where you've spent the last few years putting the dollars where 

they can be serving the people, the children, best.  He's not 

feeling this way.  He's feeling 

in fact that the field services have been reduced to his school 

district. 

 

Have you given any consideration to expanding the 

correspondence school, the role of correspondence schools, so 

that people in rural Saskatchewan might even receive more 

effective help than the kinds of things that have been 

happening to them lately?  And if so, I'd like to know what sort 

of options you're considering. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the first 

remarks about the director of education in a rural department 

and his concerns -- his or her concerns -- I would be most 

pleased on some other occasion, perhaps when we meet to talk 

about the mandate that we discussed earlier, to hear of specific 

details about that. 

 

Because what we did do in the third-party funding formula, for 

instance, was make adjustments which might have not been 

entirely visible.  Because we talked about globally 2 per cent 

reduction but there actually were rural school divisions who 

received an increase.  Everyone didn't receive a 2 per cent 

global increase.  There were some who received a reduction of 

more than 2 per cent; there were some who actually received 

increases. 

 

And we did pay attention to and make adjustments within the 

funding formula for such things as in the transportation factor, 

the small school factor.  If there was a division where a small 

school was farther . . . was more than 30 kilometres away from 

another school, we actually provided more money for that 

school.  Same thing in the sparsity factor; we made that kind of 

an adjustment. 

 

And with respect to the second part of the question relating to 

the resources to the correspondence school and distance 

education, I was assigned responsibility for the SCN 

(Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) -- the 

distance network -- at the end of March. 

 

And in reviewing the role of SCN, the role of SaskTel, which 

does do delivery of some distance education on fibre optics, the 

correspondence school within the department, SIAST, the 

regional colleges, and both of the universities, it quickly 

became evident to me that there are a lot of people with 

expertise trying to do a good job in an area in distance 

education that has a very great potential but that the efforts 

were much too diffuse.  So I set up a task force, headed up by a 

facilitator, Mr. Chairman, that the member may be familiar 

with, is Dr. Barry Brown from the University of Saskatchewan, 

is acting as a facilitator. 

 

And representatives from all those groups who are involved in 

distance education are involved in this exercise, the objective 

being to rationalize our efforts in distance education, to 

determine which are the best points, where should the headings 

be, how can we collaborate on production of software and 

production costs for programs, not only within the province but 

within the western region. 

 

We do expect a report from them early in the fall.  We know 

that with the changing demographics in 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard July 24, 1992 

Saskatchewan that distance education has a great potential 

never, never to replace the role of the school, but certainly to 

enhance the quality of programs that are available within the 

high school and post-secondary curriculum, and for adult 

education and training and retraining opportunities as well. 

 

So we do want to make sure that we're allocating again those 

scarce dollars in a very focused way, rather than diffused 

through these seven different centres.  I think the people that 

are working on this exercise are very dedicated to the future 

and the future potential for distance education.  So I do expect 

a good and positive result from that task force. 

 

We also received a report fairly recently from the distance 

education committee of the K to 12 department.  And 

interestingly enough, even though the other exercise involving 

SCN is not quite as advanced, the recommendations from the 

Distance Ed Committee looked very much like what was 

shaping up in the other exercise that's going on.  So I'm sure 

that good results will come from that and that distance 

education has really an excellent and promising future in this 

province. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


