




















































Hansard: July 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1743 

 July 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan . . . (and the petition reads this way): 

 

 That the provincial FeedGAP program has been (established 

as) an essential tool in the preservation of a competitive 

Livestock, Feeding, (and) Slaughter, and Packing industry in 

the province and that just as grain farmers need and deserve 

support to preserve their competitive position in the face of 

unfair subsidy practices of others, so too our highly 

competitive livestock industry must be protected against the 

unfair subsidy practices of others and further that the loss of 

FeedGap will result in thousands of jobs destroyed, homes 

lost the and crippling of an entire industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I present this petition.  I have another one 

here that deals, Mr. Speaker, with the livestock cash advance, 

with the same format, and I'll read the instructions to the 

Assembly. 

 

 That the provincial Livestock Cash Advance program was 

vital in putting the Saskatchewan Livestock industry on an 

equal footing with the national grain sector, enabling 

Saskatchewan grain to be efficiently used in local industry, 

thereby supporting the entire agricultural backbone of the 

province, and that the provincial NDP publicly acknowledged 

the need for cash advance programs when they demanded the 

federal government restore the grains based program, and 

that the provincial government is taking a variety of actions 

in addition to eliminating the Livestock Cash Advance such 

as imposing taxes on farm fuels, increasing utility rates and 

imposing other hardships such that the additional loss of the 

Livestock Cash Advance will destroy many family operations 

and further cripple the provincial economy; 

 

I ask to present these to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have another in 

the series of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) petitions.  

I won't go through the entire instructions to the Assembly, but I 

will go through the three main points, Mr. Speaker, that the 

folks are asking for. 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 2.) start working with the federal government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and  

 

 3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set up 

on an individual cost-of-production to return instead of a risk 

area formula. 

 

There are folks here from Moose Jaw, Mossbank, Regina, 

Central Butte, and Eyebrow, I believe.  I do present. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Devine: -- My question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  

It's our understanding that the federal Minister of Agriculture 

has made a proposal to Saskatchewan to help Saskatchewan 

farmers and to offset losses that they are suffering as a result of 

the inadequacy of the 1992 GRIP program.  Would the minister 

be prepared to outline for the Assembly the details of that 

proposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, appreciate that today the 

federal Minister of Agriculture responded to the Premier's 

proposal last week to put in place a disaster relief program.  

The bottom line of the federal proposal, while we want to 

continue discussion with them and talk about improving their 

offer, the bottom line of the federal proposal remains that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are expected to pick up 60 per cent of 

the bill.  And that's an unacceptable burden for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers in the face of a disaster that the federal government 

has already agreed is their responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I wonder if the minister would explain to the 

House how Saskatchewan taxpayers pick up 60 per cent when 

in fact the province picks up 25.  The farmers will evidently 

have the option as late as November to contribute to their 

premium, but they don't even have to make the payment, we 

understand it, so it's just deducted from the payment they will 

receive. 

 

So essentially what we're talking about is several hundred 

million dollars could come into the province of Saskatchewan 

with no additional cost to the farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the members 

opposite for the applause.  The member opposite indicates that 

there are several hundreds of millions of dollars.  Clearly I 

appreciate that the member opposite understands that that is the 

nature of the cost of a potential crop shortfall disaster.  The 

federal minister though, has estimated their response to this 

disaster at a much lower level, at about $39 million.  And again 

the fact that the farmers would not have to put their premium 

up front does not reduce their portion of cost sharing, that in 

fact they would not receive that portion of the payment. 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, just so that we can get this 

absolutely clear, you're telling us that the farmer has an option 

to buy some insurance after the crop is in if he has low yield, 

and it can pay up to $40 an acre, but you're not going to let him 

do it because you won't contribute your share of this national 

program?  Is that true, that the farmer will have this option put 

forward by the federal government to go in after the harvest is 

finished, not put up any more money and receive up to $40 an 

acre, and you're saying no, we won't let him do that?  Just to 

make sure we have that clear, is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make it absolutely 

clear that the federal government is spending $154 million less 

this year for the GRIP program in Saskatchewan than they 

spent last year, and that they have offered this morning $39 

million. 

 

I appreciate that they have responded to the Premier's 

suggestion last week that they recognize now at least that there 

is the potential for a crop disaster, which is third line of 

defence, and I appreciate that they have offered up their 

savings in order to cover that. 

 

The bottom line is that they have . . . when we define with them 

the amount of their savings, their appropriate contribution will 

be recognized.  And clearly the fact remains understood by the 

Prime Minister but not by the member opposite, that 

Saskatchewan cannot put up 60 per cent of the cost of such 

programs in order to fund their own disaster relief programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I want to go back and ask you the 

question once more so that the Assembly will either know 

you're prepared to answer or not prepared to answer this.  The 

question is simply this.  I understand that the offer that is 

presented this morning says the farmer can look at his harvest 

as late as November and he could buy the package which 

would take him up to 100 per cent which could mean up to $40 

an acre.  He doesn't have to put up additional premium.  And 

that could cause to trigger money coming into the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And you are going to say no, I'm not going to 

let the farmer do that because Saskatchewan would have to put 

up 23 or $25 million.  Is that what you're saying today, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

engaged in these laying back and accepting what the federal 

government pushes on the province for four years, which has 

got us into the situation where the Saskatchewan province is 

now picking up in excess of, in 1991, $260 million for farm 

support programs.  Exactly by the same rationale, the member 

opposite outlines now where the federal government says, we 

don't want to pay our share; will you pick up some of it for us? 

 

The member opposite clearly understands from the way he's 

describing the situation that the farmer contribution would be 

part of the proposal, that the provincial 

contribution would be part of the proposal, and that provincial 

and farmer contributions, who are all Saskatchewans' 

taxpayers, amounts to fifty-eight and one-third per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just trying to find out what 

you might think would be acceptable.  If we look at 

post-harvest, and the farmer knows that he's got a bit of a 

drought, and if he has an option, Mr. Minister, to go then and 

purchase more drought protection and it doesn't cost him 

anything and he can get up to $40 an acre, how could you 

consider that harmful to a Saskatchewan producer? 

 

And maybe a second question.  Would you go to farmers and 

ask them if they would like that option -- if they would like to 

have that option to be able to say yes, I want to top it up, and 

I'll accept this program?  Because you're making the decision 

that he wouldn't like that option. 

 

And clearly, clearly a farmer, I would think, would like to be 

able to top up his crop insurance after the crop is in and he sees 

that he's got a problem.  Wouldn't you acknowledge that as an 

option that maybe farmers would like to talk to you about, or 

that they would like to consider very seriously? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

would have joined us in the call for the federal government to 

ask farmers not to pay back the $41 million from western grain 

stabilization, if the member opposite would stop trying to 

exaggerate the amount of this very modest offer by the federal 

government of $39.2 million, when on the other hand he 

considered it to be just a pittance when the farmers were asked 

to pay it back to the federal government, if the member 

opposite would remember that when he sat at the table with all 

the other provincial ministers when the provinces agreed to 

second-line programming and in exchange the federal 

government took responsibility for third-line programming 

which is disaster relief as defined by the Growing Together 

document and all the participation the member opposite had in 

that, if the member opposite remembers all those things, I find 

it difficult to understand why he would now want the province 

to again . . . the province's taxpayers to again participate in the 

funding of disaster relief which everyone agrees is a federal 

responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, we're just trying to find out what 

your negotiating strategy is so that farmers will have some idea 

what they can expect.  They know from the recent offer that 

you could lever say four times as much money coming into 

Saskatchewan, say a hundred million dollars for the 25 the 

taxpayer puts up. 

 

Now if it's $40 an acre a farmer might be able to get . . . why 

won't . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would ask the members please 

not to interrupt when the Leader of the Opposition 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

is trying to ask a question.  And if the leader could ask his 

question, it would certainly help. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'll just reword it.  If the farmer 

who has assessed after harvest that he has a drought wants to 

apply, he can clearly get a net benefit.  So that's not an expense 

to him, and it's not a cost to Saskatchewan.  He is going to get 

perhaps up to $40 an acre net benefit. 

 

Now that program, to be levered, means the province is part of 

the national program so you'd have to come up with your 23 to 

25 million.  It's a net benefit to the province; it's a net benefit to 

farmers.  But what are you looking for beyond that relationship 

when every other jurisdiction -- Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, 

B.C. (British Columbia) -- has a similar participation in a 

national program?  Please explain that to the farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the farmers understand this.  

The member opposite is the only one that fails to understand it 

even though he was at the table when that cost-sharing 

discussion took place.  The only thing that's been levered as a 

result of the brilliant negotiating strategies of the members 

opposite is that the federal government has levered $200 

million out of the provincial taxpayers of Saskatchewan for 

their programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I just asked . . . The minister will at least be 

able to look back through Hansard as . . . will not answer the 

farmers and respond to the fact that they could, after harvest, 

go get this extra money which would cost them nothing -- no 

extra premium, no extra premium -- just money comes back in 

here.  And he is going to deny them that because he won't 

participate like other provinces are. 

 

Could the minister explain and define in here -- and he must 

have the figures -- how much less money Saskatchewan 

farmers will receive compared to Alberta and Manitoba under 

the same circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

understands that the cost to Saskatchewan of the international 

trade wars is so devastating to our economy that the Prime 

Minister has recognized that there is difficulty in provinces like 

Saskatchewan cost sharing programs. 

 

The member opposite sat at the table when the previous 

minister of Agriculture committed to third line of defence, 

when the provinces agreed to second line.  I was at the meeting 

in Halifax a couple of weeks ago and the members sat around 

and they agreed that it was when the previous minister of 

Agriculture said we will fund a third line of defence programs, 

that the provinces said yes, we will take on second line 

responsibility. 

 

Well the provinces have taken on their second line 

responsibility and it is the federal government's responsibility 

for third line whether it's a disaster because of 

crop conditions; whether it's a disaster because of international 

grain wars; or in another sector, if it's a disaster in 

Newfoundland over the fisheries.  Clearly if the federal 

government has four and a half billion dollars to spend on 

helicopters, they can surely pay for the cost of commitments 

already made to agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, again for the record, you have not 

advised the farmers why you won't let them have this extra 

money.  Number two, you won't provide the House the 

comparisons between Saskatchewan and Manitoba and Alberta 

farmers under the similar circumstances this year. 

 

And number three, you mentioned the Prime Minister in 

several cases -- the Prime Minister in the last nine years has 

provided $13 billion of additional help into the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Now I'm not sure what you've been able to get 

out of the federal government.  I know the Premier went down 

there with the Liberal Leader and others and came back 

empty-handed, and I don't think you've got any money out of 

them. 

 

And I point out to the hon. member that if you look at the 

federal money coming into the province of Saskatchewan, in 

the letter that goes out to farmers, it is $27 benefit into Ontario 

per capita and $1,090 benefit to the province of Saskatchewan.  

And under those kinds of circumstances, the Saskatchewan 

Minister of Agriculture is saying, I won't participate and kick in 

that kind of federal money into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want that to be on the record as well, because we get far . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the Leader of the 

Opposition have a question?  I'd like him to put his question, 

and put his question right away.  You've taken well over a 

minute, sir. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Does the minister acknowledge that the federal 

contributions coming into Saskatchewan on a per capita basis 

are much larger than any other jurisdiction in Canada in 

agriculture as a result of the last few years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe I need to remind 

the member opposite that hopefully he represents 

Saskatchewan people, not federal people in the discussion 

about cost sharing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Saskatchewan produces 56 per cent of 

Canada's export grains.  Canada provides about 20 per cent of 

the total world trade in grains.  That means Saskatchewan 

produces in excess of 10 per cent of the world's total trade in 

grains. 
 

And when we have this kind of a disaster in world trade 

relationships in grains that the member opposite clearly 

understands, and then says Saskatchewan people with 4 per 

cent of the taxing capacity in Canada are to bear this burden 

when the federal government has already 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

committed to doing it to an arrangement made by the member 

opposite, I fail to see the logic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not sure your numbers are 

accurate.  I just will reiterate and summarize with the last 

question.  Clearly, agriculture is important in Saskatchewan, 

with about half the farm land, and as you mentioned, a large 

wheat-producing area and oilseeds and livestock. 

 

Given that information and given that importance, two 

questions come forward.  Why will you deny participating in a 

program that could put at least $100 million into the pockets of 

people that need it here?  And number two, on top of that, how 

can you justify cutting back in all of agriculture -- roads, gas 

taxes, fees up, all of the things that you've done in hurting rural 

infrastructure -- if you think agriculture's so important?  And 

you mention the Prime Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Leader of the Opposition 

has asked two questions already. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks 

why we would deny.  We in fact have not denied.  The Premier 

and myself and others have been persistent, and the member 

from the Liberal Party here has been persistent, in supporting 

the call for the federal government to carry their responsibility.  

The Premier put forward last week a proposal in order to cover 

the cost of disaster in Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite is the one who has denied this basic 

support for Saskatchewan agriculture, who has refused with his 

caucus to support the call for third line of defence, the very 

same third line of defence that he sat at the table negotiating 

with the federal government and has since let them off the hook 

on, and continues to call on their behalf for Saskatchewan 

people to pay that cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, we just have to look at the record 

of . . . the Prime Minister that you're talking about has 

contributed $13 billion to Saskatchewan people and farmers in 

the last few years.  Now it was under our administration.  

You've got nothing from them.  You are not going to get the 

same amount, even equivalent amount that's going into Alberta 

and Manitoba, and that's why you won't talk about it.  You're 

now denying farmers to get extra money after harvest, 

post-harvest, for nothing because they don't have to pay the 

premium.  And you're on record now as saying, well 

agriculture's really important in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now table, would you table in this 

legislature your ideas for agriculture and what you're 

negotiating with the federal government so the farmers in this 

Legislative Assembly have some idea of what you're up to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would answer briefly 

to the member opposite that our goals are several.  One is to 

correct the major policy flaws that were put together in a great 

big election hurry by the member opposite last year.  And then 

to call on the federal government to meet their responsibility 

with respect to agriculture in Saskatchewan, to do it in a 

co-operative fashion based on the understanding that we would 

call on them first, to spend the money that they are saving in 

the more appropriate expenditure this year; and secondly, to 

recognize the cost of the international trade war to 

Saskatchewan and the disproportionate share of that cost that 

falls to Saskatchewan taxpayers if we pay that bill; and call on 

the member opposite to understand, with the Prime Minister, 

that in fact that is a problem for the Saskatchewan people, a 

problem that we want to address and put back into balance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Return of Leased Lands 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to carry on a line of 

questions which the government opposite has been less than 

open with in its answers.  My question is to the Minister of 

Rural Development.  Mr. Minister, your NDP candidate in the 

last provincial election, the defeated NDP candidate from 

Maple Creek, a Mr. Brian Oster, has recently turned back to the 

Department of Rural Development a parcel of land bank land 

which he was leasing from your government.  Mr. Minister, 

how much was Mr. Oster paid for improvements to that 

property after he forfeited the land back to your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the number was in 

the neighbourhood of about $70,000 that Mr. Oster was paid 

for improvements on his land. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I am 

asking these questions to clear up what is widely perceived to 

be a conflict of interests.  I would hope that you would be as 

open as you had promised such that you would be, so that we 

could get to the bottom of this.  Now Estimates have been in 

the range of $80,000 and as your answer is around 70, I 

presume it could as easily be 80, or maybe 90.  I would hope 

that you would confirm or counter these figures, Mr. Minister. 

 

And would you table the appraisal that the Department of Rural 

Development did on these improvements?  And would you also 

table the original appraisals on the land and buildings that was 

conducted when the land was originally taken over by the land 

bank? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

continues to drudge up and try to slur people's names.  I don't 

mind the personal attacks on myself as minister.  That's part of 

the game, I guess.  I don't like the personal attacks and 

innuendo on the member who was defeated in the election, 

although I suppose there may be some justification for that.  

But I really get upset when he slurs and slanders my 

department people who did the appraisal and suggest that they 

are not honest people and have a conflict of interest. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

Mr. Speaker, the number I gave was the $70,000 range; it's 

certainly not 80,000 if that's . . . They asked for the number.  

They now have it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That certainly was 

a nice round of rhetoric that we heard there and I certainly want 

to have this matter cleared up.  And I believe that a man should 

have the right to clear his name and be given that opportunity.  

That's why we're talking about this, because this is a matter in 

the country that is being discussed at great length. 

 

You did not, sir, agree to table those documents.  Would you 

table those documents in this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the list of 

improvements includes a house, a Quonset, several steel bins, 

and some acres of land.  Certainly it was a very reasonable 

appraisal and was done by the department, was done by . . . had 

done an independent appraisal which turned out to be higher 

than the department's values and there is nothing untoward with 

those appraisals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is 

this:  if you have nothing to hide, Mr. Minister, you will table 

those documents and show what the original values of that 

house and property were that were already on the property 

when this man took over. 

 

Can you confirm that after turning the land back to your 

government, after receiving a large pay-out for the 

improvements to that land, can you confirm that the former 

NDP candidate has been allowed to again lease back this very 

same land and is as we speak here today living in that very 

house? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again I say, the 

appraisal was done in accordance with the standard department 

procedure.  All lessees who give up their land are paid for their 

improvements.  They were valued . . . some of those 

improvements were done . . . and many of those improvements 

were done to the land by Mr. Oster at the time that he farmed 

the land.  He was given a one-year leaseback.  His land will be 

up for tender beginning next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, if 

you've nothing to hide, if you're going to truly defend this 

individual and allow him to defend himself, will you table that 

information in this House?  Or are you afraid to table the very 

information that you say could clear him, the information of 

how much those improvements were worth when the man took 

over the land.  How much was that property worth at the time 

when the land bank 

purchased it from the original owner?  How much was that, and 

will you table that information in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat.  Some of the 

improvements were there; many of them were added to the 

land after the time . . . during the time that Mr. Oster farmed 

the land.  And again it's standard government policy, was not 

any political interference, although the members opposite may 

find that hard to believe. This government no longer operates in 

that manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

can stand there and talk all day about how there's no political 

involvement in this whole matter, but unless you table the 

information that we've asked for, this man will go through life 

for ever being accused of receiving political plums. 

 

It is common knowledge out in the country that this is what 

people perceive.  We are asking you to give this individual the 

opportunity to clear his name in public; do so by tabling the 

information that we asked for.  Will you table that information 

in this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, if people want to 

falsely accuse people and slander them, they can do so.  If they 

care to do so without information, they will continue to do so.  

And it is not our fault that somebody is slandering people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Could we please have quiet in the 

Assembly. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 64 -- An 

Act respecting Arbitration be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think we 

have a number of questions that we can get into in committee 

on this Act.  I was listening to the minister as he presented his 

comments the other day.  So at this time, I would just move 

that this Act move through to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 68 -- An Act to 

amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On this Act, 

The Act to amend The Education Act, we do have a couple of 

concerns with it.  Although the ideas that the minister has 

brought forward are good ideas, they need to be carried on a 

little bit further. 

 

The minister talks in here of consultation with local school 

districts, local school boards, and that's all very well.  The fact 

is, I wish her government would do more of that on all of the 

issues. 

 

The one item on consultation with the local school districts 

which would be a good idea was, if those local school districts 

were given an opportunity to have a direct say in the viability 

of their school, whether or not that school would remain open 

or closed, and have a chance to have a say on how that was 

funded.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will be proposing an amendment 

to deal with that.   But at this time I will let the Bill go on to 

Committee of the Whole where we will deal with the 

amendments and any other ideas. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 40 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 40 -- An Act to 

amend The Highway Traffic Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, we actually intend on allowing this Bill 

to go forward very shortly.  I just wanted to comment though 

that I have had several people indicate to me concern about 

changing The Highway Traffic Act in any way.  I guess most 

people are drivers, and as soon as we start to amend Acts that 

have consideration to the things that they do in their everyday 

life, they are automatically concerned that it may be something 

as detrimental to them. 

 

And so I want the minister to be aware of the fact that we will 

be asking a lot of detailed questions when this Act comes into 

committee, because the people out there have 

been asking us to get a full explanation.  I don't believe that it is 

nearly as bad as some folks feel that it is.  They got the notion 

out there that somehow they're going to be responsible for 

things that probably aren't in this Bill. 

 

And I think maybe a little more PR (public relations) work on 

this Bill would have been in order and should maybe still be in 

order.  You might reassure folks, Mr. Minister, through the 

news media or some other way.  I think the media would be the 

best way to assure them that you are not in fact placing 

restrictions on them that they can't live with and that they 

would be afraid of in this democratic society that we have.  

And I think I'll go into the details of that in committee.  But I 

think you're aware of the kind of things that are going on.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

me Mary Ellen Wellsch sitting beside me, who is the Public 

Trustee; behind me, Mr. Keith Laxdal, the associate deputy 

minister of Justice; and Brent Prenevost, a Crown solicitor with 

the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I just 

have a couple questions regarding the Bill before us.  And first 

of all just want to know, is this more a house-cleaning Bill or 

was there some specific groups really interested?  I understand 

it's a matter of money held in trust in the case of individuals or 

mentally disabled individuals.  I wonder if you could just 

clarify that for us, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member, it is in 

the nature of housekeeping.  It is a Bill intended to effect 

certain efficiencies and to have regard to the fact that time has 

passed and inflation has changed the value of money, and all of 

that has led us to the changes that you see in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Now when I look at . . . Just taking a quick look I 

see we're going from 2,000 . . . Do I take it we're jumping from 

2,000 to $10,000 max?  Is this a maximum amount a person 

can hold on behalf of an individual?  Or what's that . . . what 

does that amount apply for there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The amount that the Public Trustee may 

hold is an unlimited amount, can be as large as whatever the 

amount is.  There is no upper limit. 

 

What we're talking about here is the amount that can be paid to 

a responsible adult acting on behalf of a child.  And that 

amount under the previous legislation had been $2,000 and 

we're proposing in this Bill to increase the amount to $10,000 

so that the Public Trustee would then be in a position to pay up 

to $10,000 to a responsible adult on behalf of a child. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

Incidentally, that would cover about three-quarters of the 

accounts administered by the Public Trustee for children. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You'll have to excuse me for a minute, Mr. 

Minister.  I may have missed it, but if you could just fill me in 

again.  What is that money specifically used for?  Like it's held 

in trust and . . . Is it for paying off bills, or covering accounts, 

just to clarify, because I'm not sure?  And you may have 

mentioned it a minute ago but I just didn't hear all of your 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the Public Trustee 

supervises the property rights of the children and administers 

trust funds of children where no one else has been appointed to 

do that by the court.  And I was saying earlier that that can be a 

large amount.  Whatever the amount, the Public Trustee is able 

to do it. 

 

The amount that we're . . . the figure that we're talking about in 

this Bill is the amount that the trustee is authorized . . . the 

Public Trustee is authorized to pay to an adult person on behalf 

of the child.  In other words, turn the money over to the child 

by paying it to a responsible adult. 

 

And as I mentioned earlier, this figure of $10,000 would 

account for three-quarters of the accounts that are presently 

held by the Public Trustee on behalf of children. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So then I take it, Mr. 

Minister, if this covers fully three-quarters of the accounts, are 

you saying then after this Bill has been finalized and this 

funding is in place, then a lot of these accounts will be taken 

care of and will be put out of the way and you don't have to 

address them any more? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What about the other 25 per cent of the accounts?  

Are the accounts larger, or are new accounts coming on stream, 

or what are we looking at here, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, if this Bill is passed by 

the legislature and the maximum amount that may be paid 

increased to $10,000, that would permit the Public Trustee to 

pay out in respect of all but 300 of the trust accounts that the 

Public Trustee is maintaining. 

 

In other words, the bulk -- really over three-quarters of the 

accounts -- are less than $10,000.  And this will enable, or 

authorize, the Public Trustee to pay out the money to the 

family, as it were, a responsible adult on behalf of the child. 

 

Now in all cases it won't work that way.  There may not be an 

adult who is prepared to take on the responsibility, or indeed 

there may not be an adult who is considered responsible.  So 

we're not suggesting that these will be entirely wiped out but 

the bulk of them will. 

 

And if all of the accounts under $10,000 were to be transferred 

to the family, as I've suggested, that would 

leave about 300 accounts active where the amount involved is 

more than $10,000, and where the Public Trustee would 

continue to administer the account on behalf of the child.  And 

that would continue unless and until the court appointed 

someone to replace the Public Trustee and administer the 

child's money. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well these are funds that the Public Trustee then 

has in his or her possession to help . . . is that with the 

maintenance of a child or of living or looking after?  You 

mentioned paying out to an individual if they're willing to take 

a child or look after the child.  This is funding that's available 

to help with maintenance.  Is that the . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

money normally comes to the Public Trustee in one of two 

circumstances.  Either the child is the beneficiary under a will 

and no one has been appointed by the will to receive the money 

on behalf of the child -- then the money goes to the Public 

Trustee -- or the child is involved in a court action and either is 

given a settlement or a judgement, and again, the money goes 

to the Public Trustee.  That's how the money gets there. 

 

There are many situations possible.  It may be that the child is 

paid allowances or sums of money before reaching the age of 

18 for their support and maintenance or their education.  That 

happens in many cases.  And when the child is 18 years of age 

then the child is entitled to receive the pay-out of the trust 

money, and that happens. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I was going to ask you what 

happens at 18.  I kind of took for granted that that's the case 

and you've answered that. 

 

One other question here.  Regarding The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act, what are we specifically dealing with here?  Are 

there individuals in much the same case as children where 

monies are held in trust?  Or what's the purpose of that . . . or 

does this just follow under the mental . . . the Act kind of falls 

into this Act as well, the mentally disorders Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's right.  The member will recall 

that we discussed this question of certificates of incompetence 

under the The Mentally Disordered Persons Act just the other 

day in this House.  And you'll recall that they were, by that 

legislation which was passed, the certificates were limited for a 

period of about one year.  And that made it necessary to change 

The Public Trustee Act to accommodate the change that we 

made the other day. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying is both Acts kind of 

intertwine with each other and so if one is changed, the other 

has to be changed. 

 

I was looking at the word "revoked" and I was just wondering 

if you were going to take and put both Acts sort of separately 

so that they wouldn't intertwine.  But I don't take it that's the 

case.  It's just a matter of bringing each Act in line with the 

other Act as we discussed the other day, the mentally disorders 

Act. So this brings this Act now in line and makes sure that 

everything is addressed, I take it, for the matter of justice and 

the legal 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

aspects of a case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member is correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, I think the major question arising out of this Bill 

is the fact that I think the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business have some problems and some concerns with the fact 

that the appeal process is being removed, if I understand the 

Bill correctly.  In just reading a little bit in the explanation 

note, it makes the comment that consumers will still have 

access to the courts. 

 

My understanding just from talking to members of the business 

community is they felt the appeal process was appropriate, was 

working well, and that the court process would just delay the 

ability of business men or consumers to follow through.  And 

certainly they can make their appeal or raise their concerns, but 

I think that they feel it would be a slower process than working 

with the appeal board that was in place. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Minister, I think the feeling is that the fact 

that courts may stretch out or delay an appeal process, it may 

create a problem for businesses.  The perception that people 

have that if a complaint is laid against a business and it ends up 

in court, consumers may see it as something that they may 

want to watch, whether they would shop or work with or even 

support a local business.  And I think that's one of the main 

questions being raised by independent businesses.  I'd like your 

comments or your perception on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the whole point of the 

Bill is to repeal section 31 of The Consumer Products 

Warranties Act.  Section 31 provided for a process of 

mediation in the event that a dispute arose under the Act. 

 

Now as the name would indicate, the dispute would normally 

concern a warranty with respect to the sale of a consumer 

product.  Pursuant to that provision, we provided a mediation 

service to which the public could have access.  The affect of 

this Bill will be to remove that service so that the department 

will not have a capacity any longer to try to mediate a dispute 

between the consumer and the vendor. 

 

The section obviously had a useful purpose, but in reviewing 

the programs of the department and determining where we 

could effect economies, this was identified as an area where we 

could in fact reduce expenditures.  And hence we are bringing 

this Bill to the legislature. 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I guess as I 

indicated earlier, that's the main concern the business 

community have.  The fact that the consumer could come to 

them and if they had a dispute, they had a mediation process in 

place.  The fact that this would be removed . . . They see 

certainly the avenue of the courts as open to them, but I think 

they perceive that as being a longer route.  And in most cases 

the mediation process probably is a lot simpler, a lot more 

efficient, and certainly to a consumer and a business group, 

would be more economical. 

 

Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what kind of dollar savings . 

. . I take it from your comments that the main reason for 

discontinuing the service was more on the basis of economics 

versus the fact whether the . . . not that the program didn't serve 

a useful purpose.  I'm kind of wondering whether the economic 

value certainly outweighs the personal value that the service 

had and the value it gave to the community . . . or the business 

community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the direct answer to the 

member's question is that we will . . . two person-years are 

involved and they will be eliminated, and the annual savings 

will be in the neighbourhood of $52,000 per year. 

 

I might say to the hon. member that we recognize the criticism 

that he is conveying, which quite properly has been 

communicated to him by people who are affected.  And it is 

our plan to try and encourage voluntary mediation services 

within communities and to encourage existing mediation 

services to expand their programs to include this type of 

mediation as well.  It's early to say whether or not we will be 

able to be successful in encouraging volunteer organizations to 

undertake this function, but we intend to try. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess the question I would just like to pose, Mr. 

Minister, is what process have . . . you've indicated that you're 

hoping.  Now I'm wondering, have you talked to the business 

community or talked to consumer groups?  I'm sure consumer 

groups probably find too . . . And I think most people would 

agree that if a dispute arises on a warranty, and let's say a 

television set; a lot of times with television sets having come 

down and the prices a lot of times aren't that high, but you've 

got a dispute over a warranty, and if you end up in the courts it 

certainly could cost you a lot more than it's worth.  It's 

probably just as worth your while . . . not worth your while to 

go to the courts but just to go and buy another TV rather than 

effect the warranty. 

 

What process do you have in place, or have you a process?  

You indicate that you're hoping people will . . . or some 

consumer groups.  Would it be . . . have you talked to the 

business community and asked them to maybe look at setting 

up a process themselves with some consumer representatives 

that would maybe serve the same purpose as the Justice 

department has? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had preliminary 

discussions with two groups about the matter 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

that I spoke of earlier, about the matter that you asked about, 

and we are going to follow up on those.  We didn't want to 

begin that before the Bill was tabled in the House, but we have 

begun.  And we'll continue to follow that up and see where it 

takes us. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  At this time I don't 

have any other questions, unless my colleagues do.  And we 

just encourage the minister and his officials to certainly take 

the time to consult and see what process can be put in place to 

alleviate the fears that . . . and no doubt this . . . 

 

Well one other question just came to mind is, Mr. Minister, 

how many cases . . . you indicated there's two person-years 

involved in the savings as far as monetary value.  How many 

cases would have come before the Justice department yearly 

regarding that type of complaint? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, it's varied over time, but 

on average it would be between 500 and 600 disputes or 

complaints that would come to us. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In light of the numbers you've just given, Mr. 

Minister, I think it would serve the department well to indeed 

actively pursue an avenue that would give consumers and 

business people a way and a means of addressing those 

complaints that come forward that would be satisfactory, in 

light of the fact the department is discontinuing the service.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I agree with that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to, on behalf of 

the legislature, thank the officials for coming today to assist us. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I too would express my thanks to 

the minister and his officials for their help this afternoon. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of Community Services 

please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

us today John Edwards, the assistant director of planning with 

Community Services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, we 

just have a few quick questions that we would like to deal with 

here this afternoon.  I wonder if you could give us the amount 

of funding that SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) 

received for '91? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The provincial government provided $7 

million in the last 1991 budget to SAMA. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And could you provide us with the figure for 

1992 please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The 1992 funding for SAMA will be $7.5 

million. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, with that it seems that they're 

going to be receiving an additional amount of funds.  Can you 

account for what they will be doing with those additional 

funds? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  They are going 

through a reassessment phase at this point in time, and they're 

using those funds to do an education program with the public 

and with the municipalities, and to do some modelling for the 

municipalities to check out the effects of the proposed changes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I see that it suspends the 

funding formula in the future number of years.  I wonder if you 

could provide us both with the . . . for one year, pardon me.  I 

wonder if you could provide me with a copy of the funding 

formula.  And is there any indication of whether this will be . . . 

the suspension will extend beyond one year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The formula is very 

simple.  There's a base amount of $6.8 million allocated to 

SAMA from the provincial government, and any amount of the 

requisition over that is shared 50/50 with the municipalities. 

 

As far as the future, we are talking to SAMA at this point in 

time.  There may be some changes but we don't know what 

they will be until we've had further discussions with SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), as well as 

SAMA. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you provide us with a copy of that funding 

formula, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The formula is in the Act, Mr. Chairman.  

We can provide a copy but it's relatively simple and it's at the 

beginning of the Act. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If it's in the Act, 

that would be fine then.  That would conclude any questions 

that we would have with respect to this Bill. And I thank Mr. 

Edwards for his time this afternoon and I appreciate the 

minister's answers. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the Minister of the Environment 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have on my 

right Les Cooke, deputy minister.  I have on my left David 

Beckwermert, director of policy and legislative services; and 

behind me is Larry Lechner, director of air and land protection. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, we do have a number of questions dealing with this 

Bill.  To start off with I would like to ask you why in the case 

of a clean air Act you would not have included something 

about ethanol.  If we look across the border into the United 

States, their clean air Act does include provisions for ethanol; it 

does include provisions to encourage the burning of ethanol. 

 

And when we look around this province we have an 

agricultural crisis.  We would have had the opportunity to use 

up a portion of the grain supplies that we have on hand by 

running them through an ethanol plant, say at a 10 per cent rate 

on all our gasoline sold; would have made a significant impact 

onto our economy; would have made a significant impact to 

our environment, and a significant impact to agriculture. 

 

Why would you not have included ethanol in your Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that 

question, to the member opposite.  We have looked at it 

intensively and we are investigating it.  It is more within the 

realm of Economic Development and Agriculture.  We are 

working with those two departments now to develop a strategy. 

 

As far as a clean air, we are investigating now the ramifications 

of that production of ethanol and we yet haven't finalized those 

deliberations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Mr. 

Chairman, I think if you had included though some provision in 

the Act for ethanol it could have been a spur to move things 

along the line.  As it is now, there's no urgent rush being put on 

to go to an ethanol-based fuel system.  And if you had 

included, in a time frame, in this Act, The Clean Air Act, it 

would have added some impetus to develop something along 

that line. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I appreciate those comments and we are 

seriously looking at them.  Right at this point in time, we're 

looking at whether it's ethanol or ETBE, which should be 

added to gasoline.  We aren't quite sure whether simply stating 

that ethanol should be added makes environmental sense at this 

point in time. 

 

There is some debate whether the production of ethanol 

produces more CO D22 (carbon dioxide) than what happens 

when you burn the gasoline.  So we're still doing some further 

research on that and we're waiting for some more data before 

we finalize our program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad to know 

that you are at least looking at it. 

In this Bill, who have you consulted with before making the 

decisions you have made? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, these amendments are 

very general in nature and they come out of our day-to-day 

operations as we have talked with the people who are in 

industries and business.  So it hasn't been a consultation 

process per se, but definitely the people we are working with 

all the time have contributed to these amendments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would not this 

Act eliminate burning in municipal disposal sites? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this Clean Air Act is 

simply a housekeeping amendment as far as municipal burning 

is concerned.  It takes municipal waste-burning our of The 

Clean Air Act and puts it under EMPA (The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act), so that it is governed by one 

piece of legislation instead of two. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Is that 

also why you removed natural gas from clause 6(d)? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a reflection of what 

already is happening within the industry.  It takes the 

exemption of the oil and gas industry out so that they are 

governed now by The Clean Air Act, and their emissions are 

now subject to licence permits. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- On these licence permits, would they be 

licensed for each individual installation, or would it be a 

blanket permit per company? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, it's each individual 

installation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I noticed in the old Act, Madam 

Minister, that it stated water flood equipment, and it's not in the 

current Act.  What's the changes there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, that is picked up as an oil 

and gas facility under the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Over the years there has been a number 

of oil locations, sites, where burning has taken place.  There's 

been permits issued for certain kinds of burning.  What will be 

available now?  Will all burning be limited, or will there still be 

certain types of burning permitted? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There will still be certain types of 

burning permitted, except now they will have to have a licence 

in order to proceed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What types of burning will continue to 

be allowed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, that will occur in 

emergency-type situations where there's some residual that 

can't be cleaned up in any other way and it'll have to be burned 

off.  And in those circumstances, they'll be given permits. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- In all other circumstances then, I'm 

assuming that a recycling system or a recovery system will 

have to be in place. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in section 12(1) of the 

Bill it gives you the power to amend a permit or to suspend it 

or to rescind it.  In what circumstances do you see that that 

would be necessary? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, technology is changing 

quite rapidly, and what we have to do is make sure that our 

legislation reflects those changes in technology so that we can 

keep ourselves abreast of those developments.  So this reflects 

changing in technology. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I don't understand why changing 

technology . . . why you would need the power to suspend 

somebody's permit because technology changed.  Would you 

mind elaborating on that a little bit? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are two instances, Mr. Chairman, 

where there would be a change.  If someone is deliberately 

contravening the legislation then we have to have the ability to 

take steps to bring that into compliance.  On other instances 

where technology changed, because that technology has to be 

part of a technical side of the permit, we have to be able to 

change that side of the permit to reflect the technological 

changes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, does this Act . . . will 

it have any effect on agricultural operations?  I'm thinking of in 

the terms of feedlots and hog operations, chickens, turkeys, 

whatever. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There is no change in the status for 

agricultural industry whatsoever. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So this Act won't have an impact on hog 

operations such as somebody complaining about the odours 

coming from the hog operations that are . . . any changes this 

Bill will do. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, no that doesn't.  That falls 

within legislation under the Department of Agriculture.  We're 

not changing that at all. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Mr. 

Chairman, clause 24(2)(i) deals with a sliding scale of fees.  

Would you mind explaining why a sliding scale of fees? What 

do you see in this Bill as needing a sliding scale? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the sliding scale is there 

for the purpose of tying the amount that the industry pays 

according to the amount of pollution that is emitted from the 

smokestack.  So it's a form of polluter pay: the more emissions 

the higher their fee schedule will be. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Will this sliding scale change if, say, 

somebody is at a low end and all of a sudden they have a large 

emission at some point in time for a short period in time.  

Would that fee change based on that?  Would it be used as a 

penalty structure? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, Mr. Chairman.  It's based on annual 

emissions. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, officials, 

clause 6 of this Bill will create a new section 17.1 and 

addresses the problem of persons or firms that fail to follow an 

order to stop polluting the environment.  I'm wanting to refer to 

section 17.1(1).  And it states that you may -- and I'm wanting 

to point out the word "may" -- take steps to enforce polluters to 

obey an order calling them to stop these environmentally 

harmful actions. 

 

Does the word "may" imply that you have an obligation to 

force offenders to abide by an order? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To the member opposite, "may" is a 

discretionary word; "shall" is where it's obligatory, and this is 

not obligatory. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I guess 

that's where my concern comes from.  I guess I will ask: does it 

mean that you as minister may do nothing to a firm disobeying 

an order if that firm, for some reason, you feel you don't want 

to enforce the order? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, what it is meant to do is to 

give some latitude for some business or industry that has a 

legitimate reason why they cannot comply.  So it's to give some 

flexibility so there is some tolerance there.  Obviously it's not 

meant to simply disregard somebody who is non-compliance, 

but it is meant to give flexibility to allow people who are in 

non-compliance for some unforeseen reason the time that is 

needed in order to come into compliance. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I guess what a lot of the people of the province 

should be concerned about is a level of assurance that every 

offender will receive equitable treatment.  And when there's no 

obligation upon you as minister to enforce orders in each and 

every case then it can leave things open to you as minister to 

choose who you will bring to task on this and who you will not. 

 

I'm wondering if in fact you would consider accepting an 

amendment to this Bill striking the word "may" and replacing it 

with the word "shall"? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I respect what the hon. 

member opposite is saying, and we would want to think about 

that carefully.  It eliminates any flexibility that we might have 

to deal with unforeseen circumstances when we put "shall" in.  

When we're talking about a time specified in order to comply, 

and if something happens and there are problems with 

technology or other circumstances beyond the control of the 

industry, what this would do is it would make it obligatory for 

us to shut it down or to prevent it from operating. 

 

And I understand your intent, but I question whether it's in the 

best interests of the province at this time to take such a rigid 

position on this. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I do hear what you're saying about wanting to 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

leave some flexibility.  And I'm just wondering in a case such 

as this if in fact that could be dealt with in the Bill itself too.  

What I'm concerned about is that if one were to adopt this 

amendment, it'll place an obligation on a minister such as 

yourself and future ministers to act in cases where offenders 

contravene an order. 

 

And I believe that's it necessary in order to ensure fair process 

and that no one is going to be able to avoid compliance based 

on whether or not they're a friend or foe of those in power.  

And I think that that's a very important thing to be able to 

assure the . . . ensure the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Am I to take it then that you don't see that there's another way 

there can be flexibility built into the Bill, and at the same time 

ensuring that there will be an equitable treatment of people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, a point of clarification.  

This is intended to allow the minister to carry forward and do 

those things that need to be done in order to bring it into 

compliance. 

 

If you read further, it says that the minister may carry out the 

activities required and the minister may recover the costs.  It is 

not intended, you know, there . . . as you read further, that's the 

intent of the sections under that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I just 

wish to clarify my position as well.  The use of the word "may" 

to describe the power of the minister to remedy problems or get 

an injunction is of greatest concern to me.  That's the part that 

I'm most interested in.  There are counter-propositions, okay, 

that could go with the word "shall". 

 

What I think is missing in the Bill is a real obligation on your 

part to see a problem fixed.  You may do something, or you 

may not do something.  And as minister you could be 

convinced to do nothing if the thing at fault happens to be a 

project of a particular firm that's a friend of government, or a 

department of government, or even a Crown corporation.  

There are examples of this now where there are real problems 

whether standards can be met as a result of this kind of thing 

happening in the past. 

 

I think that in Saskatchewan we have had too many examples 

that have become the reality of Saskatchewan where many, 

many projects have had political ramifications or even what I 

would consider ownership interest at stake in terms of the 

consideration for what's being done. 

 

So part of my concern that I'm raising here is one that is based 

on what has already transpired in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and if nothing else I would just like to be on the 

record for stating that I wish that the Bill would approach the 

flexibility issue in a different way, and include the word "shall" 

rather than "may". 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I respect what the member 

opposite is saying, and I agree with her that there are times 

when conflict, political conflict, has caused 

 problems with compliance.  This section here is not the 

appropriate place to put that, and perhaps there should be an 

amendment later added that would take care of just the 

situation that you're talking about.  The 17.1 deals with 

something quite different, that when a control order fails to 

comply within a specified time, then the minister may -- and 

we leave it as may because the company may want to comply 

but there's technological problems that they can't, so we leave it 

as may.  But it says if they choose not to or ignore it, then the 

minister may proceed and have the work done and the minister 

may charge that cost against the company. 

 

But it doesn't intend to leave a loophole for someone who has 

political connections to be able to circumvent the law.  And if 

we want that type of amendment, perhaps it should be added at 

a different spot.  But this is not the spot that it should be put in. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I guess 

it's the flip order that I'm talking about.  I'd feel far more, I 

think, comfortable if there were mandatory obligation here, 

right where we're talking about it, so that non-compliance 

activities are absolutely stopped.  Okay?  So that the obligation 

of you as minister should be to see that non-compliance is 

rectified and then 17.1 and 17.2 will actually be the ways in 

which you might choose to act.  So I think that it would be 

interesting to see an order here. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I think without some 

considerable discussion with industries and with other people 

we would be reluctant to put it in at this point in time.  It is 

important to understand the ramifications of what you're 

speaking about.  And it would be appropriate, I think, to do 

further discussions on this before we put it into this Bill.  Not 

to say that there wouldn't be an appropriate time or place for it, 

but at this point in time we choose to leave some degree of 

flexibility here until we have further investigated what you're 

talking about. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I do appreciate that given your availability to having 

further insight into details of this, as well as having access to 

people who have expertise and many officials -- none of whom 

I have -- that I go on the basis primarily of the network of 

people with whom I am in regular contact.  And much of my 

concern in most things is raised as a result of talking to many, 

many people.  As you are probably aware from discussions that 

have taken place in this Assembly in all different areas, I am 

very much of an advocate for flexibility and see many, many 

problems arise through rigidity. 

 

But I also have been someone watching what has transpired 

over the last decade in this province when it comes to 

environmental concerns, and from what many of those have 

stemmed. 

 

So part of my concern comes from the fact that too often 

people who end up in government say, well we're different so 

trust us; and that perhaps what we need here is someone who is 

speaking on behalf of the people of the province who say, 

maybe we shouldn't trust any of them.  What sorts of 

legislation can we have in place that first of all provides for a 

specific obligation on the part of anyone 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

who's minister, and secondly, builds in the flexibility 

somewhere else? 

 

So that really is all that I have as a concern regarding this Bill 

and I do appreciate your responses. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some 

concerns as I sit here and listen to my colleague deliver the 

outcomes of this Bill and the effects that it's going to have in 

relationship to many of the comments that I've listened to over 

the past months, and in fact years, with respect to matters of 

environmental consideration. 

 

The problem of garbage burning in municipal areas has been 

talked about for probably the last four or five years and there's 

nothing wrong in my opinion with the government attempting 

to help preserve both the quality of our air and all other 

environmental situations.  What happens though, Madam 

Minister, is that we have a tendency I think to watch in our 

society the old rule of the pendulum swinging, metaphorically, 

and I'm sure you know what I mean by that. 

 

We have a tendency to say, things are too far over here; we 

must move more to the middle.  But when we get to the middle, 

we can't stop the momentum of what we are doing and it has a 

tendency to swing by and we have what we would possibly 

term as an overkill of a situation, or lack of a balance for a 

better way of describing what I want to get at. 

 

The balance we need of course is to allow people to eliminate 

some of the garbage that we have in our society without 

destroying the atmosphere, but at the same time when we stop 

all burning we have a tendency to pile that garbage up and 

cause other environmental concerns to become even worse. 

 

How many rats do you multiply in a garbage pile that's not 

properly taken care of, whether it be above ground and covered 

up with dirt or left out in the air?  That's just a comparison of 

the type of thing that can happen.  You can have major rat 

infestations into garbage dumps that are not properly burned 

out or gotten rid of in a proper way. 

 

The other consideration is your water table.  When you don't 

allow people to burn garbage and you pile it up and it rains, all 

of the things in that garbage wash down through and get into 

the aquifer.  And so what I'm saying is that if we don't be very 

careful here and get some kind of a balance, then we're going to 

destroy one part of our elements in consideration of trying to 

save the other.  I like fresh air.  Don't get me wrong; I love to 

breathe fresh air. 

 

I was in Eastend over the weekend and there was nothing more 

beautiful than to have our window down on a sunny day and 

have from the open prairie, a wind blow down that street and 

come through the window.  And you just knew right there that 

this was the reason why rural life is so important and so worth 

saving and so worth fighting for -- just that one or two breaths 

of air coming through the window as we went through the 

parade.  Enjoyed that.  It was beautiful out there. 

 

The member from Shaunavon should have been there; he 

would have noted how nice it was to be there.  I guess they 

didn't invite him. 

 

But I just wanted to make that point that we don't want to 

overkill the situation and get out of balance, Madam Minister.  

We've got to maintain that kind of balance in our society where 

we don't try to eliminate one problem and create another. 

 

I'll give you another little example of what we're talking about.  

A few years ago the town of Shaunavon had a problem with its 

sewage.  They were dumping it down the creek, and it was 

running of course eventually into the Swiftcurrent Creek and 

polluting the Duncairn dam reservoir.  We don't know, to be 

honest with you, how extensive that pollution was. 

 

What we do know is though that the people became very 

concerned about it, so concerned that they organized in several 

different ways.  They brought in wildlife people, all kinds of 

people that were concerned about the environment.  They took 

a look at the whole situation, and they came up with a plan 

where they would store the sewage into an area and put out 

nesting areas so that the ducks and the geese of course could 

utilize the water. 

 

Now I start to wonder.  We solved the problem of not dumping 

that water down the system.  We've cleaned up the pollution 

aspect of water running into the Swiftcurrent Creek, and we've 

cleaned up the problem of contaminants may be killing the fish 

in Duncairn dam. And we stopped the potential danger to the 

people of Swift Current all being poisoned, and of course 

eventually into Saskatoon where they drink the water. 

 

Somebody made the comment that at one time Shaunavon had 

the best water in south-west Saskatchewan.  In fact in North 

America it was even touted to be . . . they claimed that they 

collected water from Shaunavon and gave it to the Queen to 

drink on her visits to Canada.  I don't know if those stories 

were right or not, but certainly the water was of that quality 

that it may have been used for that. 

 

The point is that we saved all that pollution problem down the 

system, and that was necessary.  But now we've got these large 

reservoirs sitting beside the town of Shaunavon where the 

water below was supposedly the best ever.  Now I find out that 

they're having to chlorinate the water for drinking, and it starts 

to make me wonder, did we store that water there to save the 

rest of the system downstream in order to destroy the ground 

waters in and around the town of Shaunavon?  And this is a 

large aquifer; it runs for many miles around.  And of course 

once it's polluted and poisoned, it will have an effect on a lot of 

people there. 

 

And so we have to have that balance. And that's what I got out 

of this debate so far, is that we may not be watching out for that 

balance.  If we allow small towns to collect garbage and force 

them to bury it without burning off those things that can be 

burnt and got rid of or if we don't take care of it somehow, we 

will have rat problems.  We will have aquifer problems. 

 

And we've had just an awful lot of the towns express a lot of 

concern about the sizes of areas that they will have to 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

have in order to get rid of all the garbage.  It's unfortunate, I 

guess, that wherever we have people in our world we are 

naturally going to have pollution -- the nature of the beast, I 

guess you might say.  Whenever we populate an area the first 

thing we need is food.  You can go out with a baseball bat and 

hunt some animals and feed yourself, but as the population 

grows you have to have farmers growing food.  And as you 

grow more and more food, you find out that you've got to spray 

the weeds and things like that to get more food.  And we create 

our own problems. 

 

So to say that we are going to clean up all of the environmental 

problems is just simply never going to ever happen.  You can 

assist the situation.  You can make great strides.  But you will 

never eliminate all the problems as long as we have people.  So 

we have to accept the role of providing a balance. 

 

And I'm saying that the folks out there in the small towns are 

first and foremost affected by the burning problem because 

that's an obvious situation.  Every town has to have a dump 

because the first thing you create after you feed people, you 

create garbage.  And everybody that is a person that lives 

anywhere leaves some garbage some place, somehow.  It's just 

another situation of the nature of the beast.  We are people, and 

we pollute by the very fact that we live. 

 

How to handle that and best return it to the environment, that is 

the key and the question.  And so I'm saying to you, Madam 

Minister, that we want you to take a look at the balance here.  

We've got all of these towns worried about where they're going 

to get the landfill site from.  They have an awful lot of trouble.  

I know you are aware of the facts, having been involved with 

municipal government yourself, how tough it is sometimes to 

find a new site just to dump garbage.  Nobody wants to have 

the dump beside their house.  Everybody needs one, but 

nobody wants it anywhere close.  And if you have to have 

twice the size that you ever had before, you escalate the costs, 

and we're into all these cost/price squeezes and all those kinds 

of things. 

 

So I'm saying that we have to take a look very carefully at 

controlled types of burning in order to eliminate some of this 

stuff.  Maybe we have to load some of it up and take it away.  

But it seems that we've got a panic out in the country.  People 

are really worried about the fact that they're not going to be 

allowed to burn up their garbage and that they're going to get 

all these problems.  And I want you to be aware of that. 

 

And I want you to be aware of the fact that I have had probably 

25 different towns and locations make this issue known to me 

personally.  Now that is more towns than I have in my 

constituency, almost double the amount.  So you know the 

depth of the concern out there, and I'm sure that all of my 

colleagues could bring you in stories from all around the 

province where they've been. 

 

So I don't want you to go out of this Assembly thinking that 

what you're doing here isn't being noticed by the folks out 

there.  They're noticing, and they're concerned.  They're 

extremely worried that you may be producing an overkill. 

(1545) 

 

The other thing I worry about in your deliberations here, 

Madam Minister, is the sliding scale.  And immediately when I 

heard that . . . I guess I have thought sometimes that I shouldn't 

have, but I thought immediately that if I were to get into 

trouble, I'll bet you the best thing I could do would be to buy a 

membership in the NDP and I'd probably save myself just a 

whole bunch of money.  It just seemed to me that, you know . . 

. I know that's not a good thing to have to say, but it just 

crossed my mind that maybe it wouldn't be so much what you 

did wrong as who you knew in the departments, or who you 

were affiliated with, or who had the most power to convince 

people.  Not what you know, but who you know. 

 

And I don't really think that that's the way people want their 

laws to be drawn up or even perceived to have been drawn up, 

and I perceived this in the first few minutes that I sat here and 

listened to that very comment. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I draw that to your attention.  If I thought 

it, everybody else in the country thought it because nothing, I 

think, is original.  I only pick up from listening to other people 

and listening to what they say so they've all picked it up and 

they've all thought it too. 

 

And I think you owe it to yourselves and to the rest of the 

members of your political party to alleviate those kinds of 

concerns and to take those kinds of perceptions out of your 

Bills. 

 

The "shall" or "may" mentioned by the member from 

Greystone is obviously again, as she has pointed out, one of 

those things that leads you in that direction of thought.  And 

her point is well taken, and I support that line of thinking, that 

you ought to reconsider how you word these things to make 

sure that it is fair to the people. 

 

With that, I want to let my colleagues get back into the debate 

and I want to ask you though to please give me your comments 

and your responses to these questions and issues. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  You 

made some comments that are very interesting and I'm very 

concerned as you are about the cost to taxpayers when it comes 

to environmental regulations and changes in environmental 

legislation. 

 

I'll point out first though that when you talk about burning of 

municipal waste, this Act, this Clean Air Act, takes the burning 

of municipal waste out of it.  There is no reference in this Act 

to burning of municipal waste at all.  The burning of municipal 

waste is under EMPA, which is the other Act. 

 

I will also point out to the member opposite that it was under 

the former government that the enforcement on the burning of 

municipal waste came into effect.  I can also assure you that 

when I sat as a director on SUMA and chair of their health, 

environment, and protective service committee, we had a lot of 

concern with that and I understand completely what you're 

talking about.  So I have some empathy with what municipal 

governments are going through. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

We can discuss the whole idea of landfills at some detail if you 

want, although it doesn't pertain directly to this legislation that 

we're under review here at this moment.  I will say though that 

we do feel that regional landfills are the way to go.  We are 

working with a great many municipalities to try to cut down the 

need for a lot of landfills for every community.  We are talking 

about waste minimization so that they do not have as much 

waste going to landfills.  Most of what goes to landfills is 

burnable but it's also recyclable.  So we are looking at the 

whole idea of waste minimization and recycling. 

 

But once again I want to point out that burning at municipal 

landfills is not part of the legislation of The Clean Air Act; 

there's no reference to it.  In fact we took that reference right 

out of this.  So it's another Act that you're speaking about here. 

 

In regard to the sliding scale, I can assure you that there is no 

intent for political interference or manipulation here, although 

there may be past governments who would have interfered.  

We do not believe that this government or any future 

government would want to interfere in that. 

 

Further to that point, those sliding scales will be controlled 

through regulation.  So there will be no ability for this minister 

or any other minister to think about that.  But I would point out 

that we do not believe that any minister in this government and 

any future government would take that upon themselves 

anyway, and perhaps it was only past governments that would 

have happened. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Madam Minister, I certainly have no 

intentions of standing here and throwing stones at the Blakeney 

administration of the 1970s and some of the foolhardy things 

that they did back then.  And the fact that they might have 

treated this type of a Bill ridiculously, really doesn't make any 

difference to us today.  We're looking at the future and today 

on, and this is what your Bill concerns.  So I don't personally 

care what happened in the past except to use it as an experience 

to guide our actions in the future to make it better. 

 

And it looks to me like you'll have to take responsibility for 

what you're doing in this Act and other Acts, and the 

responsibility of the results of your actions will be yours and 

you won't get away with blaming people in the past or some 

place else for what you are doing.  That just won't wash any 

more. 

 

This is your government, this is your Bill, this is your law.  

You're tied to it; you're going to have to live with the results of 

it.  And I tell you that if you say to me that politicians will not 

play politics, I simply have to say that I don't agree with you 

and I don't believe you.  Politicians are politicians and they will 

play politics.  For as long as I've lived and for as long as there 

will be people and for as long as there is an organized society 

where there is the freedom to have governments, you will have 

people attempting to influence what happens to their lives by 

what they know and, better yet, who they know. 

 

And so there will be, as long as you make a provision in a Bill 

an opportunity for there to be interference, there will be 

interference, because that is the human nature and the 

human condition.  If you want to have a Bill that specifically 

spells out that certain things will happen, then that's exactly 

what you have to do, otherwise it will be manipulated and it 

will be abused. 

 

And I suggest to you that people in your government will abuse 

it as much as Mr. Blakeney's government might have in the 

'70s.  And you are as vulnerable to being human as he was and 

his administrators and his government.  So don't point fingers 

and say they were bad guys.  Do this thing yourself and do it 

right.  Take out the possibility of the thing being abused and 

you will find yourself a lot happier people. 

 

I did have another question.  And it seems to me that probably 

you were proper in stating that you have taken out a lot of these 

things out of the Bill, and that it would be better reflected into 

Bill 3, so I think I will reserve those questions for that Bill 3.  

And those things that apply to Bill 3, from the statements I 

made earlier, I would appreciate it if you would superimpose 

and imply that to Bill 3 and save me having to repeat myself a 

lot at that time. 

 

If you'd care to comment any further, I'd be happy to hear your 

comments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, I have no more comments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At this time 

I would just like to thank the minister and her officials for 

coming in today and answering our questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill affects a number 

of people across this province, and we've been contacted by a 

number of them over the last period of time, mainly people 

dealing with small service stations that repair air conditioners 

in vehicles.  It seems to be they have a lot of concern about this 

Bill.  I'm wondering, Madam Minister, who have you consulted 

with in concerns to this Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, I'm pleased to report that we 

have talked to nearly everybody that this Bill could be 

concerned with.  We've talked to the automobile association; 

we've talked to the service industry; we've talked to 

refrigeration companies; we have done extensive consultations 

regarding this Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the minister, Mr. Chairman, 

supply us with a list of those people that she consulted with? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, we would, by 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

association.  We can provide you with the list. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On this 

Bill, have you given any consideration to what it's going to cost 

the individual sectors to make the changes as outlined in this 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill . . . The 

amendments do not add any cost whatsoever.  It only provides 

for the certification of the people who are working with CFCs 

(chlorofluorocarbon).  The certification process costs about, as 

I understand, about $80 for the service repairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Does this 

Act not call for the recovery of all CFCs such as Freon from 

systems? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, that's not a cost to the 

industry.  Obviously, the more they can recover the less they 

have to replace so actually this recovery process is saving them 

money, not costing them money. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't believe 

that all locations have systems in place for the total recovery 

and storage of used CFCs and refrigerants.  That would be an 

added cost to them; the storage, the unit to recover, and the 

storage and the transportation thereof. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the industry is very 

quickly moving to do just those type of processes that you're 

talking about, and it provides an economic activity for them.  

Obviously, I think most people today are very concerned about 

the hole in the ozone layer and the release of CFCs.  And most 

responsible people in industries are now understanding their 

obligation and responsibility, and they are moving forward on 

this.  And we haven't had a great deal of opposition from 

members of the public or members in the industry on this. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you're right that 

a lot of people are concerned about the environment, the ozone 

hole, the effects on skin cancer.  We see it in the paper all the 

time where they're talking about people not going to the beach 

and going sun-tanning. 

 

And yet there is a cost associated with the recovery of the 

CFCs and the Freons and the refrigerants.  And that was the 

question I asked you.  What is that cost going to be? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 

these amendments are only providing for the certification.  The 

costs that he's talking about were costs associated with a Bill 

that was brought in by the last government, and they have been 

part of the legislation for quite some time.  These amendments 

we have do not put an obligation of any increased costs on 

anyone except the certification process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that may well be 

true, although I find it surprising that people would all of a 

sudden start getting antsy about this Bill, about the program of 

collecting refrigerants.  Why, when this Bill comes forward, is 

all of a sudden there a great concern that it's going to cost 

somebody a lot of money to do this collection?  People are 

talking of getting out of the 

industry because of the costs of buying recovery units and 

storage.  So there must be a new, added cost there some place 

that they were not experiencing before. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, that there could 

be some misunderstanding within the public's mind and within 

the member opposite's mind.  These amendments we're talking 

about today are simply for certification.  The fact . . . what he's 

talking about is the Act that the last government brought in 

which talked about controlling the ozone-depleting substances 

and with that came a set of regulations. 

 

Those regulations are now in effect, and there are some people 

who are concerned.  But obviously it is a necessary thing that 

we must do, and as responsible citizens we simply have to 

move forward.  But we are aware that there is a cost, but this 

amendment we're dealing with today is not part of . . . does not 

bring about that cost.  That cost was from the last piece of 

legislation that your government brought in.  Today we're 

dealing with certification of the people who handle the 

ozone-depleting substances. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- On the certification and the training, 

what procedures will be in place now to provide that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we are running programs 

at this point in time from the department to certify people who 

require that training and knowledge.  We hope by the end of 

this calendar year, we will have all the people who require 

certification with the certificate and training that they need. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, where is this training 

being done at?  Who is providing the training? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The training programs are provided at a 

cost to the department.  They're advertised in the paper.  There 

was an ad in the last Saturday's paper, and they're provided in 

centres all across this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And your department supplies the 

instruction for that type of training and for the certification? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the department 

provides the instruction. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, on your control orders, 

what is the purpose for this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, in circumstances where 

there is a problem with an industry or a business, the 

department needs a control order in order to make the industry 

or business refrain from continuing its operation until such time 

as they are in compliance with the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in this Bill, like the 

previous Bill, you also have in here the power to . . . or may 

revoke, replace or amend or vary previous control orders.  

Under what circumstances would you be doing that?  And 

would that be consistent every time?  If you made an 

amendment or a change in one circumstance, if 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

a similar circumstance arose again, would the same amendment 

be made in it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this area is very complex 

and the department needs the ability to respond to unique 

circumstances.  And this gives some flexibility in order to 

provide the department time and the industry time to check out 

circumstances, that's all. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, my concern here 

is the consistency.  That if an event happens in where you need 

to take some action, that the next time that same type of 

occurrence happens that you will be consistent. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we do intend to be consistent.  But 

there are circumstances, as you probably are aware, where 

technologies vary, circumstances change from time to time.  

And we have to have the ability to respond to each 

circumstance individually. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in section 10.3(2), you 

talk there of interim relief.  What do you mean by interim 

relief?  The section reads: 

 

 With respect to an application pursuant to subsection (1), the 

court may make any order for interim relief that it considers 

appropriate. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The interpretation of that section means 

that the court will make an order that would correct the 

problem as it sees appropriate, which means many things 

according to the circumstances they're dealing with.  It's hard to 

put it into an Act, all the circumstances that might occur.  And 

so what this says is that the court will have the authority to 

make interim relief. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- In subsection 11(1)(g.3) it talks of 

prescribed fees which will be paid with respect to any matter 

that is regulated pursuant to this Act.  How will those fees be 

laid out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, through regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in the regulations how 

will you determine what the fees will be?  Again it's a matter of 

consistency that I'm looking at here.  For the same type of 

business, for the same type of refrigerant, for the same type of 

service, will the fees be the same? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, absolutely you're right.  That's the 

way the regulations will be set up.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- At what level will these fees be set at, 

I'm wondering.  For a service station that works on 10 air 

conditioners a year, will there be any variance along that line? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, at this point in time we're 

consulting with various people.  It's under study right now; we 

haven't made that determination.  But we will make every 

effort to keep the member opposite and the public aware of 

those discussions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- When these fees are set and when 

the permits are issued, for what time period are you looking at?  

Will it be a one-year term or a five-year or have you some 

figure in mind? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank you for that question.  It also is 

under study.  Those will be further terms within the regulations 

that we'll be discussing with people in the industry and the 

public, and we'll keep you informed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, my concern here 

is whether the fees will be at such a level as to not be 

prohibitive to a business.  If it's for an extended period of time, 

then a higher fee is perhaps applicable.  But if it's simply for a 

one-year term, then a high fee can be quite prohibitive to a 

business which is on the verge of not doing well.  So I think 

you need to take that into consideration when you enact your 

regulations. 

 

You also, I think, need to take into account the costs associated 

with putting this Act into place to those individuals, to those 

service stations, refrigeration companies. 

 

On section 12.1 you have in here that no prosecutions will take 

place after two years.  I mentioned in the second reading of this 

Bill that perhaps an extended period of time should be 

considered.  Have you given any consideration to extending it 

beyond the two-year time frame that you have in the Bill now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank the member opposite for the 

previous remarks regarding the regulations.  I agree with you.  

Those all will be considerations.  We'll make the regulations 

fair and equitable. 

 

With regard to the last remark, the officials in Justice feel that 

the two-year limitation is fair and reasonable and that that is an 

appropriate length of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, we have no further 

questions.  At this time I'd like to thank the minister and her 

officials for being present today. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, we do 

have some very serious concerns about this Bill, and the fact is 

I have some amendments which I'll be presenting later on this. 

 

The one issue that is to us a burning issue is the matter of 

search and seizure without a warrant.  So we will be getting 

into that after a bit. 

 

I would just like to ask the minister who she has consulted with 

in dealing with this Bill? 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

Well it seems Madam Minister had a very short answer for 

that.  I wonder if she could give us a list of who she consulted 

with. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, you want a list of who we 

consulted with on all the amendments or the ones we handed 

out today? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- All of the amendments, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, most of these amendments 

come out of the day-to-day activities that the department 

undertakes.  They've been recommended by Environment 

Canada and industries that interface with the department on a 

regular basis. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you're saying then that 

you did not go out and hold any public consultations or any 

consultations with any groups other than those that your 

department happens to meet in the regular course of business? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, as my colleague 

from Maple Creek was just bringing forward in the last Bill, 

that the RMs (rural municipality) have a very serious concern 

about the waste disposal, their sanitation sites, and I'm 

surprised that you would not have consulted with them to some 

degree concerning this issue.  Have you consulted with the 

RMs, with SARM about the landfill sites and the burning? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there's nothing in this Act 

about landfill management.  It doesn't deal with it here.  The 

issue that the other member was commenting on is a very 

important issue and we've done extensive consultations with 

municipalities and we are now, in regards to municipal 

landfills. 

 

We have a committee struck that is talking with both people in 

SARM and SUMA regarding the potential for regional landfills 

and the impact on their costs.  But the Bill that we have today, 

the amendments that we're talking about today, don't 

necessarily deal with that issue.  The issue of burning and 

landfills was an issue that was legislated under the previous 

government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, during 

comments in the last Bill you stated that the burning had now 

been transferred to, you call it the EMPA, which is what this 

Act is.  So is not burning then being dealt with under this Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, point of clarification.  Burning 

at landfills was always under The Environmental Management 

and Protection Act; it's always been there.  But there was a 

duplication in that it was under The Clean Air Act as well.  We 

removed it from The Clean Air Act.  We've done nothing to 

change it under the EMPA.  It was there last year and two years 

ago and three years ago and it's there same today. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well perhaps then, Madam Minister, 

there has been a change in enforcement, that perhaps it was not 

being enforced strictly to the letter of the law perhaps, but now 

enforcement is very stringent. 

 

I've been receiving complaints that RMs and towns have been 

told that if there is a fire at their disposal site, regardless of how 

that fire started, that they will be fined up to $5,000.  Is that the 

case? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate what the 

member opposite is talking about because as former mayor I 

received one of those letters.  But that started two years ago.  

The process today is no different than it was two years ago, 

started under the former minister of the Environment. 

 

I understand their concerns.  We're working with those people.  

We are trying to be very fair and even-handed, understanding 

the limitations they have on their financial resources.  And 

we're looking at trying to work out a program that would to 

some degree limit the amount of financial obligation that we'll 

have by trying to find ways of sharing the cost across a broad 

number of municipalities. 

 

But I will repeat, the amendments to the EMPA Act today do 

not deal with burning at landfills, because that was an issue that 

was put into the Act a couple years ago and the process to 

control that burning started a couple of years ago under the 

former government. 

 

And we are doing nothing different today than you were two 

years ago, except we're holding further consultations and trying 

to mitigate any of the problems and the financial burdens that 

they may have toward the whole issue of burning at municipal 

landfills. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, again 

in this case as in the ozone Act, it seems rather strange then 

that all of a sudden people are getting more and more 

concerned about it, about the costs at this time.  There needs to 

be some controls placed in there, but all of a sudden they're 

very concerned about the costs; they're very concerned about 

the enforcement. 

 

When they receive notification that if there is a fire under any 

circumstances, you will be fined up to $5,000, it scares a lot of 

people, because they do have some real concerns.  It may have 

been caused by an accident, it may have been an act of God, or 

it may have been deliberate.  But in the case of an act of God, 

surely the RM or the town council in question should not be 

responsible for such.  They may be responsible to try and get 

the fire out as quickly as possibly, but not to prevent it.  And I 

think some considerations need to be given there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Certainly I appreciate what you're saying.  

Mr. Chairman, the member opposite perhaps only himself has 

become more aware of it.  As a former mayor and member of 

SUMA I can tell you that concern has been there for a long 

period of time and our department at this point in time has a 

committee struck. 

 

We're working with members of SUMA trying to rationalize a 

landfill situation in Saskatchewan. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

We empathize with the cost that you're talking about.  But I 

will say that I don't believe the situation has been raised any 

further by our administration than under the last administration.  

The concern was there with municipalities then.  Municipal 

waste is their responsibility.  We are working with them to try 

to find ways of reducing it.  But this is a responsibility of 

municipal governments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you are the 

Minister for the Environment.  You also sit in cabinet.  When 

we look at what happened in the budget, funds for RMs, for 

both rural and urban municipalities, were cut.  And yet this is 

going to add an added burden to their expenses.  Have you 

considered, from your position in cabinet, to providing some 

sort of assistance to those RMs, to the urban municipalities, for 

waste disposal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have announced a solid-waste 

management assistance program of $1.75 million over the next 

five years to give just such assistance that you're talking about.  

We would like to provide more.  And perhaps when the 

province has more flexibility in regard to financial resources, 

we will be able to.  But at this point in time we have allocated 

one and three-quarter million dollars toward the assistance that 

you are talking about. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, for 

bringing that up.  I was going to get to that after a bit. 

 

This $1.75 million that you're providing, those are for 

experimental sites, are they not -- landfill sites?  And you have 

it designed that there would be what? -- approximately five 

sites tested at the present time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That money will be allocated towards 

regional landfill sites.  Right now we are looking at a limited 

number, but we hope to expand that as years go by and we 

have more resources.  But it's not experimental.  It will be a 

regional landfill site across the province.  And we hope to have 

a more limited than the just about 900 landfills that we have 

now, or garbage dumps. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- This $1.75 million -- how many landfill 

sites do you expect to fund with that at the present time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point in time, Mr. Chair, we 

intend to fund one very large, complex, regional landfill site 

and one smaller one in rural Saskatchewan.  That's the program 

for this year.  We'll evaluate it again next year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Have those sites been chosen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chair, we just recently announced 

the terms of reference for those projects.  There is a committee 

that's been struck that consists of people from SUMA and 

SARM, and we'll be selecting those sites in the near future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, who is on your 

committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we know we have SUMA and SARM representatives 

as well as SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association).  

We can provide you with a list of the names and their 

associations, if you like.  We don't have it with us. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If you would please, Madam Minister.  

How many people are on the committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, 10 people sit on the 

committee. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What cost do you expect this committee 

to incur during their deliberations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the associations that have 

representatives on the committee pay those costs for their 

members.  There is no cost to the provincial government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I find 

that they're being very generous to us, these various 

associations that are sitting on this committee. 

 

You spoke earlier of another committee.  What was this 

committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not sure what the member opposite is 

referring to, but the committee I referred to earlier is the same 

committee.  It's the Community Environmental Management 

Committee. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wasn't 

sure if you had two committees on the go or if it was just one. 

 

Madam Minister, in the Bill it says that this Bill will be 

economically responsible.  I was just wondering, how many 

fines or how much in fines for those people who do burn in 

their landfill sites . . . How much would you expect to collect in 

a year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not sure that I understand your 

question fully, but there is a discussion under way at this point 

in time that'll discuss the fees that you're speaking about.  We 

have no set amount. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if I could go back to 

the $1.75 million, you say that you have two sites in mind for 

that -- a large site which would probably be somewhat of an 

urban area, and a small site, probably a rural area.  What 

happens to the rest of the landfill sites across the province?  

Where do they get any funding considering the cuts in the 

budget and the additional costs that they will incur? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the process under way is 

under a request for proposals, and every set of communities can 

join together and put forward a proposal if they like.  This is 

simply the start of a process that we feel will go on over the 

next number of years as we try to eliminate the many small 

garbage dumps and end up with fewer landfills. 

 

The department will be working with municipalities.  This is a 

beginning of a very long process and we have only a 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

limited amount of funds and that's what's been allocated this 

year.  But it's by no means the end; it is only the beginning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I'm sure that those municipalities 

that do not receive any money from your 1.75 million will 

appreciate it's only a beginning.  But what do they do in the 

mean time?  Between the point that this Bill comes into assent . 

. . it says this Bill comes into force on the day of assent.  Well 

on the day of assent they have to start meeting these rules and 

the regulations that you may impose on them until some point 

in time when you provide some funding.  So what do they do in 

the mean time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well there are many things a 

municipality can do in the mean time.  First of all, I would say 

that waste management is a municipal responsibility.  How 

they control their waste management systems is up to them.  

The provincial government has only limited resources in order 

to provide assistance. 

 

There are many municipalities who are in compliance with 

their regional . . . with landfills at this point in time; they're not 

burning.  For the smaller ones, they are joining together, 

working together.  Instead of every municipality having their 

own, they're sharing the cost. 

 

So there are many things that a municipal government can do at 

the local level to decrease their costs as well.  There are many 

fronts that they're working on.  The provincial government is 

providing as much assistance and help as we can.  And the 

municipalities are joining together collectively to provide a 

joint approach to this system as well. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, when you go to 

a larger collection site, a larger collection area, and you 

eliminate some of the RMs, some of the urban municipal 

dumps, they've already got those in place.  If they're full, fine, 

then it's valid to go to a larger collection system.  But if those 

sites are not yet filled, if they still have some useful life span, 

then it's going to be an additional cost on those RMs to close 

that site down and move to a larger facility some place else.  

And so that's going to provide some added cost to the whole 

system. 

 

Madam Minister, I have to really wonder what precipitated all 

of this action.  Who asked for this Bill to be brought forward, 

and why are you bringing it forward? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- What I would like to comment on to the 

member opposite, that first of all this is not just a Bill to deal 

with municipal landfills.  In fact, that doesn't come into this 

Bill at all, into these amendments.  That was under the previous 

government, I'll point out again. 

 

The amendments in this Bill that we're dealing with today have 

a number of purposes.  Some of them were recommended by 

the Department of Justice, some of them were recommended 

by the federal department to bring provincial legislation into 

equivalency with federal legislation, and some have just come 

from the department officials who have been working at a 

number 

of areas and see deficiencies within our own legislation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I'd like to go back to a 

question I asked about the funding.  And I'll read from your 

explanatory notes.  Firstly, the ability of the minister to 

prescribe fees and charges for a number of activities will allow 

the department to become more self-supporting. 

 

That was the question I had.  What do you envision?  How do 

you envision the department becoming more self-supporting?  

Is there any place that the department collects other than fees 

and fines?  Do they have any other source of income other than 

the general funds from the government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At this point in time, Mr. Chairman, the 

department does not have any ability to collect any fees.  These 

amendments allow the department, the government, to charge 

for permits and licences that we issue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Will the department also collect any fees 

that are . . . excuse me, any fines which are levied against any 

municipality? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, we do not do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, in section (2) of the 

Act you've added the words ". . . waste dangerous goods".  I 

wonder if you'd mind explaining what you mean by ". . . waste 

dangerous goods". 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, that is the generally 

accepted term for hazardous wastes that's used across Canada.  

It's part of our equivalent terminology. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So this would be equivalent terminology 

to what is in the federal legislation.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, will there be any 

repercussions from this Act on farmers with respect to storage 

of their chemicals like farm chemicals, pesticides, insecticides, 

or rat poisons and that type of thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, not under this legislation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, why does this 

amendment allow the Minister for the Environment or an 

agent, an officer of that, to enter onto any land or buildings 

without the consent of the owner? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you for that question, to the 

member opposite.  There are two reasons for it.  One, there are 

circumstances where the government must move to protect the 

public health and welfare.  And the second is that we have to 

make sure that evidence is not being destroyed during the time 

that we have to take action. 

 

So in circumstances where we have to take immediate action, 

this amendment will be used. 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, that seems to be 

an awful heavy hand to be able to have search and seizure 

without a warrant in the case of the environment, where that's 

not the case in most other areas in criminal activities. 

 

The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) or the local 

police, whomever it may be, has to get a warrant if they wish to 

search somebody else's property in search of evidence.  Why is 

the Minister of the Environment so much more special that she 

should be able to enter into somebody else's property without a 

warrant, without having to give an explanation to anyone why 

you or your agents should be allowed into such type of forceful 

entry. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This applies only when there is a risk to 

the public good.  It does not apply to private residences.  I'd 

like to point that out.  And I would also like to point out that 

the occupational health and safety also has the same provision 

for the minister to act in circumstances where immediate action 

is required in order to protect the environment or the health of 

the public. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'd like to read 

this section of the Act here: 

 

 . . . enter on any land or into any building where the minister, 

environment officer or designated person believes on 

reasonable and probable grounds that: 

 

  (a) a hazardous substance, waste dangerous good, 

hazardous waste or other material that could cause 

or may cause pollution is present on the land or in 

the building; 

 

Well, Madam Minister, to me that gives you blanket power to 

enter any place you want to.  It doesn't say that it is causing 

pollution but it says that it may cause pollution, ". . . could 

cause or may cause." 

 

Madam Minister, many things could cause pollution.  Common 

table salt, NaCl, if used in a large enough dose will cause 

pollution, will sterilize soil.  In fact Carthage when it was 

sacked by the Romans was salted so that nothing ever grew 

there again.  And so that is an environmental hazard if used to 

that extent. 

 

So this could give you the ability to enter into any place you 

wanted to, other than a dwelling, with very little explanation as 

to why you're doing so.  There's no onus on you to explain why 

you had to enter into that building, other than the fact that there 

could cause or may cause pollution . . . something in there that 

could cause or may cause pollution.  Why do you need that 

extreme power? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, the hazardous substances are 

defined under the hazardous substances Act, so there's a limited 

number of goods that we are talking about here.  What this says 

that the minister, or the environmental officer may enter private 

property if they have reasonable or probable grounds that the 

substance is there and that activity that is dangerous of 

polluting the environment is taking place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it says: a 

hazardous substance, waste dangerous good, hazardous waste 

or other material.  Now what do you mean by other material?  

Surely if the only things that are going to cause a problem to 

the environment are hazardous substances or waste dangerous 

goods, then why do you need other material in there?  That's 

where you collect everything that allows you to enter into 

anybody else's property without any good cause. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Perhaps to explain, to clarify some of 

these circumstances where this could be used . . . perhaps in an 

auto body shop or in a garage, the occupants are pouring 

gasoline or solvents down a sewer.  Now the hazardous good is 

not necessarily something that you would, in general terms, 

decide that it is hazardous, but once it enters the sewer system, 

then it is.  So in circumstances like that, the environment 

officers have to have the right or the authority to enter and stop 

those activities from taking place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I would think 

that pouring gasoline down the sewer would already be covered 

under hazardous substances or waste, dangerous good or 

hazardous waste. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 

substances or materials that could, in appropriate amounts, 

become dangerous to the public good.  They can't all be 

defined here, but in circumstances where it is perceived that is 

a dangerous use of them, the environment officer would enter 

and take whatever actions were necessary.  It is difficult to give 

a limited list of these because quantity and other circumstances 

determine whether it's hazardous or not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well that's right, Madam Minister, and 

that's why I used the example of the salt.  We all use salt every 

day, but if it's used in an excessive amount, it'll kill you. 

 

Madam Minister, further on in the Bill it says, "without a 

warrant".  You used the example of the gasoline being poured 

down the sewer.  If your agent or if you knew that gasoline was 

being poured down the sewer in a service station, why do you 

have to enter in that immediate second?  Surely if you know 

about it happening, you can go to a judge and say, Your 

Honour, somebody is contravening the Act.  Here is the 

evidence that we have.  Give us a warrant to do something 

about it. 

 

Why does it have to be so immediate?  Surely if you know it's 

happening, then you can get the warrant to do so, because you 

have the evidence.  But what it seems is that you want the 

warrant . . . you want to be able to operate without a warrant so 

that you can enter on the suspicion. 

 

Well if you have suspicions, surely you can go to a judge and 

get a warrant for that.  That's what the RCMP have to do; that's 

what the city police of Regina have to do.  And surely breaking 

a criminal law is just as important as breaking an 

environmental law.  In an environmental law you may have a 

large number of people affected, but the same may happen in a 

criminal law if it's being broken, or you may have simply one 

individual being affected. 

 

I don't understand why, in your particular case, you feel 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

it's more important that you have that right than, say, the 

Minister of Justice has for his officers to enforce the law. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, what we're talking about 

is public health and public good.  And pollution is very 

difficult to control, and even more difficult to clean up in 

contaminated areas.  In regard to an instance where there's gas 

in the sewers, it is extremely dangerous and it has to be stopped 

immediately.  And to allow that to go on over a prolonged 

period without taking action would endanger the health of a 

great many citizens. 

 

So there are circumstances and they have to be used very 

judiciously.  No minister or environmental law officer will use 

this power without a great deal of forethought, because 

obviously no one is trying to exercise power that is 

unnecessary.  But in order to protect both the environment and 

the public health, there are circumstances going on all the time 

where immediate action is required, and it is necessary to enter 

the premise immediately in order to either secure data, secure 

information, or stop the practice from continuing.  And in those 

circumstances it is important that the officer have the 

legislative authority to do so. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well I agree with you, Madam Minister, 

that the environment is extremely important, and actions at a 

speedy time are necessary.  And yet this Act does not require 

any burden of proof or any responsibility on the part of your 

agents when they do in fact enter into a premise on a suspicion 

that somebody is contravening this Act.  Why have you not 

included something along that line? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Once again I would point out that it is the 

responsibility of the government to protect the safety and 

health of the citizens.  And responsible governments will, as I 

pointed out, use these amendments only when required.  They 

will not be used in any circumstances that can be avoided.  But 

they have to be here in order to protect the health and welfare 

of the environment and the citizens at large. 

 

And there are many, many times when these amendments 

would have prevented pollution or prevented damage to 

property, and it's important that they be there.  They're not 

there to be used lightly or without a great deal of information 

acquired beforehand.  It is only when the minister feels an 

environmental law has been broken that they will pursue the 

types of activities that are talked about in these amendments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you say only 

when required, and yet that means somebody has to make a 

judgement on when it's required.  Is that simply going to be 

made on the basis of one of your agents in the field making that 

judgement that it is now required that I break down Fred's barn 

door and check out his premises?  Or do they have to report 

back to you? 

 

You stated at the end of your statement that only by the 

minister.  So if they have to come back and consult you before 

they do make this forced entry, why not take some evidence 

before a judge and get a warrant? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The circumstances have to warrant it.  If 

the public's health or welfare is immediately threatened, then 

the minister or her agent has a responsibility to act.  These are 

the types of circumstances that we're talking about.  I'm at a 

loss to try to understand exactly the problem you're having with 

this, maybe. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the problem we're having, Madam 

Minister, is that government is a large organization with many 

different views brought to it.  Your bureaucrats will come and 

go, as do other minister's bureaucrats. 

 

What we're finding here is that we have fairly Draconian 

legislation placed in the hands of people who aren't trained 

legal officers.  They are people that are supposedly 

environmental protection types, but we don't know any 

classification to them.  We don't know sort of what their 

standing is within the legal community.  And yet you're asking 

us, and I look at the sections here where if need be one of your 

designees could take a bulldozer and drive through my shop 

door because it says any piece of machinery or equipment 

necessary to enter the premises without a warrant. 

 

In other words, you could drive into my lot, unload a bulldozer, 

drive through my shop door because you suspect something is 

going on.  And I would say to you, Madam Minister, that's 

fairly Draconian. 

 

Now the member from Souris-Cannington asked you earlier, 

where was the drive for this legislation?  Where did it come 

from?  I want a list of people that demanded this type of 

legislation from your department.  Was it your back-benchers?  

Was it people in your department?  Was it your deputy 

minister?  Was it certain industry segments?  Who demanded?  

Was it unions?  I want to know from you a list of people that 

demanded measures that Draconian that you can come and 

unload a bulldozer on my lot, my private property, and drive 

through the door of my shop to gain access.  I want to know. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't agree that this is 

Draconian.  The incidents that you like to recite are Draconian 

but they are not those circumstances that we would envision 

using the terms of this amendment.  The public has told us in 

very strong terms that they want the environment protected and 

they want the health and welfare of the public protected. 

 

This does not though, take precedent over any other civil or 

criminal law.  It is simply a matter if people in the department 

act improperly and exercise poor judgement, then the recourse 

will be as in any other terms when there's a person who 

transgresses any other law, that they'll have the same recourse 

to action against department officials or the minister as any 

other time when there is trespass. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you didn't answer my 

question about who demanded this type of legislation.  The 

other is a separate issue.  And I know about suing the 

government.  My farm was in a legal action with the 

Department of Highways for five and a half years.  I know all 

about it.  Suing the government is one of the most difficult 

things for an individual or a 



July 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

company to undertake. 

 

Government is large.  Government has access to the taxpayer to 

pay their legal bills, where I got to pay my own.  Believe me, 

no one sues the government lightly because you're more than 

likely to get dragged through the courts for years and years and 

years.  At the end of the day, you may break even.  And that's 

sort of the life of suing government.  And I don't think any 

individual in this province should have to do that. 

 

Madam Minister, your Bill says that someone can come onto 

my property, break in to my property, using whatever methods 

they deem necessary, and my only recourse will be at the end 

of the day to sue the government.  That's not acceptable.  I want 

to know from you a list of people, institutions, groups.  I want 

to know who asked for this legislation prior to it coming in 

here. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the public has told us, in 

no uncertain terms, that they want their water and the soil and 

the air protected.  We've had many discussions.  This is not a 

problem with most people.  The problem that the hon. minister 

opposite has is not a problem that most people in the general 

public have.  They feel quite comfortable that the environment 

has to be protected in the circumstances where there is 

immediate reaction required.  They feel that the responsible 

authority would be the person or persons representing the 

minister or the government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I don't know why you 

don't want to answer the question.  I'm a former minister of 

Energy and Mines.  A lot of the people that you interact with, 

that your deputy interacts with on a day-by-day basis, because 

he interacted with my officials when I was the minister, are 

people that could be affected by this legislation.  If it was those 

people, just tell the Assembly, that demanded these changes. 

 

I want to know from you a list of groups, individuals, 

back-benchers, I don't care; I just want to know who demanded 

the changes to the Act to bring forward these clauses that in the 

hands of the wrong person I say to you are Draconian. 

 

Why won't you provide that list to the Assembly?  I'm a 

member of the public, Madam Minister, and a lot of the people 

I talk to are members of the public and they haven't asked you 

for this legislation.  So let's get down to brass tacks here and 

give us some examples of people who demanded this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there wasn't a demand 

made on the public . . . on the department from any specific 

group.  The public demands that the water and the soil and the 

air of Saskatchewan be protected, and they demand that there 

be some security and some enforcement of environmental laws. 

 

In circumstances where environmental laws are being broken 

and there is an emergency nature attached to it, then it is 

incumbent upon officials of the department to take action that 

they deem necessary in order to stop the action from 

proceeding.  They need to gather evidence; they need to stop 

the action.  In this circumstance they 

need the legislative authority to do so. 

 

There are always circumstances, if you wish to use hyperbole 

or use exaggeration, that you can dream up, but this authority 

also is the same authority that rests with the occupational and 

welfare statute and it is not used in excess.  It is used only 

when required to protect the public health and safety. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, many people in the public 

appreciate your concern for our environment.  Some of us live 

it.  On Wednesday evening there will be a celebration at my 

parents' farm for 10 years of using Moose Jaw effluent for 

irrigation rather than running it into the Qu'Appelle system.  

Some of us understand that quite well about our environment 

and what we do to mitigate things. 

 

Madam Minister, parts of this legislation are Draconian, and 

that is from many sources.  Now I don't know why you will not 

inform this Assembly of the groups and people who have said 

there are instances that demand change in your legislation, 

Madam Minister, because we think something is going on.  

And I don't know why you hesitate to provide that to this 

Assembly.  And I can only tell you, we're going to be here a 

long time until you're ready to come forth with names and 

groups and give us some indication of who demanded these 

changes to this legislation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, there was no single person 

or single group that demanded this.  It is in response to the 

environmental concerns that most people in the public have. 

 

I would point out that not only is the same authority provided 

under The Occupational Health and Safety Act, but it is a 

similar type of legislation that's now coming forward in most 

jurisdictions across Canada.  There is nothing Draconian about 

this.  If it is used inappropriate, obviously there will be political 

consequences to it. 

 

No minister would want to take upon him or herself any action 

that was not required, because obviously we are in an open 

society, and that is always open to debate. 

 

I will point out though that it is the responsibility of the 

Minister of the Environment to protect the public and the 

environment, and in cases where it is required that we take 

immediate action, this amendment gives us that legislative 

authority. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well we'll switch tacks here for a minute, 

Madam Minister.  In your legislation is there any immunity 

from civil action or lawsuit provided to employees of your 

department under this Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Does that exist in any of the other legislation 

pertaining to your department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Does what . . . Could we have the 

question? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- In a civil sense, lawsuits or 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard July 27, 1992 

prosecutions, are your employees immune from that in any of 

your other areas of legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No. 

 

The Chair: -- It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands recessed 

until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


