




















































Hansard: May 29, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 729 

 May 29, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Tuesday next, move: 

 

 first reading of a Bill to declare a day of appreciation for the 

Scottish clans in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and to the members of this 

Assembly, a class of 26 students from Langenburg High 

School who are seated in your gallery.  The students are 

accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Okrainetz and also Mr. 

Haczkewicz. 

 

I would just like to mention that these two teachers were my 

colleagues up until election time in the Potashville school 

division.  And if I can put a little plug in here, I think the 

Potashville school division is one of the best school divisions 

in the province.  So I'm pleased to have the class and the 

teachers here with us this morning. 

 

I will be meeting with the class and the teachers at 11:10 for 

pictures and then followed by refreshments.  I'd also like to 

acknowledge their bus driver, Mrs. Nerbas, who came up from 

Langenburg with them this morning.  I'd like to wish them well 

on their tour today and a safe trip home.  And I'd ask you to 

welcome that particular class to the Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On 

behalf of my colleague, the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for The Battlefords, I would like to introduce to you 

and through you to the House 55 grade 5 and 6 students from 

the Lawrence School in North Battleford seated in the west 

gallery.  The students are here with four of their teachers:  John 

Diehl, Andra Kelly, Janet Anderson and Doug Schell, along 

with their bus driver Ken Maertens. 

 

My colleague regrets being unable to be here today, but I 

would ask all members to welcome the guests here from North 

Battleford. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you, Mr. 

Speaker, and through you to the House, I'd like to welcome 13 

grade 6 and 7 students from Paddockwood which is located in 

the centre of my constituency. 
 

Their teacher's name is Janice Dearing and chaperons Janet 

Slater, Greg Harris and Bonnie Griffin, and the bus driver is 

Mark.  I will be meeting with them at 10:30 after 

question period for pictures and drinks.  Would you please help 

me welcome them. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to the House, 

36 students from the Hartley Clark School in Spiritwood.  They 

are here to tour the Legislative Building and four or five other 

sites in the Queen City. 
 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Gil Goodfellow and 

Jean McLachlan; chaperons, Melvin Nelson and Adele Booth.  

I was told that as I met with them a little before they came in 

here that they haven't had a good count on the students since 

they left Spiritwood, but they hope they still have the same 

number. 
 

I will be meeting with them for pictures afterwards, and I hope 

that they have a good day today because they're going to spend 

the evening as well here and stay over and go back tomorrow 

so that they're in good shape to really give their chaperons the 

run-through. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

this morning to introduce to you, and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, 34 students that come from 9 

countries who are enrolled at the University of Regina in the 

English program as an academic program. 
 

I met with them on the stairs for pictures earlier and took them 

on a very quick tour.  I'm going to be meeting with them 

following question period in Room 218 for refreshments and to 

answer any questions they may have about the proceedings that 

they've been able to view. 
 

I would ask members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming the students and their Professor Penthes, Laura 

Roszell and Therese, the teachers of the program. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday I was in 

Wadena and six farmers came and talked to me at different 

times.  Some of them weren't even finished eating.  They had 

some very serious concerns. 
 

They said that the federal government was acting even worse 

than when they cancelled the two-price wheat system.  We all 

remember at that time they promised to be reimbursing the 

farmers for the equivalent of one year's losses.  There was 

never a payment issued. 
 

Now that Western Grain Stabilization Act, their administration 

is gone, there's a bill in the mail from Ag Canada.  They're 

taking $41 million directly out of the Saskatchewan economy.  

And I have a letter here that was accompanying that bill, and it 

say: 

 

 Dear Producer, 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

 . . . I know this is difficult news coming at a time when many 

of you in the grains and oilseeds sector are under financial 

strain . . . 

 

 We apologize for the inconvenience this situation has caused, 

and appreciate your co-operation in resolving it. 

 

 We want to be as fair with producers . . . we will make every 

effort to work with farmers . . . 

 

Signed with the director of WGSA (Western Grain 

Stabilization Administration). 

 

They sent some remittance options with that.  It says you can 

pay it by cheque or money order, deduct from a NISA (net 

income stabilization account) payment, deduct from a GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program), deduct from a crop 

insurance payment, or other.  And I tell you, every farmer 

should go with the other one because . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to bring to 

the attention of the Assembly a destructive act of one of the 

members of the media just this morning.  I got off the phone 

with a constituent just a half an hour before the House opened 

and the story was confirmed by a member of my caucus staff. 

 

The CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) morning 

hostess, in questioning the federal minister of corrections, 

wanted to know why the healing lodge was located in Maple 

Creek because she said Maple Creek is one of the most racist 

communities in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, this is an 

outrageous charge to be broadcast across the province at 

taxpayers' expense and I demand an apology for the people of 

Maple Creek. 

 

Maple Creek has one of the soundest and most progressive 

relationships among aboriginal people and the non-aboriginal 

community.  The fact that the CBC could not find Maple Creek 

until it found an offensive avenue of attacks speaks loudly to 

the taxpayers in my constituency about the money the federal 

government takes from them and gives to this state-owned 

radio.  The fact that the healing lodge location was approved by 

the aboriginal women and the chiefs escapes the CBC 

commentator. 

 

I am proud of Maple Creek, and I am proud of the friendship 

and co-operation among all of the people of Maple Creek and 

district.  Mr. Speaker, every member of this Assembly should 

join me in condemning this wrong and unfair attack on my 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to relate to 

the Assembly that after years of lobbying by Saskatoon's 

business community including the chamber of commerce and 

the North Saskatoon Business Association, the city of 

Saskatoon decided this week to establish the Saskatoon 

Economic Development Authority.  This body will in a very 

proactive way seek to 

attract and facilitate the expansion of Saskatoon's business 

community. 

 

As a member from Saskatoon who meets regularly with my 

colleagues in the chamber of commerce and the Saskatoon 

economic development board, I want to congratulate the city of 

Saskatoon and the chamber of commerce and the north 

Saskatoon business community on this initiative.  They've 

worked hard to bring the idea to fruition.  And we as Saskatoon 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker, are committed to co-operating with the 

authority in its endeavours.  We believe that as the authority 

increases the involvement of the business community, business 

will be attracted to Saskatoon.  And we also feel that this spirit 

of co-operation between the civic government, the business 

community, and the province will keep Saskatoon in the 

forefront of economic development.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wish to bring 

to the attention of the Assembly this morning that the 79th 

annual meeting of the Saskatchewan stock growers will be held 

in my home community of Moose Jaw on May 30 to June 2.  

And I think it's imperative, Mr. Speaker, that as many rural 

members particularly of this Assembly as possible attend 

because of the severe drought that is going across southern 

Saskatchewan at this time.  I'm aware of many tens of farmers 

in that area having to move cattle.  They're looking for hay 

supplies. 

 

I'm sure this meeting will touch on a number of areas of 

importance to the province, Mr. Speaker: the changes in the 

critical wildlife habitat legislation, certainly the FeedGAP (feed 

grain adjustment program) program, cash advances to 

livestock, breeding fee increases in community pastures.  There 

are a whole realm of things that I'm sure will be discussed at 

the stock growers' meeting. 

 

Moose Jaw, I'm sure, is very happy to have them there.  And I 

would encourage all members of the Assembly to avail 

themselves of this meeting in Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Tomorrow marks a 

very special day in the history of one of the towns in the 

constituency of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden.  It is the 100th 

anniversary of the founding of the school in Pilot Butte, which 

is quite an achievement when you consider that Saskatchewan 

as a province is only 87 years old. 

 

I'd like to take a moment to remind my colleagues in the House 

of the achievements of rural education.  Out of the small 

country schools in Saskatchewan have come some of Canada's 

most impressive men and women, leaders in the fields of public 

service, the arts, industry, finance, and sports -- people like 

Frances Hyland, Sinclair Ross, Al Johnson, Gerald Bouey and 

Gordie Howe. 

 

I have no doubt that the education provided by these schools is 

as good as ever and that children attending these schools now 

will continue that tradition of leadership. 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

Pilot Butte School has for 100 years ensured a quality, 

comprehensive education for the children of the area.  And 

tomorrow many of the students educated there, will return for a 

day of celebrating and reminiscing. 

 

I'd like to welcome those who are returning for the celebration, 

and I would like to extend my congratulations to the staff and 

students at Pilot Butte School, Mr. Speaker, and also to the 

people of the community who have supported the school.  I 

wish them much success as they begin their second hundred 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was pleased to be a 

part of a tour and media conference with the Hon. Carol 

Teichrob on the filming crew from Minds Eye productions who 

are in town to produce the film or the show, Eli's Lesson. 

 

Kevin DeWalt, the producer, took us on a tour of the locations 

for the filming to be occurring, and Mr. Marshall spoke to us as 

a director who left Saskatchewan at the age of 19 to pursue his 

career.  He is now back in Regina as the director of the film. 

 

It is a time in Saskatchewan when we can see a film being 

produced that employs 80 to 90 per cent of the people from 

Saskatchewan.  It's a co-operative effort between the industry 

and the province of Saskatchewan and other local people who 

are involved in the making of the film, as well as an 

opportunity to have a co-operative effort between the Hutterite 

colony at Arm River and the makers of the film who have had 

good co-operation.  And I would mention it's the first time 

anywhere that people have been involved in filming in a 

Hutterite colony and they've received a warm welcome from 

the people there. 

 

The stars of the show are a local woman named Gaye Burgess, 

and we are also able to attract Kenneth Welsh as a Canadian 

actor and Jack Palance, who said he is coming to Saskatchewan 

because of the lesson in the film.  And he's here and taking part 

in the film to tell people that you should never desert your 

dreams or give up on your dream because someone claims it 

can't be done.  It's a lesson . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, earlier this week we've heard congratulations 

extended to graduates of universities as well as high schools in 

Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of the members of the Assembly 

I'd like to add today, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the grads 

of our technical education system from SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 

 

I'll be attending the Palliser campus graduation tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker, and it will be indicative of the changing face of 

post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, as many of those grads 

will have their own children there as members of their family 

for the graduating class.  Many 

of the grads, Mr. Speaker, are returning to technical education 

as part of a second . . . the beginning of a second career, and 

there will be some 800 grads who will receive their diplomas 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on behalf of all of the members of the Assembly, I wish to 

wish all of those grads every success in their new careers, and 

to hope as well that their futures will be found here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Impact of Health Care Changes 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Health.  Madam 

Minister, yesterday my office received a very disturbing phone 

call from someone who has been trying to get help from your 

office for a couple of weeks already. 

 

This woman is a low income earner who refuses to go on social 

assistance because she's determined to make it on her own.  

And this low income earner was told in the budget that she 

would be protected against your massive increases in health 

care.  She phoned my office, Madam Minister, because she 

sees no evidence of your government helping low income 

earners.  In fact, Doris Looker phoned because she received no 

help from your office.  Doris is a low income earner and she 

has . . . is a single mother with a couple of children, and one of 

them has many ailments including such things as asthma. 

 

Madam Minister, you said that the people who couldn't afford 

it wouldn't have to worry.  And yet this woman cannot get a 

hold of anyone in your office who will help her.  Are you 

prepared, Madam Minister, to help this woman?  Are you 

prepared to talk to her? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I thank the member opposite for bringing 

that to my attention.  Absolutely -- if Mrs. Looker will phone 

me I will personally speak to her and put her in touch with the 

proper officials to give her assistance in . . . We will have to 

discuss the situation with her of course.  And, Mr. Speaker, as 

you know there is special assistance for people who cannot 

afford medication or other services depending on what they 

are.  If they are low income earning and can't afford it, the 

government will provide assistance.  So Mrs. Looker should 

get in touch with me and we will have someone look after the 

situation for her. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  Madam Minister, Doris informs me that she has 

called your office more than five times, and that the only time 

that she got a return call from your office was after she 

threatened to phone the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus 

office.  That was the only time she got a response.  She knows 

about the special assistance, she asked for it, and she was told 

that a form would be in the mail.  That was two weeks ago, 

Madam Minister. 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

Madam Minister, you are the government that claims that it is 

the one that cares for people.  You are the only one that cares 

for people.  That is what you have been saying.  Well some 

caring government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, are you telling me that this is the kind of 

treatment that a caring government extends to the people?  Is 

this the kind of treatment that the people can expect from your 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know, in terms of 

what happened with respect to the five phone calls.  What I can 

promise the member opposite is, I will look into it.  I will find 

out who didn't return the calls.  Her calls should have been 

returned promptly, and we will see to it that it is done in the 

future. 

 

So Mrs. Looker should phone our office again.  I don't know 

whether she's phoned the ministerial office or the Department 

of Health.  It's not clear from the member opposite as to where 

the phone call was placed.  I ask him to provide me with more 

information after this question period, and we will look into the 

situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will say to you, 

Madam Minister, that I will give you that phone number 

personally so that you can return the call to her personally. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, Doris needs new glasses, but because 

of your so-called excuse for a budget, she is now no longer able 

to do that because you have placed user fees on optometric 

care.  Doris cannot even go for her eye examination.  Even 

worse she cannot afford to have a chiropractor work on her 

injured back, again because of your government's so-called 

improvements to health care. 

 

Madam Minister, Doris Looker told me this morning when I 

called her that she is frightened.  That's the exact word that she 

used.  She is frightened for people like herself and for many 

other people in the province like her, and she stressed that.  

She's concerned not only about herself but many hundreds of 

people in the province like her. 

 

And, Madam Minister, Doris Looker is paying a price for being 

independent.  She's paying a price that's affecting the health of 

her family. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I'd ask the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

ask you: is this the way your government takes care of those 

who choose to work rather than go on social assistance?  You 

said that you would be taking care of people like Doris.  If 

you're helping people . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll let the minister answer. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I would ask the members opposite that 

when they hear of a situation like this -- which it is our 

intention to help, you know, assuming that they cannot afford 

the services, as they indicate to you - 

_ I ask you to phone our office, give us the person's name, and 

we will get in touch with them and help them out as best we 

can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

that is exactly the point that I have been trying to make this 

morning -- the fact that people are contacting you; they want a 

response from you.  But you in your callousness and your 

overriding agenda that the Finance minister is imposing on 

you, they can't get any response from you, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, Doris is a real person who is desperate, 

Madam Minister.  And your office, your staff, you are not 

responding to her needs.  And there are hundreds like her, 

hundreds who cannot afford to pay, Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  You're still commenting on the previous answer the 

minister has given.  I want you to get to your next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I was laying the format for my 

next question, and this is it, Madam Minister.  People cannot 

pay the exorbitant costs that you're asking for these low income 

earners. 

 

Madam Minister, again, I want this to go on record once more.  

Will you give me your assurance that you will phone Doris -- I 

will pass the phone number over to you -- find out why this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister answer.  

You've asked your question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have said before and I'll say again that if 

the member opposite gives me the phone number, we will 

phone this individual.  I also want to say this, with respect to 

anyone who may be listening, that with high drug cost 

threshold, the government has a program that will provide 

assistance to SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) clients or 

anyone who is low income and cannot afford their drugs.  They 

will simply have to go to their pharmacist -- and I understand 

there are application forms there in order to fill them out -- and 

then the department will take a look at the situation.  And if 

they qualify for assistance because they can't afford their 

medication, it will be provided by the department.  And there 

are a number of arrangements that can be made such as 

removing a deductible for up to a year or reducing the 

co-payment and so on. 

 

There are other provisions with respect to some of the other 

services we talked about such as optometric for low income, 

SAP, FIP (Family Income Plan), and SIP (Saskatchewan 

Income Plan) to be covered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to make this point as well, that the . . . 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Effects of Budget on Livestock Industry 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers' Association annual convention is scheduled in 

Moose Jaw to start this Sunday, and there are a number of 

serious concerns.  And my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  And I wonder if he would explain to us a couple 

of things this morning.  Will the minister tell us how much the 

net cost to producers will be for the budget brought down by 

the Finance minister?  Will you tell us the net cost it will be to 

the livestock producers in the province of Saskatchewan?  And 

are you prepared to tell them on Monday morning what that net 

cost will be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the member 

opposite that I will be attending the stock growers' convention 

and speaking with them.  But I also want to let him know that 

I've had already a couple of discussions with the livestock 

industry and they understand the financial crisis in 

Saskatchewan, and they are willing to work with the 

government in recognizing that there are limited means at the 

government's disposal.  I wish the opposition could be as 

cognizant of the mess they've created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister inform the House today of 

the net cost that it is to livestock producers, hogs and cattle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to again say to the 

member that I've . . . to the member opposite that I've been in 

discussion with the livestock industry both before the budget 

was brought down and after the fact, and they understand the 

difficulties that are in the financial situation here in 

Saskatchewan.  They recognize the government's limited 

ability to participate in the kind of programs that were there 

and they want to work with the government in building a strong 

agricultural sector in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

minister.  Tell us the net cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will repeat again that the 

livestock industry is aware of the difficulties in the province 

and have expressed their willingness to work with the 

government in designing programs that are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I believe that the 

member from Rosthern has asked his questions and I wish that 

he would let the minister answer.  If you have additional 

questions, we'll recognize you later. 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister tell this Assembly the net 

cost on jobs that his budget that he brought down through the 

Minister of Finance will cost this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite 

ought to sit back and reflect for a moment on the net cost, of 

not only on individuals' jobs here and there, but on the cost to 

every Saskatchewan citizen of the $760 million interest charges 

that are now part of the annual budget of the province as a 

result of the waste and mismanagement and the mess that 

you've created. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and to the minister. 

 

I'll tell you about costs.  Land bank costs in 1970 to 1990 have 

been a significant amount, up to 15 and $16 million annually.  I 

want to know what the . . . and you did that and your party did 

that.  I want to know from you the cost in real jobs for the 

province of Saskatchewan in the livestock sector by the 

changes in the budget that you brought forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would just like to put on 

the public record that the members opposite reduced support to 

the livestock industry from about 55 or $60 million in the 

mid-'80s to under 20 million by the end of the '80s.  And in the 

process of doing that, additionally created a debt which is now 

publicly known to be about $15 billion, which burdens every 

Saskatchewan citizen and which every Saskatchewan citizen 

recognizes that needs to be dealt with, except of course the 

members opposite.  And they will work with the province, 

trying to create an economy not only in agriculture, but in all 

other areas of further development because they are 

hard-working and they are creative and they are innovative.  

And they're going to make Saskatchewan work -- not like the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, again about jobs.  How much 

money did you put into Intercontinental Packers so that they 

could buy the Moose Jaw packing plant from Canada Packers 

to keep jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the investments in business 

creation here are in the jurisdiction of the member of the . . . 

Mr. Lingenfelter.  The fact is that we will continue to 

participate in job creation and economic development strategies 

with Saskatchewan people who are willing to look to the future 

as a positive place, in spite of the difficulties that are here as 

the result of the mismanagement of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, we have packing and killing 

plants in Saskatoon and in Moose Jaw in this province, and we 

have packing plants in North Battleford.  How many jobs are 

you going to lose by the very fact that you've cut the budget in 

the livestock sector so that producers have no more opportunity 

to be 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

competitive? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers are 

amongst the most competitive in Canada.  Our hog 

costs-of-production are the best in the country; our grain 

producers are excellent producers; and our cattle . . . our 

livestock people in the cattle business are also very competitive 

producers. And I can assure the members opposite that they 

will continue to work in Saskatchewan to support their 

communities and to generate economic activity here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister who 

he consulted with in the Pork Board to deal with the changes 

that you made to the feed grain assistance and to the livestock 

cash advance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the questions are getting a 

little repetitive.  You're aware, you dealt with these questions a 

couple of days ago.  And the facts are that the members 

opposite know that we would not discuss the final detail of 

budgetary measures. 

 

I want them also to know that I've met with the Pork Board on 

more than one occasion.  I've met with the other members of 

the livestock . . . repeatedly and clearly the livestock industry is 

willing to deal with the crisis in Saskatchewan that the 

members opposite are not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the opposition does not wish to have 

any answers, I will cease the question period and we'll go on to 

other business.  I do not want to remind the members again.  If 

you want the ministers to answer, I don't want continuous 

interruption. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make a point and say 

this: you had the freedom to talk about cigarettes in the 

province of Saskatchewan going up in price, but you didn't 

have the freedom to consult with the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the livestock producers, about the impact of 

your budget.  And how do you square that with those livestock 

producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the feigned anger of the 

member opposite belies the truth of the last 10 years in 

agriculture.  Who did you consult with when you cancelled the 

beef stabilization program in favour of the tripartite program?  

And who wanted that changed?  And what was the result of 

that change on the livestock sector in Saskatchewan? 
 

Our feeder cattle numbers have gone from $400,000 to 

approaching $200,000 under the changes you made under those 

circumstances.  Your investment's reduced from about 60 

million to under $20 million.  Talk about changes in the 

livestock industry without consultation. 

That was under a circumstance where you had the beginnings 

of a provincial economic structure that was healthy.  You have 

then dismantled the economic health of Saskatchewan and 

wonder why we have to do tough things. 

 

I'm saying one more time that Saskatchewan people are 

prepared to deal with this crisis, and I wish the members 

opposite would get on side and try and build Saskatchewan 

instead of throwing stones. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is 

again talking out of the both sides of his mouth on both faces.  

And I want to say to you, $150 million or more is in that beef 

stabilization debt which you moved over in the Department of 

Finance in March 31, '92.  Are you going to put that back?  

And are you going to initiate that program again so that you 

can impact negatively on the provincial debt your government 

started?  Are you going to do that again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was 

asking about the health of the livestock industry in 

Saskatchewan.  I simply repeat one more time that the livestock 

industry in my discussions with them after the budget, as well 

as the day before the budget, recognized that there is pain here.  

Of course it's pain.  We all understand that.  And they are 

willing to deal with that pain because they know that they are 

good producers and they will produce under the circumstances 

that they find the province in.  They know there is not a lot of 

money here.  Everyone in Saskatchewan knows there's not a lot 

of money here.  And they will do business the way they've 

always done business and they will do it well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The pain is in the minister in Agriculture.  

And I know where it is; it's a pain in the neck.  And I want to 

point out to them . . . ask the minister again: will he give the 

people of this Assembly and the producers in this province an 

assurance that he is going to protect the jobs by offering an 

opportunity to back the livestock industry like we did in the last 

10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will assure the member 

opposite and all the people in Saskatchewan that we will get 

the financial situation in this province under control so that the 

programs that are so essential to every sector and industry . . . 

so that we can continue to spend 80 per cent of our agriculture 

budget on income support and stabilization; so we can continue 

to spend money on economic development and industry 

development in agriculture; so we can continue to spend money 

on the kinds of things that are important to Saskatchewan, will 

be able to be spent because we have a solvent province, one 

that is willing to deal with its economic difficulties created by 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, this province is carrying debt 

from two programs initiated by that member and the 

government opposite by the Minister of Finance -- land bank 

and beef stabilization. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the question:  are you going to 

bring them back so that the people can increase the debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan?  Is that what you're going to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a curious argument the 

member opposite makes.  The Saskatchewan government is 

now paying back $14 million a year from the 1988 drought 

program that you pretended to put in place with money that 

was hopefully paid for. 

 

The members opposite sit there and watch the federal 

government demand $41 million back from farmers.  They sit 

there and they sat there for four years and watched the federal 

government off-load $260 million on to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

How can we see any sincerity in the members opposite when 

they have contributed to the demise of funding of agricultural 

programs in Saskatchewan; when they've watched the federal 

government and supported the federal government in taking 

money from Saskatchewan people so that their buddies in 

Ottawa can get off the hook, and pretend they've done 

something for the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Why did you take the cash advance off?  Grain 

farmers were getting it.  We gave it an opportunity to the cattle 

producers to equalize the opportunity. 

 

Are you going to reinstate that as a part of what you're going to 

do for the people in the livestock industry?  Are you going to 

make that announcement on Monday when you speak to the 

stock growers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the member opposite 

to know that those program discussions were part of the 

discussion I had with the livestock industry.  And they accept 

and recognize that these reductions are necessities in the face 

of the climate, the economic climate that's in Saskatchewan, 

recognizing that it is difficult in order to live in that 

circumstance. 

 

We had this year to reduce the provincial proposed . . . 

projected deficit from 1.3 billion to 517 million, a number we 

still believe we wish we could make lower.  As result of the 

measures the other members made, we are left virtually 

bankrupt.  We have balanced the books for the province this 

year, except for the $760 million interest charges as a result of 

the mess you've made. 

 

We would have a $240 million surplus if we could only dispose 

of the debt that you imposed on this province over the last 10 

years.  And farmers and livestock people and workers and 

business people across the province know what has to be done 

to get the province back on its feet. 

The members opposite should be so observant as to notice and 

get on side with the work that has to be done to build 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The grain producers were on the front lawn 

here and they didn't appreciate what you had to say about 

off-loading. 

 

Now I'll tell you what.  When you get there on Monday, they're 

not going to appreciate the off-loading that you're doing in the 

livestock industry -- in the cattle side nor on the pork side.  I 

want to ask you this question: why did you off-load on them on 

their lease fees for the pastures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

also aware of what went on with pasture lease fees, that there 

were formulas set in place that were after that ignored.  They 

were formulas based on the economic health of the industry 

and the returns from livestock. 

 

That formula has now been allowed to function again.  The 

lease fees have been increased in response to that formula, and 

the member opposite is quite aware of that.  He didn't have to 

ask the question to find out the answer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask you why . . . or can 

you give me the volume of jobs that are going to be lost by the 

change in the budget that you got from the Minister of Finance, 

the changes in jobs in the packing industry itself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the difficulties in 

Saskatchewan that have been perpetrated by the members 

opposite are ones that will certainly be felt by all of us, and the 

people across Saskatchewan are willing to deal with that. 

 

The fact is we've crafted a budget which balances the continued 

economic development of Saskatchewan with the need to bring 

the budget under control so that, in fact, not only other 

Saskatchewanians but other Canadians and investors 

internationally begin again to respect the financial management 

of this province as opposed to the sincere disrespect they had 

for the ad hoc-ery of the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the court heard information on 

GRIP that was going to cost the farmers roughly 30 bucks an 

acre.  Mr. Perkins, who is the head of the livestock feeders 

association, pointed out in his letter to you, sir, that it's going to 

cost on an average of $30 a head in the feeding industry -- your 

decision on the budget.  Can you tell me how many jobs are 

going to be lost in the packing industry because of those two 

things? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Perkins and we have had 

more than one meeting.  He is a responsible livestock producer 

and a responsible representative of the livestock industry and 

understands the difficulties the 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

province is in. 

 

And we will work with the livestock industry in such a way as 

to maximize the production here in order that the economic 

development dollars that are spent in this province result in the 

maximum economic growth here as opposed to the careless 

expenditures and the absurd debt accumulation of the members 

opposite over that last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I think statements by members has been done 

this morning.  I would like to just remind the member from 

Humboldt and the member from Maple Creek of that. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move that the Public Trustee Act be 

now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move that a Bill to amend The Land 

Titles Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

(1045) 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move that a Bill to amend The Mentally 

Disordered Persons Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

the Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale of Milk be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

The Chair: -- Order.  The business before the committee is 

interim supply and the motion of the Minister of 

 Finance: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $469,935,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, 

after the comments by the minister yesterday in the House, I 

took the liberty of going back over some interim supply 

motions from the last two years.  The minister will remember 

that there was supply motions in both '90 and '91 and it was 

very interesting, Mr. Chairman, in spending a couple of hours 

going through the verbatim from those particular supply 

motions.  And I must say that I reviewed the comments of 

probably half of the government caucus in how they 

approached this particular issue. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Chairman, that the discussion was quite 

wide-ranging, to say the least, in both years, that members of 

the then opposition went on at great length about very specific 

items.  And it was very interesting, Mr. Chairman, in reviewing 

that verbatim that the then minister of Finance was far more 

forthcoming to the opposition members of the past two years 

than what I saw the Minister of Finance with the present 

opposition yesterday. 

 

The Minister of Finance yesterday maintained over and over 

again that he couldn't answer any questions dealing with the 

particular departments, even the ones that were more than 

one-twelfth, because there would be ample opportunity in 

debate in Estimates later on in the session, that those types of 

questions would be answered.  And he kept referring that these 

answers are statutory votes of this Assembly and that they'll be 

handled at the appropriate time. 

 

Well my fear, Mr. Chairman, in this process is that the 

appropriate time may be about the 70th or 71st day of the 

legislature that these votes will be handled and that the ability 

of members to question the minister about a number of things, 

particularly the minister's moving of debt around in a very 

significant fashion . . . has the opposition wondering if we 

aren't going to sort of be held to the last day of the Assembly so 

that the minister doesn't have to answer those questions. 

 

It was interesting, a statement made by the now member for 

Churchill Downs, the Associate Minister of Finance, who in 

the April 9 discussion on interim supply when the minister 

brought the motion forward said, and I quote:  Mr. Minister, I 

accept your explanation, but I don't seem to recall having seen 

it done this way in the past. 

 

What the then minister of Finance asked for was one-twelfth, 

one-twelfth of the amounts to be voted.  And the minister, the 

now Associate Minister of Finance, said, I don't recall having it 

seen done that way in the past. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, this Minister of Finance comes in, says, 

here it is, boys.  I've stripped it of any debt associated with any 

of these departments, run it back into the previous fiscal year, 

and bloated my previous deficit to the hilt.  But I don't want to 

answer any questions about that.  I don't want to talk about the 

capital side of hospital 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

construction or nursing homes or educational facilities.  I don't 

want to talk about any of the capital projects that Energy and 

Mines are involved in, even though Energy and Mines are 

getting more than one-twelfth.  I don't want to talk about any of 

these things because you can do that at a later date. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, as I say, going back and reviewing the 

verbatim of the last two years in interim supply, we had the 

member from Rosemont talking about Rafferty in very specific 

detail.  We had the present Premier, the member from 

Riversdale, talking about federal-provincial funding 

agreements in agriculture in great detail.  We had the member 

from Churchill Downs, the now Associate Minister of Finance, 

asking questions about the debt side of potash in very great 

detail. 

 

And I must say in reading that verbatim, Mr. Chairman, that 

the member from Weyburn, the Finance minister of the day, 

did talk about each of those issues at some length with the 

members who are placing questions.  Some questions he said 

would be better answered in committee, in Estimates, but in 

other areas he did give the members many questions and 

answers that were properly answered I think, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So it's very interesting, Mr. Chairman, that now that the shoe is 

on the other foot that the members of the government of the 

day, who wanted to be very specific about a whole range of 

issues on a one-twelfth appropriation, a one-twelfth 

appropriation that the member from Churchill Downs says he'd 

never seen it done that way in the past . . . and now this 

minister says you can't ask me anything specific because what 

you have here is just one-twelfth of these departments except 

for some exceptions. 

 

The exceptions have federal-provincial agreements tied to 

them.  They have contractual arrangements tied to them.  They 

have third-party granting tied to them.  There may be some 

ongoing construction tied to that third-party granting, but I 

can't talk about it because that would be too narrow. 

 

And I just want to say to the people of Saskatchewan who are 

watching the Assembly this morning that this is another case of 

saying one thing in opposition, demanding one thing in 

opposition . . . and if one checks the May verbatims on interim 

supply from 1991 you will find out, Mr. Chairman, that that 

particular interim supply motion went on for days and days and 

days and days, indeed weeks, because the members of the then 

opposition said we are demanding questions on specific areas.  

We want to know about the debt.  We want to know where 

you've moved the debt.  And now the fact is that they are the 

government, they're saying, no, we can't talk about it. 

 

We can move it from one fiscal year to the other.  We can take 

a special warrant supply from '92-93, move it back into '91-92, 

but we don't want to talk about it.  That's better left to the 

minister to talk about.  We can take write-downs involving 

major Crown corporations and agencies of government, take 

massive write-downs, shift them back a year arbitrarily, for 

political reasons, but we don't want to talk about it. 

We can take items such as the member from Morse identified 

yesterday like the land bank and the Beef Stabilization Board 

that have seemed to have just disappeared into thin air -- 

completely disappeared out of the budget documents, 

disappeared out of the Estimates -- and yet I'm sure that when 

one adds up the deficit numbers that the member, the Finance 

minister, the member from Regina Dewdney talks about, that 

those debt numbers are indeed in there.  Indeed form large 

chunks of it -- large chunks of debt that he is saying to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, interest charges will accrue to. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we are going to have to go out and borrow 

money in order to have funds to pay those interest charges.  I 

have made a arbitrary political decision to take all of this debt 

in one particular year, but I don't want to tell the members of 

the Assembly, when I come to this House after two special 

warrants, an interim supply motion, and my guess, that we'll 

have another interim supply motion, Mr. Chairman, before this 

House rises, and I don't want to talk about it. 

 

I'm going to spend more than one-third of the entire allocation 

of the province of Saskatchewan's '92-93 budget.  I'm going to 

spend over one-third of it -- probably closer to half because of 

the special considerations that he says are necessary on 

quarterly deals -- and I'm not going to tell you a darn thing 

about it.  I'm not going to tell you the consequences of moving 

all of that debt into one particular year.  I'm not going to tell 

you the consequences of moving all of that debt into one 

particular year.  I'm not going to tell you the consequences of 

taking all those write-downs on share values in one particular 

year. 

 

And I think the reason that he doesn't want to talk about those 

things, Mr. Chairman, is that those consequences would point 

out to Saskatchewan taxpayers, people watching the Assembly 

this morning, some very clear inconsistencies, particularly in 

what the members of the government said a short seven months 

ago in an election campaign, but particularly some 

inconsistencies as to what might happen in the future if certain 

circumstances were to change -- certain circumstances that 

might allow the Minister of Finance to begin building his 

election platform for three and a half or four years down the 

road. 

 

And I think that's clearly, Mr. Chairman, why when we ask 

questions that aren't single line items by any stretch of the 

imagination -- which members of the now government felt 

quite at ease asking in the interim supply in '90 and '91 -- but 

broader issues, broader issues such as the capital side of health 

care, the capital side of education, and the debt that was being 

amortized over 20 and 25 and 30 years with many of those 

projects, and how it is now all gone some place else that we 

can't talk about, how that debt has shifted in so many different 

areas. 

 

(1100) 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Chairman, going through that verbatim, 

all the various numbers used by the then opposition, talking 

about debt.  And we had a great variety of them.  The member 

from Regina Elphinstone, the  



738 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

former member of Shaunavon, talking about the Consolidated 

Fund debt being at $5.2 billion.  Other members -- I believe it 

was the member from Humboldt -- talking about the 

consolidated debt or the total debt of the province going from 3 

billion to 9 billion.  Had one of the members opposite talking 

about the total debt including the pension liabilities from the 

1970s and '60s added in, the debt of the province being 13.1. 

 

It's really interesting, Mr. Chairman, because Mr. Gass uses 

some numbers that I think are very close to 14.  The Minister 

of Finance in his replies yesterday was up to 15.  It's the old 

question, Mr. Chairman, of the dancing deficit.  It's whatever 

number they happen to want to pick at a given day, and we're 

supposed to believe it.  I mean they're asking the former 

minister of Finance all sorts of questions and they tell him on 

good authority that the debt numbers are this, this, and this.  

And we have totally different pictures presented, Mr. 

Chairman, by this minister in this motion for interim supply. 

 

And I guess it harkens back to statements made, Mr. Chairman 

-- and the minister, I know, doesn't like me to talk about the 

financial review commission headed by Donald Gass, but there 

was a very important statement in there, very important 

statement.  Mr. Gass at the end said, you know, anyone that 

cared to look, anyone that had the slightest bit of interest in the 

finances of the province of Saskatchewan, could go and have a 

look.  The books were always open. 

 

And I commend the minister's staff in the Department of 

Finance because I think they always were forthcoming.  I 

mean, rating agencies, bond people, anybody that cared at all . . 

. and I can remember well going around the province of 

Saskatchewan on some budget consultation trips in the spring 

of 1991 and people asking questions about the debt of the 

province and it was always forthcoming.  There was no hidden 

agenda, no hidden secrets that the member now likes to 

perpetrate on Saskatchewan people.  That those debt numbers 

were there. 

 

But one always has to remember, Mr. Chairman, that those 

debt numbers have been accounted for, as I pointed out 

yesterday, by the past six administrations of this province in 

one particular way.  Since 1958, I am told, we have had a cash 

basis of doing our accounting.  But the minister insists on using 

these other numbers which the province doesn't use at present 

in its accounting systems.  He likes to use those bigger 

numbers because he thinks they'll have more political impact 

on the public out there; that he can get away with his tax 

measures. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Chairman, that was another very 

important part of the verbatim of the interim supply motion in 

May of 1991.  We had the members of the opposition at the 

time going on at great length about what harmonization would 

or would not do to the province of Saskatchewan -- what 

growth potential would there be with harmonization; what was 

the job creation numbers being used; what were the detriments 

to Saskatchewan society; how would the retail sector be 

affected; how would the manufacturing sector be affected.  

And they took great issue with the Finance minister today 

because he said there'll be a 1.6 -- I believe was the number 

used 

-- of growth in the province and that there would be 5,000 jobs 

created. 

 

Now we've heard since, Mr. Chairman, from the Minister of 

Finance, a wholly different set of numbers about what 

de-harmonization would do for the province of Saskatchewan.  

The Conference Board of Canada comes along yesterday and 

just blows any numbers that he even dreamt of out of the water.  

But that doesn't seem to matter to this minister. 

 

He can stand and his colleagues can stand in interim supply last 

year and go on at great length about the tax grab, the massive 

tax grab that the minister of Finance has just brought down in 

his budget because by having a 7 per cent tax on a cup of 

coffee or a hamburger or clothing under $300, the people of 

Saskatchewan were going to suffer dire straits. 

 

And they went on to talk about the roads being full of 

pot-holes.  Not tearing the pavement off the roads and putting 

them back to gravel, but the roads would be full of pot-holes.  

And how was the government going to justify all these hospital 

closures, Mr. Chairman?  These were the things that were 

discussed in interim supply just one year ago, very narrow 

questions to the minister of Finance. 

 

I mean, Mr. Chairman, if you want to talk about hospital 

closures, here we have a report to the government on the Plains 

Health Centre, an institution that they built as an election 

promise 16 years ago at hundreds of millions of dollars it cost, 

and they're talking about tearing it down now.  That is the 

inconsistency of these members of the legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, they took those comments from interim 

supply last year and went around this province day after day 

after day and into the election campaign using the same 

numbers, the same rhetoric, and they said that the minister of 

Finance of the day wasn't forthcoming and he didn't answer my 

questions. 

 

Well I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the questions asked by 

the members of the then opposition were indeed, were indeed 

tough questions to answer for the Minister of Finance because 

they were in great detail, very specific, down to individual 

buildings, individual projects. 

 

The members opposite yesterday . . . the members of the 

opposition yesterday simply asked the Minister of Finance to 

account for some very broad issues.  You've moved tens of 

millions, indeed hundreds of millions of dollars of debt around.  

You're saying you're accounting for it in a different way than 

has been the practice since 1958. 

 

We simply wanted to get from the minister some answers as to 

how much interest is being paid on that debt, why was it all 

moved in one particular year, why wasn't some of it perhaps 

done in a different year? 

 

If you've added the cost to the taxpayer of Saskatchewan, why 

are you taking all of these write-downs in one particular year?  

Who's advice was that on?  Did you seek outside advice?  Was 

that the smart thing to do?  Did you 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

seek some advice from people in the investment industry 

around the world that the government deals with? 

 

Did you, when you were in New York city, discuss with people 

what it would do to Saskatchewan's bond rating?  And if not, 

just simply give us some general answers on it. 

 

Because it simply isn't good enough, Mr. Chairman, to come 

into this Assembly, come into this Assembly with a very -- in 

the definition of the Minister of Finance -- narrow document, 

and say, well I simply can't answer any of those questions.  

You can do that at a later date.  It has no bearing on the 

ongoing operation of government. 

 

And I say to the minister this morning it has a great deal of 

bearing on the ongoing operations of government.  Because we 

want to know how items like land bank at nearly $200 million 

can simply disappear from the public's view.  How the over 

hundred million dollars in the beef stabilization fund simply 

disappears from the public's view.  How the debt attached to 

capital projects all over this province, many of them three, four, 

and five years already into amortization period, simply goes 

poof and disappears from the public's view.  And that the 

figures that he presents to us in this Assembly, $469.935 

million have no bearing on all of these things that have just 

gone poof and disappeared from the public's view. 

 

And I think that is why, Mr. Chairman, it's important for the 

Minister of Finance to start answering some of our questions.  

Because if precedents have been set, Mr. Chairman, if one 

wants to use them, I can go back through far more verbatim 

than I did last night, Mr. Minister, and find precedent after 

precedent after precedent for very narrow lines of questioning, 

believe me.  And it can go on for days and days and days in 

this Assembly because those precedents are there. 

 

And there are arm loads of this stuff, Mr. Minister, arm loads.  

And I didn't go back beyond 1990.  I'm sure '89 and '88 and '87 

and '86 are full of it too.  And it is very narrow, it is very 

extensive.  And I must say that the minister, particularly the 

member from Weyburn, in reviewing that verbatim, gave a lot 

more answers than what we in the opposition were treated to 

yesterday, Mr. Chairman. 

 

With that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to go back to one of the 

questions from yesterday and introduce it.  And I think the 

member from Morse has some more questions on that matter.  

But I would like the minister to explain to the Assembly this 

morning what exactly did happen to the land bank debt, an item 

that used to be visible to the public in a line by line item in the 

budget, and seems now to have disappeared off the face of the 

earth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to 

comment on the member's sterling defence of the former 

government's record.  I think that record speaks and stands for 

itself.  I'm not going to take the time of the House to comment 

on that.  It is not particularly a record that if I was a member of 

the opposition I'd be very proud of. 

 

I want to respond to some of the comments that were made, 

Mr. Chairman, and draw to your attention as well as the 

attention of the members opposite, because I too 

took the time yesterday to review the verbatims of interim 

supplies of previous years. 

 

And I in particular reviewed the rulings of the Speaker of the 

House, who at that time was the Hon. Mr. Arnold Tusa, with 

regard to questions in interim supply.  And I will bring to your 

attention, Mr. Chairman, what those rulings were.  I guess it 

would have been the chairman of the committee at that time, 

this would have been the former member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River. 

 

And it's quite appropriate to debate in a wide-ranging way, the 

resolutions that are presented to the House in interim supply.  

And the members opposite have been doing that yesterday and 

they're doing it today.  Nothing inappropriate about that.  

Nothing inappropriate about talking about all kinds of things.  I 

accept that. 

 

How long and at what time various Estimates of various 

departments are presented before this House is really not a 

decision of the government.  It's a decision of the members 

opposite.  Everyone knows that how long a session lasts is 

determined by the members of opposition parties, not the 

members of the government. 

 

So if members opposite want Estimates to come to the House, 

it'll be up to them as to how long they take any one particular 

department to ask the questions that have to be asked. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Chairman, that in April of 1990 the 

chairman of a committee on page 56 -- you will find it in 

Hansard -- ruled as follows: 

 

 . . . members must realize that this is not an appropriate place 

to get into detailed questions on the operation of specific 

department programs. 

 

 I refer members to debates of June 14, 1989, as follows: 

 

  Detailed questions should be asked of the minister of that 

department.  Interim supply covers the whole 

government and all its expenditures, but not any 

detailed question should be asked of separate 

departments under an interim supply Bill. 

 

I mean I can only abide by what is the rules of the House, Mr. 

Chairman, and I believe that's what we're doing. 

 

On page 99, May 10, 1990, the chairman ruled: 

 

 . . . the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of the government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of Estimates at a later 

date.  For this reason members must reserve their detailed 

questions on Estimates and government financial policy for 

the regular review of the main Estimates. 

 

That's the position, Mr. Chair, that I have been taking, quite 

appropriately, during the consideration of these Estimates . . . 

these are not the Estimates, during the consideration of this 

interim supply Bill. 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

(1115) 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, but to the extent that I am capable of 

answering the questions as they apply to the interim supply, 

I've been doing that and I will do it today.  Members opposite 

raise the question: on what recommendations did the 

government act to write off certain debt on the CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan)? 

 

Well I'm . . . It's nothing secret about that, Mr. Chairman.  They 

were public reports.  They were based on the recommendations 

of the auditor's firm of Ernst & Young.  That's been made 

public in this House and been made public through the media 

and to the public.  Recommendations based on the Gass 

Commission report which recommended that these things be 

done.  Recommendations of the Provincial Auditor who has 

made it clear year after year after year that these things have to 

be done. 

 

The member finally asked the question about what happened to 

the land bank debt.  Well, Mr. Chairman, nothing's happened to 

the land bank debt.  It used to be in what was the Heritage 

Fund.  The Heritage Fund no longer exists because it was 

recommended by the Gass Commission that the government 

should review all funds separate and apart from the 

Consolidated Fund to see whether they are useful, necessary, or 

appropriate.  And Mr. Gass clearly recommended that the 

Heritage Fund should be eliminated.  We agreed.  As we're 

doing with almost all of the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission, we are implementing the recommendations of 

that commission. 

 

Now what has that done with the money that was borrowed for 

the purposes of the Saskatchewan land bank, Mr. Chairman?  

Well the money was borrowed back in the 1970s from the 

Consolidated Fund; that's where it was borrowed from.  And 

simply what's happened is that the interest cost on this money 

has now been transferred to the Consolidated Fund and that's 

where it is. 

 

I said to the members . . . I gave that answer to the members 

yesterday, and that the interest payments on the bonds that . . . 

till they mature -- some of them, I am told, mature in 1992, this 

year -- until those bonds are paid up, the interest payments that 

have to be paid on them are paid as part of the interest on the 

public debt. 

 

The member for Thunder Creek wanted to know the answer to 

the question.  He now knows the answer to the question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Could the minister 

itemize or send us an itemized list of the various debt transfers 

that were made from the CIC to the Consolidated Fund?  

There's 875 million total.  Can you give me a list of those items 

that were transferred and the volumes of debt in each one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member opposite can pick up 

the budget speech, which he received on May 7, and on page 4 

there is a full itemization of CIC 

non-recoverable debt which has been transferred to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can he also point out the $184 million worth 

of Sask Water debt that was assumed by the Consolidated Fund 

and the irrigation projects that were involved in the debt 

transfer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Did the member ask for the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation and the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation?  The 184 million of the 

Saskatchewan Water Corp debt which was associated with the 

Rafferty-Alameda project . . . and the member will know 

opposite that the Rafferty-Alameda project does not have the 

capacity to repay that debt.  It does not have that kind of 

income-earning capacity; never did have.  Didn't have when the 

former government decided to go ahead with the project.  That 

has been transferred to the Consolidated Fund because there is 

no other way to pay for that debt except out of the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

The $750 million in Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation has also been transferred to the Consolidated Fund 

because there is no other way to pay for that debt except from 

the Consolidated Fund. 

 

So government should not play games.  Government should not 

pretend that somehow it's not a debt.  It is a debt.  It wasn't 

incurred by the present administration, but it's a debt that's 

there and the taxpayer has to pay for it.  So it's in its 

appropriate place, the Consolidated Fund, because the revenues 

that are expended by the Consolidated Fund come from tax 

purposes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the 184 to Sask Water and to the 

Rafferty-Alameda project and certain irrigation projects, can 

you itemize them for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- My staff is searching for that.  As 

soon as we get it, we'll get it to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- While they're looking for that, Mr. Chairman, 

and Mr. Minister, would you provide for me the volume of 

dollars that have been paid for by the Americans to the 

compensation in the payment for the Rafferty-Alameda project.  

Would you give me the volume of dollars paid and the volume 

of dollars that are still to come? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, that's an example of a 

very specific question related to a particular department.  When 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation do their Estimates with 

the minister here before the Legislative Assembly, they'll have 

that information.  We don't have that specific information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to point out that 

you wanted all the figures in one place under Sask Water, so 

you moved them into the Consolidated Fund.  I'm asking 

whether you took the assets as well.  Did you take the assets 

and dollars from the Sask Water Corporation that were being 

paid for by the Americans -- the 40 million or $50 million -- 

did you take and put that into the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, Mr. 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can I ask the minister where it is then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Those assets would either be with 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation or the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, and that's why I keep saying, Mr. 

Chairman, that that's where the questions have to be asked 

because they are the ones who have to explain it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I know that Sask Water 

Corporation had some of that fund.  I want to know whether 

you transferred the assets and the value of those assets into the 

Consolidated Fund revenue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The $184 million that was 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund is on debt that is not 

recoverable from the Rafferty-Alameda project.  That's why it's 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

If any other debt that is recoverable by Sask Water or 

SaskPower, that exists there because it is recoverable and it 

will be their responsibility from their revenue sources to pay 

for it.  The only debt that's been transferred is debt that's not 

recoverable because there are no assets available to earn the 

income to pay for that debt and therefore it's a liability to the 

taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I don't want to disagree with you too 

strongly, but there were some assets that were recoverable, and 

I want to know where those went to.  There was an asset from 

the U.S. (United States) commitment to the construction of that 

project, and I'd like to know where they are, how much they 

have paid, and whether there's any left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that is a 

question that I can't respond to in interim supply.  It has no 

bearing on the interim supply.  There is nothing in this interim 

supply Bill that deals with that particular issue.  The member 

will have to wait until the Estimates are considered by the 

Saskatchewan water supply . . . for the Saskatchewan water 

supply board, which is going to come to the legislature in this 

session because only then will the appropriate information be 

available. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to know . . . You 

said yesterday that you had an allocation in your one line of 

$1.425 million for Sask Water Corporation, and you said 

yesterday there was extenuating circumstances that you had to 

pay extra. 

 

Now I want to know, are there any of the interest benefits 

accruing to the Sask Water Corporation, are there any of those 

accruing to the Department of Finance because of the money 

left in there with the payments made by the United States to the 

Sask Water Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No to what? -- to the interest being paid or to 

the debt being there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No interest being paid to the 

Consolidated Fund nor any other revenues that are coming to 

the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay then I want to know where that 

principal is.  I want to know how much it is.  And your 

Department of Finance will know because they keep a track on 

all of the records of the Crown corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we are here not 

considering the Estimates of the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation, we're here considering interim supply.  Interim 

supply does not deal with any of those questions.  None of the 

funding that's being requested here deals with any of those 

things. 

 

The member knows opposite that he's going to have to ask 

those questions with the Saskatchewan water supply board . . . 

or Water Corporation is before the legislature.  The Department 

of Finance does not have the capacity to answer those 

questions, only the Saskatchewan Water Corporation has the 

capacity to do that.  It is their responsibility and they will be in 

the legislature at which time those questions can be answered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, yesterday the member from . . . 

that is chairman from the Crown Corporations Committee said 

to this Assembly that he was pleased at the co-operation and 

the general compliance that ministers had to questions being 

asked by members of the Crown Corporations Committee.  

And he said, I know that it will be the same in the future 

because these ministers are accessible, they are available for 

comment to give you the most credible information there is. 

 

Now what we have here is a duck and run.  You're ducking 

behind the fact that your line by line item here is saying one 

thing, but I want to know about the debt.  When are we going 

to have a chance to answer the question on the debt?  And that's 

what I want to know. 

 

Are you clear that the 184 is the net figure or is it the gross 

figure that was transferred from the Sask Water Corporation?  

That's what I want to know.  If it's the gross as it's stated here, I 

think it's important for the people of Saskatchewan to 

understand there's still 40 or 50 million sitting in the Sask 

Water Corporation that is available to the Consolidated Fund, 

and that's the point I want to make. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I will repeat again, Mr. Chairman, 

the 184 million transfer of debt from the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation was the non-recoverable debt.  There is no one 

who can recover that debt because there is nothing that will 

earn the income to pay to do that.  It was part of the 

Rafferty-Alameda project.  The part that is not recoverable was 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund as part of the 

Consolidated Fund debt because it is a liability of the taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So are you telling me it's a net debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This is not the Estimates for the 

Water Corporation.  But in order to help the member, we'll see 

if we can find that information and we'll provide it to you.  If 

not orally, we'll provide it to you from the 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

Water Corporation because they have to provide it to us in the 

form of written, if that's the way you want it.  But I'll undertake 

to check with Saskatchewan Water Corporation so that they 

can get that information for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd also like to have the 

itemized statement of the debt in related to the irrigation 

projects that are ongoing there.  And if memory serves me 

right, there is some net debt there too.  And I want you to 

provide that for me on net debt basis in those irrigation 

projects, because the 184 million is not accruing wholly and 

solely to the Rafferty-Alameda project which you are leading 

this Assembly and the people here to believe. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'll undertake to do that as well, as I 

undertook on the other question.  We'll have to check that with 

the Water Corporation.  When we get it, the member will get it 

presented to him. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And I also want to have, Mr. Minister, if I 

could, the statement of revenue, the volume of dollars from the 

agreement between Canada and Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the volume of dollars yet to be paid through PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and all of those areas as it 

relates to the irrigation development along the South 

Saskatchewan River, as a volume of dollars. 

 

Included in that, I'd like to know where the volume of dollars 

are that the United States are paying to the Sask Water 

Corporation.  Some of that was paid to the Consolidated Fund; 

some of it was paid to Sask Water.  I'd like to know how much 

is in each of those locations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well we're not aware of any of it 

being paid to the Consolidated Fund, Mr. Chairman.  But as I 

indicated earlier, we're doing interim supply, we're not doing 

the Water Corporation.  But we will check with the Water 

Corporation and we'll provide that information when it is 

available. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now going to the next area of net debt, Mr. 

Speaker, or debt by the provinces, you have on page 4 or 6 

indicated the places that the CIC money went.  And I can agree 

with that or disagree with that.  I don't have a tendency to agree 

with the way you've put it together; however, I'll just put it this 

way:  on the $715 million that's the Sask Property Management 

Corporation, I'd like an itemized list of that debt and how you 

moved it over from the departments into the Consolidated Fund 

to deal with how you come up to $715 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That was the full debt of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation as of March 

31, 1982.  It was not a liability of each individual department.  

It was a liability, a debt, in the Saskatchewan Property 

Corporation. 
 

There's only one itemization there -- the full amount as 

recommended by the Provincial Auditor.  The member will 

know that.  He was on this side of the House when the 

Provincial Auditor recommended that, as recommended by the 

Gass Commission, has been transferred to the Consolidated 

Fund because it is a liability of the 

Consolidated Fund, because the only way you can pay that debt 

is from revenues from the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does Sask Property Management Corporation 

provide you with a list of the items that were placed from Sask 

Property Management Corporation into the Consolidated 

Fund?  They must have said, here's a list of the itemized 

statements as it relates to the departments, the hospitals, the 

schools, all of those liabilities.  Did they provide that for you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, all that would 

happen is that the total debt was transferred.  We don't have the 

information the member opposite asked.  The member opposite 

was in the House when the Saskatchewan Property Corporation 

spent more than two days in Estimates answering questions, 

and that was the time when the member could have asked those 

questions.  He can still ask those questions of the minister. 

 

But since the Saskatchewan Property Corporation has now had 

its Estimates completed and since the members opposite either 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not finished. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not?  Well fine, then we have no 

problem.  I am glad that that's corrected, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Then the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation will 

be here, and the member will be able to get all of the answers 

to his questions because we don't have access to that 

information. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, here we come into the 

paradox.  When I've been asking the minister those questions 

he says, oh, just wait and we'll give that to you from the 

department.  We'll give you that from the department.  They're 

the ones that know how much that money was. 

 

And where have I got to get the information from?  It all ends 

up conclusively in your department.  It ends up in the 

Department of Finance, and that's why I want to ask you -- 

because you're supposed to be running the finances of this 

province -- where is a list of these assets that have been 

transferred from the Property Management Corporation to the 

liabilities and where are they transferred, and what are the 

descriptions of those liabilities? 

 

You had the freedom, Mr. Minister, to do that in your CIC 

statement, but why haven't you got the freedom to do it in your 

Property Management Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is off on the wrong tangent here.  There were no assets 

transferred.  Any assets that may exist are still with the 

Property Management Corporation.  The only thing that was 

transferred is the debt of $715 million which is debt, not asset. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well you took the opportunity in CIC to 

itemize line by line as you have outlined them here on page 4.  

You have itemized each one of them.  What you 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

need to do is give me that in the $715 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the debt is not 

specifically allocated to any particular project -- not any 

particular hospital, not any particular school, or whatever it 

may have been.  It is total debt that has been transferred.  It is 

not specific in any other way except the total debt which was 

incurred and existed in the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corp. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you don't give us the 

liability . . . or you've given us the total liabilities here and they 

went into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Now I know and you know that hospital boards are asked on a 

specific basis and school boards on a specific basis to allocate 

and budget certain amount for certain schools, and you pay a 

certain grant per year for that to be completed.  And when 

you're done, you have an itemized line that says the school in 

Waldeck or the school in Neville has been paid for, it's 

finished.  You have transferred that liability into the 

Consolidated Fund, and surely you have to have a line there 

that says they're finished.  That's what I wanted to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, to the best of my 

knowledge, school capital was never part of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation and therefore does not have 

anything to do with the debt that was transferred. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, you have all of these debts that 

have been . . . or liabilities that have been transferred to the 

Consolidated Fund.  How do we know that they're debt? 

 

We're assuming that you're telling us that there is $715 million 

worth of debt in the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation.  We want to know from you what those items 

were because we're not sure that you're telling us, as you did in 

your inflated page on page 4 on your CIC non-recoverable 

debt.  We want to know from you what that really represents.  I 

don't necessarily believe you on page 4, so why should I 

believe on $715 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it's the privilege of the 

member opposite not to believe anything, Mr. Chairman.  I 

mean, I remind the members and I remind the Chair again that 

the rulings that have been made about specific requests for 

specific information on specific departments.  We're not here to 

do that.  We're here to talk about the interim supply. 

 

But the member did ask the question which in some way can 

relate to this.  He says, who said that this is debt? Well, Mr. 

Chairman, the Provincial Auditor said that it was debt.  He has 

recorded it and he has reported it in the Public Accounts and he 

has reported it in the Provincial Auditor's report saying it is 

debt that has been inappropriately considered an asset and 

furthermore said it was not an asset, it was a liability and 

therefore should be part of the consolidated debt which it is 

now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we're not arguing with the auditor's 

observations, we're arguing with your observations about 

where the liability is.  And if in fact that liability was 

transferred, what's the asset the liability is against?  That's what 

we want to know. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Chairman, I request leave to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  On 

behalf of my colleague, the hon. member for the Quill Lakes, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you, Mr. Chairman, 

20 grade 3 students from the Wynyard Elementary School who 

are seated in the Speaker's gallery.  They are students 

accompanied by their teachers, Doreen Bergfeldt; chaperons, 

R. Hitchcock, D. Lamont and P. Morrison. 

 

We sincerely hope your visit will be both enjoyable and 

educational and that you all have a safe trip home. And I ask all 

members to welcome the guests here from Wynyard today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, let me try to help 

the member opposite.  First of all, let me say this, that this 

matter has no bearing on interim supply.  Interest on the public 

debt is statutory.  It is not dealt with with a Bill dealing with 

interim supply whatsoever. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Chairman, in order to assist the member, we 

will request the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation to prepare the information that the member 

opposite wants.  But it'll have to be the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation that does that.  And when they have 

done it, the minister will . . . the appropriate minister in charge 

will make that information available. 

 

The debt of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, Mr. Chairman, is incurred the way the member 

opposite knows.  I think he was a former minister, or at least he 

was on the Executive Council on the Treasury Board benches. 

 

The Department of Health pays the interest and the debt of the 

projects, but it is a debt of the province of Saskatchewan 

because the interest and the debt has to be paid.  So it's 

transferred to the Consolidated Fund in which it belongs. 

 

But if the member wants to know what projects some of this 

debt was incurred for, I will see to it that the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation prepares it for him. And if 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation has not 

yet finished its Estimates in the House, they can do it then.  But 

if it is not considered for a while, they might even be able to do 

it 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

earlier. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, on page 4, as you pointed 

out, there's the CIC debt.  The observation I'm going to make 

about that is the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

privatization loss: $361 million.  Was that a loss or was that a 

book loss? 

 

Now I want to know whether you calculated the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation on the same basis that the 

loss carried forward was actual value that they still have to give 

projects, or whether it's an inflated figure that you did in page 4 

-- you inflated it to read a book value or some ambiguous 

number that you picked out of the blue, and now you want us 

to believe that $875 million is reality.  You want us to believe 

$715 million is reality.  Can you give me some observations 

about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I cannot.  The 

interim supply Bill which we consider has no appropriation, no 

request for any money dealing with the matters that the 

member opposite is asking about.  That's a question he's going 

to ask in the Estimates of the Department of Finance when the 

Department of Finance is here -- and it will be -- so the answers 

can be answered. 

 

All I can say to the member is this: for the purposes of what 

we're considering in interim supply today, there is no request 

for any monies dealing with the matters that he raises. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In servicing the payments to the Department 

of Health for the construction in the Department of Health, 

there will be, I am assuming, some payments made to the 

Department of Health on the basis of projects that are in 

process, projects that have to be paid for, and the interest costs 

in relation to that and the costs in relation to that.  I'd like to 

know that.  And that's why we're asking the question on how 

much is left to pay and how much did you put in prior to March 

31 and how much is put in after March 31. 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, yes there is 

one-twelfth request for the Department of Health for the month 

of June.  But as I indicated to the members opposite yesterday 

when they asked the question, there is some $21 million which 

is beyond the one-twelfth because it requires to have some 

payments made earlier than on the monthly basis. 

 

That included grants to hospitals for capital of $1.2 million and 

grants to special care facilities for capital of $200,000.  That is 

part of the interim supply Bill.  That's why I'm able to answer 

that question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the $149 million that . . . or $150 million 

that Health is going to get for this month, of that volume, how 

much is going to service any of the debt that is there in relation 

to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- None, because that's all in the 

interest on the public debt. 

Mr. Martens: -- Now, I can't find beef stabilization nor can I 

find land bank in any of your books.  Can you identify where 

that is located? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well as I mentioned earlier, Mr. 

Chairman, the land bank becomes part of the total consolidated 

debt, so it's part of the total consolidated debt of the province.  

That's now part of the total debt of the province.  There is no 

special identification because land bank, as it was, no longer 

exists. 

 

Now on the question of the stabilization program, the 

responsibility for funding any deficits in the program is with 

the federal government.  Under the current tripartite 

stabilization program, the province pays one-third of the 

premium costs plus administration costs in the province.  And 

all of that, Mr. Speaker, is part of the one-twelfth allocation 

that is being requested in the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not talking about tripartite 

stabilization; I'm talking about the old Beef Stabilization Board 

and the liabilities that are in the board and the board's 

responsibilities for the debt.  And I would like to know whether 

Ag and Food are carrying any of that or Rural Development is 

carrying that.  Who's carrying that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, once again 

that's a question that's properly to be asked when the 

Department of Agriculture Estimates are considered before the 

House because then the appropriate officials will be here and 

the appropriate minister will be able to answer the question.  

But the knowledge that we have, or that I have, is that some of 

the loans have been paid back over the last several years.  But I 

understand there's about $151 million that is still showing as 

receivables under the program.  It's part of the consolidated 

debt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that wasn't a part of what you took as a 

part of the consolidated debt as a part of March 31, '92?  That 

was attached to it previously? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, it was not. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- But the land bank is of the stuff prior to 

March 31, '92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  In page 45 of your budget address 

book it says that it's $1.8 billion of debt effective March 31 that 

was transferred.  Is land bank in that debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Answer's yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to make a point here, Mr. Minister.  

The point is this.  I have heard for the last seven months that 

the debt that had accrued in all of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management was waste and mismanagement.  I have been told 

that through the years of our waste, our waste and 

mismanagement, we went continually and said we'll throw all 

caution to the wind and we'll spend money hand over fist and it 

doesn't come to any realization of a benefit, a net benefit to the 

society 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to point out to this Assembly that the $715 million 

was paid and it went to schools in my constituency; it went to a 

hospital in my constituency.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

investment in my constituency was five schools and there was 

not one of them that was built after 1920, not one of them. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is a part of the $715 million worth of 

debt that you're talking about right here.  And I will challenge 

you to go to Waldeck, to Success, to Neville, to Vanguard, and 

any of those communities -- Cabri Hospital is a good example. 

 

You decided in your administration in 1975 that you weren't 

going to have any more funding for health care facilities.  And 

in that respect they have now got a health care facility that is 

useful to the community.  There is no level 4 care facility 

between Leader, Saskatchewan, and Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan, in a capacity to handle level 4 care people.  

Today there is. 

 

Is that waste and mismanagement?  I want to point out to you, 

sir, that that in my mind is not waste.  That is not even 

mismanagement.  The opportunity to deliver those kinds of 

things is a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan and it is a part 

of what those people have worked for for years.  And they have 

delivered it and they are prepared to deliver it based on the 

kinds of things that we talked about. 

 

Now I want to just conclude by saying this.  Why don't you talk 

about the waste of buying $180 million worth of land bank land 

in the '70s?  You talk about waste.  There is a waste.  There 

were people who were prepared to invest in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and do you know what your land bank 

commission did?  It was in direct competition with those 

individuals who were prepared to buy the land.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is exactly what I would call waste.  Building schools, 

building hospitals is not waste. 

 

And if the member from Lloydminster wants to get into the 

debate, you just ask her about the hospitals in her constituency 

that were built in the last 10 years.  And even though she got 

elected, I still don't think that was waste.  And if she says it's 

waste, then, Mr. Minister, then you have a real problem with 

your evaluation and the process that you evaluated them by. 

 

I want to point out one other thing.  In the debt that was 

transferred in CIC, the profits that were made in SaskPower, 

SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and 

retained earnings is almost equivalent to half the debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you're going to retain earnings.  That's 

what I see as of 1991 . . . 1990.  Was it '91 or '90?  It doesn't 

matter.  You know which one it was. 

 

And the last report from SaskPower was $118 million profit, 

'91.  Okay '92, what's the profit going to be with an increase in 

rates?  Is it going to be $250 million profit?  SaskTel, increase 

in rates.  Is it going to be instead of $50 million profit, is it 

going to be $75 million profit? 

So in one year, in 1992, you're going to pull out of the tax base 

and the taxpayers of this province equivalent in two years to 

pay off the debt in your CIC.  And you want us to accept that 

kind of bookkeeping? 

 

When you move it from one . . . and what you're going to have 

in your Crown corporations is this pile of money.  And when 

you see it as expedient to balance your book, it'll all slide back 

into the Consolidated Fund at your own convenience.  Here 

you change the debt focus from CIC to the Consolidated Fund 

and then, Mr. Minister, you're going to have, oh, this wonderful 

bookkeeping provided me with an opportunity to balance the 

books. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I believe that when you 

were minister of Finance in 1981-82 you did exactly the same 

thing and that is a part of the whole program of what you say to 

this Assembly that really doesn't sit well with us.  That is 

what's the problem. 

 

And the member from Thunder Creek said, the Heritage Fund, 

that didn't have anything.  And I ask you this question:  were 

you the minister that set up the Heritage Fund?  It was the 

popular thing to do because Alberta was setting it up.  And I 

believe it was you, Mr. Minister, that set it up in the first place. 

 

Now you're dismantling it.  Why did you do that?  You did it to 

cover your tracks in buying the Potash Corporation and buying 

all of the assets in the pulp mill.  You did it to cover your 

liabilities in buying Intercontinental Packers, all of those 

things.  That's what you did it for. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we want to see when we ask 

you for these itemized statements and itemized places where 

expenditures were made, so that we know you're doing your 

books right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm tempted to get 

into the debate here, but that's not the purpose here so I will 

just answer the questions that are relevant and apply to the 

interim supply Bill. 

 

What I want to point out for the record and for the member 

opposite, that $875 million that has been written off as debt in 

CIC is debt that is non-recoverable because there are no assets 

to support that debt.  I think the member knows that. 

 

Now what he is advocating here -- and you would have thought 

that maybe that he and his colleagues would have learnt their 

lesson -- is stripping the existing Crown corporations to pay for 

this non-recoverable debt that's got nothing to do with those 

Crown corporations for which there are no assets. 

 

Now we have independent accountants, we have the Gass 

Commission, we have the Provincial Auditor saying that is 

wrong.  We have an officer of this legislature saying that's not 

the appropriate way that you should treat the debt.  You should 

treat it up front and account for it appropriately so that it is 

where it belongs. 

 

We're not prepared, as a new government -- I want to make this 

clear -- to strip the Crown corporations the way 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

the former government did, plundering them of even all of their 

retained earnings to the point where they had to go and borrow 

money to pay a dividend to the treasury.  That is not an 

appropriate way to hide debt. 

 

We're going to be open and we're going to be straightforward 

and everybody will know where the debt of this province is. 

 

The minister in charge of the Crown Investments Corporation 

will be here to answer all the specific questions and, in fact, 

will do so in the Crown Corporations Committee, to deal with 

all of this, at which time the public and the members opposite 

will know what the situation is. 

 

But I want to respond to one question the member asked.  He 

asked about net equity.  Here is the answers to his net equity 

question.  In the fiscal year at the end of March 31, 1981-1982 

-- I'm going to say this slowly -- the assets of this province 

were $9.2 billion.  The liabilities were 6.6 or almost $6.7 

billion.  The net equity of this province was $2.6 billion in 

1981-82, March 31. 

 

While we had 10 years of Conservative government . . . Let me 

once again slowly for the record point out what's happened to 

that net equity, because the member asked.  The assets of the 

province now are 4.2 . . . $4.4 billion as of October 1, 1991, for 

which we have the latest statistics.  The liabilities are $9.9 

billion and there is no longer any net equity.  We have a net 

debt of $5.5 billion, something which we began to address in 

this budget so that we can begin to go the other way and 

guarantee a future for this province and the people who live 

here and the future generations who will live here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, the member from Elphinstone 

said in a question period here earlier that money earned from 

rates in Sask Power Corporation would be used to pay down 

Sask Power Corporation debt.  In the same question period the 

member from Regina Churchill Downs said, well we've got to 

use this money to cover all of the other liabilities in CIC. 

 

Now which one is it going to be?  Are you going to allow the 

CIC consolidated debt from all of the Crowns . . . pay down the 

debt in CIC, or are you going to move it to the Consolidated 

Fund every time you want to have these debts written off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that question the 

member is going to have to ask the member . . . the minister in 

charge of the Crown Investments Corporation because he is 

responsible and the Crown Investments Corporation is going to 

have to provide the answers. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I asked you a question yesterday and as I review 

Hansard there was no . . . the answer wasn't there, so I'll repeat 

the question.  Would you tell us, out of your budget, what 

portion is supply that has to be voted on . . . part that will be 

interim supply, and what is the statutory amount that we are not 

talking about in interim supply? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I refer . . . so that 

we don't have to do . . . the member doesn't have to do any 

writing, I did pass over that information on the information 

which I provided, I believe, the member from Kindersley, in 

which it is all outlined in three separate columns or four 

separate columns. 

 

There is a total to be voted, the total budget of each of the 

departments which is the amount to be voted and then also the 

total non-budgetary amount which is, I believe, the statutory.  

You have that.  Ask the member from Kindersley and he'll give 

it to you.  Also in the second column, it is an indication of what 

the one-twelfth provision will be and in the third column a 

clear indication of where it exceeds the one-twelfth provision.  

So the information has been provided and should be available 

to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I haven't looked over 

the figures but you're saying that the statutory amount that's in 

the entire budget for the province is not part of this interim 

supply and yet you're asking for one-twelfth.  You have a 

number of provisions there that are going to be over and above 

the one-twelfth.  Where do you come up with . . . where does 

that debt portion fit in there?  Why are you asking for 

one-twelfth when you're saying the debt portion, which is a 

significant portion of the budget, is not in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I know the 

member is new and, I mean, that's understandable.  But all that 

we're asking here in the interim supply is for monies that have 

to be voted on.  And that's all identified in the Bill and the 

information the member opposite has.  We're not asking for 

anything else for the committee to have to concern itself with, 

because that is something we will discuss when we look at the 

whole Estimates of the Department of Finance. 

 

Statutory funds are not voted in the House.  They're provided 

by statute, under the statutory provisions, and therefore they are 

not included in any of this because we're not requesting the 

House for anything to do with funding that is statutory. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I believe it's the 

opposition's responsibility to ensure that the monies spent by 

the government are being spent properly. 

 

When you ask for interim supply, I believe, we have to know 

what the money is being spent on, the public has to know what 

the money is being spent on, and I believe you have to justify 

what you're spending that money on. 

 

We need to be able to ask you those particular questions 

dealing with the money you're asking for for this one-twelfth, 

which isn't actually one-twelfth but something else.  Will you 

answer the questions for us on those issues where you're asking 

for the one-twelfth and more than one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we have provided 

that information already.  I explained in some detail yesterday 

where the request is beyond the one-twelfth and what it is for.  

The member can check Hansard, and it's there. 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

All that we're doing in the interim supply Bill, and the 

members have to understand that, is asking funding for the 

ongoing operations of the government for one-twelfth of the 

year.  That's why it's an interim supply Bill. 

 

The member wants questions about specific programs and 

expenditures of specific programs -- that's the questions he's 

going to ask when Committee of Finance considers each 

specific department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- When we ask questions in Estimates for 

each budget, each department, you've already had this money 

and you've already spent it.  So it's pretty tough to get it back 

afterwards. 

 

I'll ask you a question dealing with the Department of 

Education.  In administration under personal expenses and 

other expenses, you have a number here for the year.  Are you 

asking for one-twelfth of that?  And then it says at the bottom 

here that part of this is voted on the Executive Council.  What 

portion of that is in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, as I explained 

yesterday, in the Department of Education we're asking in . . . 

this interim supply Bill is requesting one-twelfth of the funding 

that has been allocated in the budget, which has been presented 

to the House, plus an additional amount of $79.8 million in 

excess of that. 

 

And as I explained yesterday in some detail, the additional 

amount is for funding to the K to 12 school systems because 

this will bring the funding up to six-twelfths because of the 

provisions in the legislation which require that that be 

provided.  It provides money for teachers' pensions because 

they have to be provided at this time, and also monies for the 

official minority language office of $2.6 million which is 

recoverable from the federal government.  Those are the 

monies in excess of the one-twelfth, which is part of the normal 

operating operations of the Department of Education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm glad you 

mentioned teachers' pensions.  I look in the budget book, and 

the teachers' pensions have almost doubled in the amount that 

you're supplying them this year.  How much of that are you 

supplying in this one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again I want the member 

to listen carefully.  The reason that the amount in teachers' 

pension is what it is, is because this government believes in 

leaving the money with the pensions as the pensions earn the 

money.  What the former government did -- and the new 

member probably doesn't know that -- the former government 

stripped money out of the teachers' pension fund even though 

there is a liability in the teachers' pension fund, stripped it 

away.  We have stopped doing that, and therefore there's that 

additional amount of money. 

 

Interim supply Bill asks for one-twelfth of the amount that the 

member refers to plus an incremental amount of $5.7 million 

beyond the one-twelfth, because there is requirement that it be 

funded by the end of June. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I 

believe that as pensions are accumulated, the funds should 

actually be in place.  But I find it surprising that you're pointing 

out just that the former government was the only one that was 

doing this.  I believe this practice started back in 1975.  Is that 

not the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Oh, I wish to correct the member.  

This practice did not start till about 1987. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, did not Donald Gass in his 

report point out that there was three-point-some billion dollars 

of unfunded pension liability in the teachers' fund?  That did 

not accumulate over simply nine years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member should be reminded 

that the Gass Commission talked about unfunded liabilities 

from the past.  What we're talking about here is surpluses of the 

existing fund, some of which were taken by the former 

government and transferred to the Consolidated Fund, rather 

than left in the teachers' pension fund. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just can't help 

but get into this, following the weird explanation that we're 

hearing from the Minister of Finance here as he answers my 

colleague.  Let's talk about the unfunded teachers' liability 

fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell me by how much this unfunded 

liability on the pension fund for teachers grew during your last 

reign . . . years of administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're here 

considering interim supply.  Interim supply has nothing to do 

with that question the member is happening opposite.  The 

teachers' superannuation unfunded liability has grown since the 

plan was first initiated and I don't know offhand what the total 

amount is, but there is a total amount that has to be dealt with. 

 

We announced in the budget that we'll be establishing a panel 

of experts and other people to review the whole question of 

pension unfunded liabilities to make recommendations to the 

government on how it should be dealt with, but it's not 

something we're dealing with in interim supply. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is just a bunch of 

nonsense, total nonsense.  Because the minister himself was the 

one that got up and started talking about the Saskatchewan 

teachers' pension fund and the unfunded liabilities.  It was his 

weird explanation that caused me and prompted me to get to 

my feet.  And now when I'm asking him some serious 

questions he ducks the whole issue and says:  I'm not going to 

answer, this is not the forum to do it.  You, sir, brought it up, 

and I'm asking you: what was the amount under your 

administration that the teachers' pension funds . . . unfunded 

liabilities rose?  What was the amount?  You, sir, brought it up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to tell the member what we 

have been talking about here.  During the term of the former 

government, there was a surplus accumulated over the annual 

requirements in the teachers' pensions. 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

An Hon. Member: -- You bet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I'm glad the member agrees.  

Now I hope the member will also agree that in the 1980s it was 

that government who began to strip those surpluses until they 

almost came to zero, to take it out of the pension fund and into 

the Consolidated Fund to help make their deficit look better. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I hate to, Mr. Chairman, on a Friday when 

we're just about ready to dismiss ourselves for the weekend, to 

show the Minister of Finance of the province of Saskatchewan 

that he knows not whereof he speaks. 

 

Now as a teacher, sir, I find that kind of remarkable.  Because 

when you talk about the Saskatchewan teachers' pension plan 

and the unfunded liabilities of $1.2 billion that you folks in the 

'70s refused to put in . . . During the super '70s when this 

province was on a roll, you chose not to put in the 

government's portion of the Saskatchewan teachers' pension 

plan. 

 

When we were elected in 1982 we decided that this could no 

longer continue, and so we tried to make up through your 

errors by putting in additional money as years went on to try to 

get that unfunded liability portion as low as possible. 

 

And then you, sir, are correct in saying that we took some of 

that money out.  But that was the additional money that we had 

put in in trying to make up for your own errors.  That, sir, is the 

way that the situation has developed. 

 

And for you to stand there then at one point . . . When I 

initiated these questions, you said you were not prepared to talk 

about it.  And now for the last six minutes you have been 

answering, trying to answer my question.  So I'm glad now that 

you have set the precedent so that in this committee we will 

actually get some answers from you. 

 

And I would recommend highly, sir, that when my colleagues 

continue to ask you questions, that you continue on as to what 

we're doing right now with the teacher's unfunded liability 

pension fund and answer the questions that we are asking you. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Now that we're on this good 

roll and now that we have finally broken the ice so that the 

minister is actually committing himself to answer the questions 

that we are asking him, then I want to just ask a few question as 

far as the Department of Health is concerned. 

 

(1215) 

 

You, sir, as a government and as was brought forth during 

question period today, have perpetrated an almost unbearable 

hardship on many of the citizens of this province.  And the 

unfortunate aspect of that, Mr. Minister, is the fact that you are 

picking on the most vulnerable within our society.  And I'm not 

talking now, sir, about those people that are on social 

assistance, because I recognize that their wants and their needs, 

albeit at a low level, are taken care of. 

 

But by the same token we have to look at the other folks -- 

those people who are determined to make a go of their own 

lives by being as productive citizens in this province as they 

possibly can be.  They do not want to be on social aid.  I don't 

think very many people do.  But that young woman that I 

brought up this morning is a classic example of the hardships 

perpetrated upon these folks by your government's cognizant 

decision, made in full awareness of the effect that it was going 

to have, has had on the people of this province.  Where not 

only do ministers not answer questions in question period, but 

ministers do not answer the telephone when people phone in 

and say: I need help.  I need guidance.  I need advice.  What 

can I do?  I don't have money.  It's costing too much.  And then 

those phone calls are not answered.  Those phone calls are 

ignored. 

 

Now I'll give the Minister of Health the benefit of the doubt in 

this particular case, whether she was actually aware of it.  But, 

Mr. Minister, she is totally responsible for her department.  

And if it was the staff that was not passing on and 

communicating this sad state, this deplorable state of affairs, 

then it is up to her to rectify it. 

 

But you're sitting there now as Minister of Finance, and up 

until this point have refused to answer our questions.  And I'm 

glad, I say again, that you have finally consented to be more 

co-operative and give us the answers that we seek.  And I look 

forward to now getting more answers out of you. 

 

But I want to ask you now, considering the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Seriousness. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Seriousness -- as my colleague says and helps 

me out here for a moment -- the seriousness of the situation for 

many of the citizens of Saskatchewan, what can you see in this 

interim supply Bill that will alleviate the concerns that many of 

our vulnerable people in Saskatchewan have as far as their 

health is concerned?  I purposely phrase the question rather 

broadly so that you can give me an answer to that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad the 

member asked the question.  That's why we have an interim 

supply Bill.  The purpose -- if the member would pay attention 

-- the purpose of the interim supply Bill is to make sure that the 

people of whom he speaks are provided the funding that is 

necessary in order to bring for them the services which they 

need. 

 

We could wait until the end of the budget debate in the 

consideration of the Estimates, and the government could stop 

making these payments without an interim supply Bill.  

Without the passage of an interim supply Bill in June, the 

payments stop because there is no funding available, if this 

House does not pass an interim supply Bill, to pay for people 

for their drugs or to pay the school boards who will then have 

to go out and borrow money at interest charges in order to fund 

their operations or to pay the amount requested here to rural 

and urban municipalities who will have to go and get access to 

money somewhere else. 

 

The purpose of an interim supply Bill is to make sure that the 

kind of people the member speaks of are provided the 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

services within the amount of budget that is provided for any 

fiscal year, can get those services.  That's why we are asking 

for an interim supply for the month of June. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think you have to 

lecture me as to the process of how the interim supply Bill 

process works.  You say that this interim supply . . . and 

obviously it's going to be one-twelfth, here or there.  As you 

suggest, some departments, a lot of departments are not 

one-twelfth for whatever reason you've given on those issues.  

This is to pay the bills on interim supply based on the 

Estimates that are hopefully going to be passed, as far as you're 

concerned, sometime in fall.  So we'll have to wait for that 

period of time to find out. 

 

Now you say this is to pay for the drugs.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

just how much of that money is going to be used to pay drugs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again we're just providing the 

department their allocation.  If you want to know the specifics 

of each department, as was ruled by the Speaker in previous 

interim supplies, you're going to have to ask the department.  

We don't have that information in the interim supply 

presentation that is made to the legislature.  That's a question 

you can get your answers to when you consider the Estimates 

in the Committee of Finance for the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, now, now, Mr. Minister, we were doing 

so well there for a little while.  Now you revert back to your 

old ways, withdrawing into your shell and developing that 

bunker mentality, and that's not going to get us anywhere.  

We're going to be in here, I'm afraid, for a long, long time until, 

sir, you are going to be co-operative. 

 

Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, he says, it's all right 

with him; he gets paid for it. 

 

Well the question I think that most people in Saskatchewan are 

asking themselves right now is whether they're getting their 

money's worth.  And the reports that I'm getting in my 

constituency, sir, are no; you're grossly overpaid for the kind of 

benefit, and certainly the havoc, you're creating with the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have here a document that is being sent out to 

many of the people who are drug plan users in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and it's being sent out by the Saskatchewan 

Pharmaceutical Association.  And quite frankly, this is -- and 

that's why I'm holding it in my hand -- the best document that I 

have seen that attempts to put some organization into the drug 

plan and how you have decimated it.  It's a good summary, and, 

sir, I would advise you perhaps you could get a copy of this for 

all the details and so on because it's a real good summary of the 

situation. 

 

But, sir, I ask you again: how will this interim supply that we're 

dealing with now help and benefit people who used to pay 

$125 per family, but now in the drugs they're going to be 

paying $380, which is more than triple, plus paying more -- 

from 35 per cent of the rest of it instead of 25 per cent. 

Now I understand the six months, and I understand how you've 

made it so easy for these folks to pay their bills, but what are 

you planning now as a government, as a Department of 

Finance, to help these people that are indeed going to be very 

painfully put up in trying to pay these bills?  What have you 

got in place for them to make it easier for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the Department of 

Finance will provide, within the constraints of the finances 

available to the province, the appropriate monies requested by 

the Department of Health for the various needs the Department 

of Health indicates it has to make sure that people are looked 

after -- people in hardship situations, people on low incomes, 

people on Saskatchewan Assistance Plan.  We will provide, as 

we are providing in this interim supply, one-twelfth . . . The 

member asked earlier, and I did not quite answer his question, I 

admit, because I didn't have the information in front of me that 

I had yesterday. 

 

But this provides for the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan 

one-twelfth of the amount that was presented in the budget 

which the members opposite has, plus an additional $3 million 

because of cash flow requirements of the department.  But the 

department and the government through the Department of 

Finance will provide to the Department of Health those funds 

that the Department of Health requires within the constraints 

that we have within the budget and the revenues that are 

available to us. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- This cash flow, Mr. Minister, that you're 

talking about that the department requires, this extra -- how 

much was it? -- $3 million, what is that used for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just ongoing costs to pay for the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug's portion of the cost. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Mr. Minister, in my books $3 million is a 

lot of money.  Now what do you mean you need $3 million 

extra to pay for ongoing costs?  Is this extra money or just the 

normal course of events? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's normal.  It's a request the 

department has identified as a need for this particular time.  It's 

part of the normal expenditures that are made under the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, nothing extraneous about 

it at all. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't buy that.  If it's the 

normal process, then why is it not considered to be part of the 

one-twelfth figure written into it and then spread out over the 

whole year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The history of some of these 

programs is that the cash flow isn't always even.  There are 

certain times of the year for reasons I don't know -- you'd have 

to ask the Department of Health to see whether they know -- 

where the demands seem to be greater than other times of the 

year.  This happens to be the case now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the cost of the drug plan at $125 

would have been a certain amount.  What would that amount 

be? 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We don't have that.  You'll have to 

ask the Department of Health in Estimates. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The amount now at $380 deductible per 

family, what will that amount be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the budget you will find that the 

prescription drug plan requirement in the budget is, I believe, 

$67.8 million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well if you have that information, then, sir, 

perhaps you can tell me how much money you're going to be 

saving now that you've de-insured the insulin for diabetics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm only giving the 

information which is the global number, as the interim supply 

is, which the member can find in the Estimates.  But when it 

comes to specific questions dealing with specific items of any 

particular items here, you'll have to ask the Department of 

Health when that department is considered in the committee. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, next question I would have to 

ask you, you as the man that signs the cheques and your deputy 

minister beside you:  how much money are you going to save 

now that you have de-insured the chiropractic services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this is interim 

supply.  That's a question you're going to have to ask when the 

Department of Health is here before the Committee of Finance.  

All we're doing here is providing a global amount of money, in 

most cases one-twelfth, to the departments so it can pay for its 

operations during the month of June. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, you have also decimated the 

optometric services in this department.  How much is the 

Department of Finance going to save by de-insuring optometric 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not dealing 

with that here.  The member said something earlier which was 

very instructive.  He said about the Minister of Health, she is 

totally responsible for the Department of Health.  That's true.  

And that's why it is necessary for the Minister of Health or the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade or the Minister 

of Community Services to answer those kinds of specific 

questions.  It is not the purpose of the interim supply to deal 

with those kinds of specifics. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I know well how the monetary 

process in government works.  You sit on the treasury benches, 

you have your cabinet meetings, you discuss from priority and 

planning committees and so on and from the treasury 

committee how you're going to be spending the money that the 

government takes in.  And I know full well that sitting around 

that table when decisions are made sits the Minister of Health, 

as do other ministers. 

 

All of you are fully aware -- and I hope, sir, that certainly that 

you are aware -- of decisions that are made around the cabinet 

table.  And without breaking any cabinet 

secrecy you could very well discuss with me right now some of 

the answers to some of the questions that I have because you're 

fully cognizant of it. 

 

And I know further well that the Minister of Health will, when 

you have determined with your officials and your toy minister 

and your Premier what direction your government wants to go, 

that you say, we're going to have an across the board 15, 20, 25 

per cent reduction in the expenditures in each department. 

 

You call each department in, sir, and they sit down with you 

and your treasury branch officials, and you go over those areas 

that are going to be decimated, those areas that are going to be 

cut, and those areas that are a priority with you that you are 

going to maintain.  And so all of those decisions, sir, that you 

make, are made directly in consultation and in concert with the 

Minister of Health and your officials.  So don't tell me that you 

don't know. 

 

All I want is some of the impact of the decisions that you and 

your Premier have made and how it's impacting upon the 

citizens of this province.  I would expect an answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I as the Minister of 

Finance do not speak for the Department of Health.  I as the 

Minister of Finance do not speak for the Department of 

Tourism and Renewable Resources.  I speak for the, in this 

case, what is being provided in the interim supply Bill. 

 

If the member looks at the Estimates he will find that in the 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission there is 

provision for $266.4 million.  That's the amount that's there. 

 

I can speak for the global amount of dollars as the Minister of 

Finance.  But if the member opposite as . . . he used to be on 

the Executive Council, he knows how he had to answer 

questions for whatever department he was responsible for. 

 

I'm sure that the member opposite knows that when the 

Minister of Health is here, she will, because she speaks for the 

ministry of Health, will be able to respond to those specific 

questions to which I cannot, because we're not dealing with that 

here today.  We're dealing with interim supply. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What you just told us then, Mr. Minister, is 

that when the Department of Health ask for the certain given 

amount, you give them a blank cheque.  Is that correct?  You 

give them a blank cheque. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Absolutely not, Mr. Chairman.  We 

give them a certain amount of money to act within a budget.  

Now it may be foreign to the member opposite to act . . . to 

know what it means to act within the budget because the 

former government never cared to act within a budget.  They 

would announce 800 or $360 million deficits as it did in 1986 

and then end up having a deficit of $1.2 billion.  That's not 

acting within a budget. 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

We've allocated to the Department of Health a budget.  They 

now have to spend within the budget and the Minister of Health 

and the department have to be accountable for what they spend 

in this legislature before it's voted and later in the Public 

Accounts when the Public Accounts are published a year later. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that the minister 

gets up and gives me a lecture on . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is my pleasure 

today to introduce to the Assembly some 30 grade 4 and 5 

students from South Corman Park School up near by 

Saskatoon.  Accompanying the students today are Terry Gasior 

and Orville Kraley, the teachers.  They'll be listening to the 

proceedings in the legislature for a few minutes and then I'll be 

meeting with them afterwards for pictures and drinks. 

 

I would hope that they have had a nice trip down, a good visit 

to Regina, and wish them a safe trip home.  So I would like all 

the members in the Assembly to help me welcome these guests 

from South Corman Park School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I was 

not aware of our guests in the gallery being from South 

Corman Park School.  But I would also join with the member 

from Humboldt in extending my best wishes to you folks as 

well.  I hope you've had a good pleasant trip and enjoy the 

proceedings here and have a safe trip home. 

 

And the reason I'm getting involved in the hellos here is simply 

because South Corman Park School was in my constituency 

prior to the last election, and a very nice area, I might add.  So 

welcome here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the Minister of 

Finance reverts quite often back into his former role, and as 

probably I do as well from time to time, to his teaching career 

where he begins to give lectures to those people who need 

some enlightenment. 

 

Well, Mr. Finance Minister, you are telling me about the 

budgetary process.  Now I just want to ask you this question, 

sir.  You are now the Minister of Finance in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  How many times, sir, have you held that 

position? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm proud to say, Mr. Chairman, 

that this is the third budget I have had to present.  I'm proud to 

say that in the 1970s I was able to present budgets that were 

balanced, in fact had surpluses; was not faced with the kind of 

devastating debt load which the member opposite and his 

colleagues created in the 1970s. 

 

Now I'm presenting the fourth budget.  And I want to tell the 

members opposite, it is the beginning of the recovery for the 

province of Saskatchewan, so that our future and our children's 

future is guaranteed, as we begin to deal with that financial 

mess which those members opposite left here for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I had a very specific reason for 

asking that question of the minister because I know that, and I 

knew . . . pardon me.  I thought he had only been the Minister 

of Finance two times total, but he tells us now that he has been 

Finance minister two times previous to this time. 

 

And my information is, my information is that this man now 

has the reputation of being a person who has brought in the 

back . . . His last two budgets, although they were a few years 

apart, have been deficit budgets.  So certainly he knows where 

deficit budgets are all about and what they're all . . . So it's 

rather an interesting turn of events, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

The question that I want to ask now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Finance Minister, is relevant to your particular position.  Could 

you, sir, give me an indication right now who your officials are 

that are with you, and their qualifications?  I'm interested in 

their qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Forgive me for my impatience, Mr. 

Chairman.  But all of the officials and their status were 

introduced yesterday when we began these Estimates.  Now if 

the member opposite wants to simply kill time, I'm quite 

prepared to do that, but I question whether that is a useful use 

of taxpayers' money when we're considering interim supply. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't think, Mr. Chairman, it's up to the 

Minister of Finance to dictate what type of questions I am 

going to ask and what kind of answers I'm looking for.  And I 

ask you again, sir, I want to know, number one, the names of 

your officials.  I want to know why they were hired.  I want to 

know their qualifications.  And I want to know how much 

they're getting of the taxpayers' money. 

 

Now you're telling me I do not have the right to stand in my 

place and ask that question and expect an answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, now that the member has asked 

the question that he didn't ask in the previous question, I can 

say to the member opposite that, yes, I can give him that 

information.  In fact we'll get it so that it'll be written out and 

we'll bring it over to you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- When? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll work on it right now. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So prior to adjournment of this morning . . . 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

or this session here, I can expect that to be brought to me so I 

can ask some further questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I've been 

listening with interest to some of the responses from the 

minister and his assertion that he doesn't need to be specific.  

And I would remind the minister, as I did in my opening 

remarks, that there have been many precedents set in this 

House in interim supply where indeed there were specifics. 

 

I refer the minister back to April, 1990, under questioning by 

the member from Rosemont, where he actually got into Sask 

Water Corporation down to the amount of money on a per 

monthly basis that was being transferred from the federal 

government to the provincial government and the answers were 

forthcoming from the minister at that time, the best of his 

ability.  And I would say, sir, they were far more forthcoming 

than what you have offered. 

 

In May 1991 the member from Prince Albert was asking the 

Minister of Finance questions as low as $1,600 in regard to 

Exec Air.  What relationship those numbers were to the private 

flying services around the province, how much per mileage 

was paid through Exec Air, how much mileage was paid to 

private people.  The minister was forthcoming in all of these 

things, right down to the per kilometre rate, Mr. Minister. 

 

We had the member from . . . the member that isn't with us 

from Saskatoon any more, that used to sit in the opposition 

benches, asking the minister about Social Services and specific 

numbers -- specific numbers -- and the minister responsible, 

the Minister of Finance, answering down to percentage points 

of specific numbers within the vote from Social Services that 

was placed before the Assembly. 

 

Now those are only a few examples, Mr. Minister, of what the 

precedent has been in this House.  The members of the 

opposition today have asked you more general questions -- 

questions, because you are the Minister of Finance, which I 

think you would be able to ask. 

 

The member from Morse asked a lot of questions in relation to 

the debt of various assets that you have transferred over to the 

Consolidated Fund and all the reasons that you did that.  You 

said in this Assembly this morning -- and you can check 

Hansard, Mr. Minister -- you said we were not responsible for 

any of those debts. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that doesn't strike with what the record will 

show.  We distinctly discussed several areas this morning 

where indeed there were debts associated with your previous 

tenure in this province's Finance minister, areas that cover 

hundreds of millions of dollars. 

 

You say to the Assembly, to the people -- you try to fool them 

-- that we weren't responsible for any of this debt that you've 

transferred out of all these areas now into the Consolidated 

Fund, and yet you will not balance that debt off with all of the 

assets that are attached to it. 

 

The minister asks a very legitimate question.  You take all of 

this debt out of a whole bunch of different areas, and 

yet you don't want to attach a corresponding asset or liability to 

those particular numbers.  You say that's for the departments to 

answer.  Well we asked the minister from SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), and he 

says, no I can't answer that; you've got to ask the individual 

ministers.  So we go around and around and around and 

nobody answers the question. 

 

Mr. Minister, so that we can have the numbers for next week, 

would you give an undertaking to this House . . . and I'm sure 

your officials are quite capable of doing it.  The total debt that 

you ascribe to the province of Saskatchewan at present, would 

you break that down, sir, in 1992 dollars to debt that was there 

prior to 1982 and debt that has been accrued since 1982. 

 

Also, Mr. Minister, when you're doing that, would you attach 

to those particular debt figures capital projects and the amount 

of debt that you associate with them, both prior to 1982 and 

since 1982, so that we in the opposition, when we're presented 

with an interim supply Bill that shows various departments of 

government that now seem to be debt free . . . that you have no 

debt servicing costs attached to them, that all of this debt has 

been hived off into the Consolidated Fund.  I think it would be 

quite reasonable, Mr. Minister, so that we in the opposition and 

the people of Saskatchewan can understand how much of it 

was there prior to that day, how much of it there since, what 

projects it was attached to.  Was it schools, as the member from 

Morse pointed out?  Was it hospitals, as the member from 

Rosthern pointed out? 

 

All of these various things that you have stripped the debt 

from, moved it into the Consolidated Fund, moved it there so -- 

as you say as the auditor recommended and as the Gass 

Commission recommended -- so that the people can see it. 

 

So let's divide it up.  Let's put it in 1992 dollars, and let's put 

the capital projects . . . because obviously you've said that 

you've had to write off large amounts of debt with things like 

the Millar Western pulp mill, the Bi-Provincial upgrader, all of 

these capital projects that were inside of SPMC. 

 

All of these things that you have stripped the debt off and 

shoved into the Consolidated Fund, you should be able to 

match the debt to asset, or debt to share, or debt to liability -- 

ongoing liability either as a preferred shareholder, as an equity 

partner.  I'm sure the minister understands the various areas that 

government have invested in over the years and would he 

match those figures to the figures that he has assigned over to 

the Consolidated Fund so that we clearly understand. 

 

As the member from Morse said, you have assets in Crown 

corporations.  You have retained earnings in Crown 

corporations.  You have monies available to you, monies 

available to you as pointed out by the member of Morse that 

cover half of the debt that you've assigned to CIC.  And I think, 

sir, if you did that for us for Monday we would have a far 

clearer understanding of this whole debt scenario that you've 

outlined to us this morning.  And the public for sure would be 

able to ascertain in 1992 dollars exactly what we're dealing 

with here.  Because as I said 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

before, sir, you like to use one set of numbers selectively, and 

then you fall back on other ones.  And the member from 

Rosthern raised it in teachers' pensions, in the unfunded 

pensions and the ones that are funded. 

 

And I think it's absolutely clear, Mr. Minister, that the public 

understand the portion that is attached to the unfunded one and 

the portion that is attached to the funded one.  Will you do that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we need 

some clarification here.  One point I want to make is this: the 

interim supply Bill is not dealing with the question of debt.  It 

is not under consideration in this committee on the interim 

supply Bill.  So therefore, the answer to the member's question 

opposite, for the purposes of the consideration of the interim 

supply, is no. 

 

Now I can, when we get into the Estimates of the Department 

of Finance, in fact I will undertake for the members opposite to 

make sure that I have here, because it will be a very interesting 

number -- I want the members to know that  

_- I will have a comparison in 1992 dollars the debt for the 

1981-1982 in the province of Saskatchewan and the debt in 

1991-92. 

 

I will provide for the member opposite a comparison of the 

debt for those two periods of time, as well as the fiscal position 

of the province as well, Mr. Chairman, as the equity position of 

the province at that time and what it is now.  I mentioned some 

of that earlier today.  All of those things I will provide when 

this Department of Finance is in Committee of Finance. 

 

But the interim supply Bill does not deal with any of that.  And 

I remind the Chairman, and I ask, Mr. Chairman, you may want 

to consider about a ruling, which was quite an appropriate 

ruling, on May 3, 1991 in this House.  And I use May 3 

because the member opposite talked about May, in which it 

said that:  

 

 The purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of government departments and programs on an 

interim basis (interim basis) while reserving to the 

Legislative Assembly the right to complete the detailed 

review of Estimates at a later time.  For this reason, members 

must reserve their detailed questions on Estimates and 

government financial policy for the regular review of main 

the Estimates. 

 

I've said that to the House on a number of occasions, Mr. 

Chairman.  I remind the Chair . . . 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask members to please come to order and 

allow the minister to make his comments uninterrupted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm done. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the reason that we have to ask 

these questions is that things keep coming to light.  Yesterday 

in this Assembly you have a line in your interim supply Bill 

that identifies Community Services.  Now we 

identified for you, sir, yesterday that you took special warrant 

monies in '92-93 but you hive them back into '91-92 in the 

Department of Community Services to pay off recreational 

grants.  Now you weren't adverse to taking '92-93 monies, 

popping them back into the previous fiscal year, and therefore 

balloon the debt of '91-92. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it comes to light this morning with 

someone watching this debate, that you have now taken monies 

and are going to pay one-time grants to various arts groups -- 

and we understand approximately as much as a half a million 

dollars to art galleries -- and you're going to take that, and I see 

a line in here for Community Services, and you're going to put 

that back into the previous year. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, with these types of things coming to light, 

with these things coming to light . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Well that's the information from one of the groups involved; 

that they have been promised by one of your ministers that 

that's what's going to happen. 

 

Now if there's a half a million bucks going to be taken out of 

this vote and popped back into the previous year to pay off art 

galleries, sir, then how are we . . . why are we supposed to trust 

you and the words that you say in this Assembly? 

 

And that's why we need to know.  We need to know when the 

member from Morse says: well what were those capital 

projects? what was that debt?  And we need it matched up for 

the debt that you've hived over to the Consolidated Fund, 

because we don't know if that 715 million figure is going to 

match up with the other stuff or how many more little half a 

million dollar ditties are here, there, and the next place. 

 

I mean, you don't seem to have any problem at all with taking 

special warrant monies and popping them back into the 

previous year to pay off somebody's rink.  It came up in this 

Assembly a month ago, Mr. Minister, and you know it.  Will 

you answer that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, no monies in this 

interim supply nor any monies in this budget will be nor can 

they legally be nor would they be approved by either the 

comptroller or the Provincial Auditor expended in the previous 

fiscal year.  I don't know where the member is getting his ideas 

from, but the budget that we are presenting in '91-92 can be 

spent only in '90 . . . sorry, '92-93 can only be spent in '92-93.  

None of that funding, I can tell the member, can be or will be 

paying for '91-92 and show up in that context. 

 

The $23 million in community capital grants that were paid 

were monies that were previously committed in fact by the 

previous government; has nothing to do with the '92-93 budget 

nor this interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, are you saying that the 

questions posed to the minister from Community Services 

earlier in this session about monies taken from the special 

warrants to pay off Community Services commitments is 

untrue?  Are you saying that, sir? 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the monies that the 

Minister of Community Services provided and the government 

provided was provided in the 1991-92 fiscal year with a special 

warrant in that fiscal year.  Nothing to do with this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, there was no special warrant 

in that fiscal year with this government.  The special warrants 

were applied for prior to this budget.  The minister had his little 

charade in the House last December where he set aside the 

rules of the House to provide supply for the government up 

until the end of March.  We then had two special warrants. 

 

The Minister of Community Services did not deny at all in 

question period in this House that money from the first of those 

special warrants was used to go back to pay off the liabilities.  

The information that we have received this morning is that 

large, one-time grants were paid out and billed to last year.  

Okay? 

 

We have no assurance, Mr. Chairman, that what happened 

previously is not happening again.  This, in effect, is a special 

warrant.  The only reason it isn't a special warrant is because 

the House is in session.  Otherwise it would be another special 

warrant.  And that is the only difference. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Minister, we're asking you to account.  

You've had a number of examples raised this morning with 

you.  You keep saying that this money simply goes off into one 

particular area that you'll have to ask questions about later.  

And yet you have a whole number of areas in this special 

warrant that clearly go over the one-twelfth . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not a special warrant. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It is in every sense of the word, Mr. Minister, 

except that the House is in -- except that the House is in. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we are simply saying to the minister that the 

progress of the committee in regards to this Appropriation Bill 

would be furthered if the minister would attach some assets to 

some liabilities.  And that is the only way, Mr. Chairman, that 

this committee can be assured that the monies that the minister 

has been moving willy-nilly from all areas of government into 

the Consolidated Fund as debt, is the only way that we can be 

assured that the minister isn't asking for monies under this 

Appropriation Bill that are inappropriate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, in order to assist the 

member and clear up some of his confusion, because obviously 

he is extremely confused, there were special warrants in the 

1991-92 fiscal year.  There were several special warrants, as 

there is at the end of any fiscal year, because you cannot 

always transfer money from one department to another. 

 

But the special warrants that were passed around March 31 had 

nothing to do with this fiscal year, including the special warrant 

for the community capital fund program.  That was money that 

was paid within the context of the budget that was finalized. 

In fact even after that payment the deficit was reduced because 

of other cost savings that were made.  The government made 

significant cost savings by doing away with wasteful 

expenditures, leaving us some room to pay community owing . 

. . who were owed $23 million by the former government who 

changed the rules midstream and said, instead of providing the 

money for capital projects in those municipalities, said whoops, 

we've changed our mind.  You go borrow the money -- Oungre, 

for example, and other places -- you go borrow the money and 

you incur the cost. 

 

We thought that was wrong and therefore we provided the 

money, but it was provided in the 1991-92 fiscal year.  It's got 

nothing to do with this fiscal year.  This fiscal year is provided 

in the budget which we are considering, one-twelfth of which is 

being requested in this interim supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that the 

minister likes to make the comparison in Community Services.  

I'm sure if we went to most of those communities today and 

said: which would you rather have -- a pay 

_out over three years for your rink or your special project, or 

having the budget that the member brought in where he 

absolutely devastated all of those communities . . . He cut back 

on their sharing arrangements, he hit them with a tax on 

gasoline. 

 

I mean these communities, by that member's own budget, have 

been hit far worse than anything that would have happened by 

having their payments on rinks and recreational projects spread 

out over three years. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it's absolutely ludicrous.  One only has to pick 

up the newspaper, read the Moose Jaw paper.  The mayor is in 

there just about every day saying, whoops, they're taking part 

of the parking tickets now.  Whoops, our gas costs for our bus 

fleet are way up, whoops -- all the way through.  I see mayor 

after mayor after mayor in these times saying that we have 

been just hammered by this Minister of Finance.  And it's 

undeniable. 

 

And the minister says you took a wrong-headed economic 

decision when you said no, we'll spread this money out over 

three years so that the taxpayer gets a break, the community 

has the assurance that they're going to get the money.  They 

may pay a little bit of interest but they don't get absolutely 

gutted. 

 

But instead this minister made a political decision as he has 

done in so many other areas, as we've been pointing out. 

 

He says, I'm going to take all of that debt.  I'm going to whap 

her over into the Consolidated Fund.  It's good for politics 

because I'm going to come along and I'm going to break every 

last promise I made to Saskatchewan people in the last election 

campaign.  And I'm going to set it up so if I take all my debt 

now and blame it on the previous Tory administration, I can 

make myself look pretty good down the road in two or three 

years. 

 

Now I say to the members of the Assembly, is that prudent 

financial management that I take 22-point-some million 



May 29, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

dollars and I whap it all in at once so that I can try and bloat up 

my deficit so that I can try and make the Tories look bad?  And 

then down the road, because I don't have to deal with that 

ongoing commitment -- because I don't have to deal with that 

ongoing commitment -- I'll go in and just claw back a lot more 

out of the various urban and rural municipalities around this 

province. 

 

I'll tell you what, Mr. Minister.  We can stand and talk about 

Community Services for a long time because I'll bet you if you 

went out there today, if you went out there today and gave 

them a choice, I know what the choice would be.  I'm pretty 

darn sure I know what the choice would be in Moose Jaw, 

given the things that you've done to them in this budget. 

 

I don't know how many Community Services grants they were 

due under the old program, but they'd gladly trade that any day 

-- gladly trade it any day.  Just what you have done to the cost 

of running a bus fleet or the cost of the ticket collections in that 

city alone would be more, more than what they were owed 

under that previous program spread out over three years. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are examples all around this province of 

that kind of duplicity.  And that's why we are asking you to 

provide to the members of this legislature those lists that 

balance off the debt and the assets that you so reluctantly don't 

want to talk about in this committee for some reason.  You can 

take 22 million bucks in Community Services and it's attached 

to a whole bunch of things, Mr. Minister.  It's attached to 

physical facilities in towns and villages and cities all over this 

province, that money is.  You hive it off over here but you don't 

want to account what it matches up to on the other side. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's bad enough, it's bad enough to break every 

last election promise you made to the folks in the province of 

Saskatchewan just to attain political power in this province, but 

it's another, Mr. Minister, not to come clean with an accounting 

of the things that matched one side to the other. 

 

And I think for the progress of this committee it's absolutely 

fundamental that you do that.  When the member from Morse 

asks you some very relevant questions about the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation, it's incumbent that you answer them. 

 

The previous minister of Finance was expected . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being past 1 o'clock, the committee 

will rise to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 p.m. 

 


