




















































Hansard: April 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 545 

 April 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

PROROGATION 

 

At 10:03 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 

 

Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this 

Legislative Assembly.  In so doing, I wish to thank you for and 

congratulate you on the work you have done. 

 

When this session began, I indicated my government's 

commitment to restoring the public's faith in their elected 

representatives.  My ministers believe the only way to 

accomplish this objective is to offer government that is open, 

honest, accessible and accountable.  To that end, you have 

enacted legislation during this first session of the 

twenty-second Legislature which is an important first step in 

restoring public confidence in our political process. 

 

You have passed amendments to The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act which ensure that by-elections are 

held within six months of a vacancy in this Legislature. 

 

Further you have enacted amendments to The Tabling of 

Documents Act which significantly improve the timeliness of 

government reporting. 

 

In keeping with the priority my government places upon the 

principle of accountability, you have approved The Crown 

Employment Contracts Act which ensures fairness and 

common sense as the primary objectives in employment 

packages for senior civil servants. 

 

As part of my government's continuing commitment to 

democratic reform, amendments to The Urban Municipality 

Act were introduced and subsequently referred to the Standing 

Committee on Municipal Law.  Although the committee has 

not had an opportunity to officially report back to the House, 

its diligent and thoughtful work will be reflected in future 

legislative initiatives. 

 

You have repealed legislation which provided for the 

expansion and harmonization of the provincial sales tax.  The 

elimination of this additional tax burden has provided 

much-needed relief to Saskatchewan consumers and has been 

important in safeguarding a significant number of jobs 

throughout the province. 

 

You agreed that amendments to The Northern Municipalities 

Act were necessary to enhance the economic opportunities 

available in northern Saskatchewan and, accordingly, voted to 

allow northern municipalities to participate through share 

ownership in municipal economic development corporations. 

 

During this session, members enacted The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, thereby lengthening the permits of physicians 

who provide temporary medical services in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My government also approached this first session as an 

opportunity to undertake an examination of the current state of 

the province's finances. 

 

Recognizing the gravity of the financial challenge facing this 

province, my government moved swiftly to appoint the 

Financial Management Review Commission.  The Gass 

Commission served to more clearly define the current state of 

our province's finances and made a number of 

recommendations which will enhance and strengthen the 

responsible nature of government. 

 

In conclusion, I thank you for the provision you have made for 

the requirements of the public service and assure you that this 

sum of money has been used prudently and in the public 

interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in 

which you have devoted your energies to the activities of the 

session and wish you the full blessing of Providence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 27th day of April, 1992, at 3 

p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:09 a.m. 


