




















































Hansard: July 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1421 

 July 13, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7), and it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) to stand for this year. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the government's decision to close Provincial 

Court circuit points: (a) What was the number of cases 

handled in each point in the province in 1991-92 fiscal year?  

(b) What was the cost of operating each point in the province 

in 1991-92? 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members 

of the House a gentleman who is sitting behind the bar on the 

government side of the House, Mr. Speaker.  His name is Bob 

Huget.  And Mr. Huget is a first-term, New Democrat member 

of the Ontario provincial parliament.  He also serves as 

member for Sarnia and parliamentary assistant to the ministry 

of Energy. 

 

Mr. Huget is a Regina boy who grew up and left Saskatchewan, 

now serves in the Ontario Assembly and is home visiting with 

his family today.  And I guess, Mr. Speaker, he's on a bit of a 

busman's holiday.  He decided to stop in and visit us here in the 

Assembly.  I'll ask all members of the Saskatchewan Assembly 

to say welcome to one of our Ontario colleagues. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, sir, and to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly two very distinguished 

guests who are touring the province of Saskatchewan and 

Regina and are in the Speaker's gallery today.  They are His 

Excellency Mohamed Adel Hussein Elsafty, ambassador of 

Egypt to Canada, and his wife, Mrs. Elsafty. 

 

This is the ambassador's first visit.  I wonder, Mr. Ambassador, 

and . . . would you stand to be recognized? 

There they are in the Speaker's gallery.  This is their first visit 

to the province.  They're meeting with the Lieutenant 

Governor, the Speaker, of course myself, and the mayor of 

Regina, and we look very forward to the meeting this 

afternoon, sir. 

 

We welcome you to the province and hope that you find the 

visit an enjoyable and informative one.  Please join me in 

welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, this past weekend literally thousands of travellers 

were drawn to Moose Jaw for two very different and very 

successful events. 

 

Friday through Sunday the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council 

hosted Motif, an ethnic extravaganza in the park with 11 

different cultural food booths, 42 different ethnic performances 

of dance or song, and an attendance of over 5,000 people -- an 

all-time high. 

 

Many who took in Motif also spent Saturday or Sunday at 

Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw's 22nd annual air show, 

where 80,000 people saw aerial acrobatics at its best, with the 

highlight as always being Moose Jaw's own world-famous 

formation flying team, the Snowbirds.  For the first time, a 

shuttle bus connection between the air show and Big Valley 

Jamboree in Craven, Mr. Speaker, contributed to the attendance 

at both. 

 

The organizers of both Moose Jaw's events are to be highly 

commended for their hard work and very successful efforts 

putting together the weekend extravaganzas.  It was 

organization at its best, and the results showed it.  Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to join me in extending the Saskatchewan 

Tourism tip of the hat to the multicultural council and 

Canadian Forces Base in Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to report to members about the success of Saskatchewan's 

biggest tourist attraction, the Big Valley Jamboree at Craven.  I 

understand this year's event at Craven was the most successful 

in the jamboree's history.  There was a paid attendance at the 

country music extravaganza of about 28,000 people. 

 

I'm told that attendance will translate into a profit of close to 

$250,000.  The profit from this year's show will go to paying 

off some of the event's outstanding debt and perhaps to some 

capital improvements for next year's show.  I am pleased to say 

that after 10 years the jamboree has reached the point where it 

can now stand on its own without government financial help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that the Big Valley Jamboree is a perfect 

example of what can be accomplished when Saskatchewan 

people work together.  I want to pay special tribute to the 

hundreds of people who 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

volunteered their time to make the jamboree a success.  The 

Big Valley Jamboree brings together thousands of people each 

year for a few days of fun and country music.  It also puts 

literally millions of dollars into our economy, attracting tourists 

from all over North America and indeed the world.  I 

understand that there were even some visitors to this year's 

jamboree from New Zealand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the House to join me in 

congratulating everyone involved in making the jamboree such 

a resounding success and to encourage them to keep up the 

good work for years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It was my 

privilege to attend the launching of Saskatchewan Express for 

their summer tour on behalf of the minister responsible for 

Community Services and accept a picture that I will be 

presenting to her after my remarks. 

 

Saskatchewan Express has a new support partnership this 

summer with partner groups Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 

Organizations, Sask Sport, and the Saskatchewan Parks and 

Recreation Association that represents thousands of dedicated 

volunteers. 

 

The Express has a new performance for the summer called 

Canadazzle which celebrates 125 years of Canadian history.  

From its beginning, finding talented young Saskatchewan 

performing artists and offering them a training and 

performance opportunity here at home were the main 

objectives of Saskatchewan Express.  It's hard to find anyone in 

the province who haven't seen their performance and raved 

about their show.  We've been thrilled to see our own young 

artists offer top-notch entertainment right here at home. 

 

They have also been excellent ambassadors for Saskatchewan 

at the Calgary Stampede.  And I'm also told that the 

Saskatchewan booth has received special recognition.  The 

troupe's tradition of excellence has been fostered from the 

beginning by two very talented people, artistic director Carol 

Gay Bell and music director Vern Bell. 

 

Over the years many talented young artists have started their 

performance career with Saskatchewan Express.  We 

acknowledge both their outstanding talents and their 

commitment to providing excellent musical entertainment.  We 

wish them well on their provincial tour and at Ameriflora in 

Ohio. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at this 

time I would like to recognize a number of organizations, not 

only in my constituency but certainly throughout the province, 

that will be putting forward their agricultural days, and it's the 

agricultural societies of Saskatchewan. 
 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple that are events that 

are taking place in my constituency this week.  I look forward 

to attending some of the events.  Over the years the agricultural 

societies have really played an important role in letting people 

around the province know the 

importance of agriculture. 

 

In my constituency the communities of Kipling and Moosomin 

and Fairmead and Kennedy all have agricultural fairs.  In fact, 

Fairmead celebrated their 100th -- it's their centennial this year. 

 

Certainly many of the agricultural societies are concerned 

about funding.  Mr. Speaker, these societies and the fairs that 

take place, take place because of the many hours of volunteer 

work.  And so I compliment the people of Saskatchewan for 

their hard work in promoting agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to report an event over the 

weekend that took place here in Regina.  It was the Canadian 

national Indian and Metis Golf Championships held right here 

at the Murray golf course.  It was hosted by the Peepeekisis 

Indian Reserve. 

 

I would like first of all to report about the winners in regards to 

the various flights.  At the championship level, we had from 

Duck Lake, from Beardy's Reserve, Bill Cameron, who won 

the championship flight by one stroke over Ken Sinclair of 

Regina.  And there was also Mitch Buffalo who came in third 

and John Dorion, fourth. 

 

On the other flights we had winners on the first flight, Roy 

Goodwill; second flight, Hugh Pratt; third flight, Lester Bull.  

The tuck flight was won by Louie Wolverine.  The juniors was 

won by Justin Albert.  The woman's flight was won by Linda 

Poitras. 

 

There was two special flights with Chief Enoch Poitras, the 

Minister of Justice, Mayor Doug Archer, and the member from 

Cumberland, as well as the MP (Member of Parliament), Willy 

Littlechild, from Alberta; and FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) vice-chiefs, Dutch Lerat and 

Ernie Cameron. 

 

There were special comments, Mr. Speaker.  They said Doug 

Archer was a powerful golfer.  They said his stance was wider 

than the Saskatchewan River or Wascana Lake.  And they said 

that the minister was so smooth, he said he ended up with a . . . 

down the middle of the fairway and ended up with a 

tremendous score. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On July 3 I rose in this 

Assembly to let members know that members of the 

Legislative Assembly, when they paid tribute to two recipients 

of the Medal of Bravery, Terry Bzdel and Andy Bucko at 

Government House in the ballroom . . . Since that time they've 

also been given the Award of Merit from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Department of Community Services.  And 

they've also been given a Carnegie Heroes Award.  It's an 

American medal that goes to world-wide heroes. 

 

Their brave act has brought much attention to the town of 

Mozart, and all because they've pulled two sisters from a 

burning home and saved their lives. 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

But the point is that 17 people in this province last year were 

not so lucky; 17 people lost their lives in fires last years.  There 

was also a $40 million loss of personal property. 

 

And it's one of the reasons why, and I'm proud to say, that our 

government is developing a new fire prevention Act and it will 

give the people of this province a much-needed fire prevention 

awareness program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Effects of Budget on Job Creation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, several times in 

this House you have stood and told us that your ultimate dream 

for this year, as far as job creation, is 2,000 jobs for 1992; that 

the great goal of this NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government is to create 2,000 jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Labour Force Report is now out and it shows 

that 18,000 jobs have been lost in our province -- 18,000 jobs, 

Mr. Minister.  In light of this fact, Mr. Minister, wouldn't you 

agree that your goal of 2,000 jobs is completely inadequate?  

And that a budget that is designed to create 2,000 jobs in the 

face of 18,000 is inadequate? 

 

Mr. Minister, given that evidence, would you agree to now start 

redrawing that budget so that you truly can create jobs in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for the question.  I want to tell the member that the budget, 

which has been presented in this legislature on May 7, 

addresses the financial crisis which the previous government 

left behind, and therefore is the right step to be taken in order 

to create security for the future and job creation for the future 

because it brings financial reality to the fiscal situation of the 

province, it begins to control the growing deficit and the 

growing debt, which you have to do in order to be able to get 

job creation and economic development for the future. 

 

The member opposite knows from comments that he and other 

members of his colleagues used to make that growing deficits 

are nothing but deferred taxes which would have a great, 

negative impact on job creation in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, that flimsy excuse will not put one 

person back to work who's been put out in the streets because 

of your budget.  We have 18,000 fewer people working in this 

province today than we had a year ago.  I suggest to you, Mr. 

Minister, that's an awful lot of people in a province the size of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You're proposing to replace those 18,000 jobs with 

higher taxes, higher utilities rates, health care premiums, higher 

insurance rates, and somehow out of that mix you're going to 

create 2,000 jobs and replace the 18. 

 

Mr. Minister, realizing the absurdity of that, will you now tell 

this Assembly how many of those 18,000 jobs -- very 

specifically -- how many of those 18,000 jobs lost were lost in 

the agricultural sector? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously I have to 

take notice of that kind of a question.  That's not a detailed 

information which I will have with me.  But I want to say this.  

The member opposite should come to face some realities.  The 

reason there has been over the last several . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The minister has taken notice. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

my information is that out of those 18,000 jobs lost in this 

province, that 2,000 were lost in the agricultural sector.  Areas 

such like cattle feeding, hog feeding, meat packing business, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, those type of things -- two thousand 

jobs in agriculture alone. 

 

You also know, Mr. Minister, from those same numbers that 

there are 6,000 fewer young people working than there were a 

year ago.  Your promise of 2,000 jobs in conjunction with 

higher taxes won't even replace, won't even replace  

one-quarter, Mr. Minister, what you're losing in youth and 

agriculture alone. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, given that the massive losses in 

agriculture-related employment, would you not agree that it's 

time for you to rethink your budgetary process that is even 

going to make that situation worse by Christmas time?  Would 

you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the 18,000 jobs, or 

whatever they are that the member talks about, are the price 

that we are now paying because of the misguided policies of 

the 1980s under the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now the member from Thunder 

Creek stands up and says that the solution to the economy is to 

go back to the policies of the 1980s.  I want to say to the 

member from Thunder Creek, the critic for Finance, that's not 

what this government intends to do.  It is time that we turn 

around and turned away from the policies of the 1980s which 

have caused this province to suffer depopulation -- that's now 

stabilized, I want the member opposite to know -- which has 

caused this province to go into debt to the tune of $15 billion in 

total.  And it's caused the province to suffer a financial crisis 

which causes us to be on the edge of being unable to borrow 

the money that we need to refinance old debt.  I want to say to 

the House, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker, and to yourself that 

everybody here ought . . . 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I was wondering if the 

Leader of the Opposition has a question.  I would recognize 

him if he's willing to stand.  The member may continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was 

saying, if we don't come to grips with the growing debt and the 

growing deficit, the only option that'll be available to this 

government or any government in the future would be to create 

and to raise higher taxes and cause even more difficulty to the 

economy.  That's not an option, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, it's absolutely shameful that 

you don't take responsibility for your own government's 

actions.  You're going to have to get off the blame kick here 

some place and honestly look at what you are doing to the 

Saskatchewan economy.  You've lost 18,000 jobs since a year 

ago, and yet all you make is political speeches about the past. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Leader-Post, Statistics Canada information 

from this morning says that even though we've lost 18,000 

jobs, we still only have a 7.5 per cent unemployment rate in 

this province.  But their conclusion is, and I quote: people who 

are out of work or under-employed are leaving the province, 

end quote.  They're simply leaving. 

 

Given that your dream, Mr. Minister, is to create 2,000 jobs, 

wouldn't you now admit that your job-creation policy amounts 

to a population reduction in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

And will you tell us what your ultimate population numbers are 

then, that you would prefer to work with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

obviously hasn't looked at the population trends in 

Saskatchewan in the last several months.  If he would examine 

what the statistics show, he will find that the population of the 

province in the last several months has stabilized and the net 

out-migration, the net out-migration that used to exist in tens of 

thousands a year under the previous administration does not 

exist any more. 

 

It's not going to be . . . it's not going to take just eight months to 

turn the situation around which the former government left 

behind.  It's going to take this budget.  It's going to take another 

budget.  It's going to take responsible government, open and 

honest and accountable government.  That's what we have in 

Saskatchewan today and that's why the situation is beginning to 

turn around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I remind you, that the 

only time our province's population has gone over the million 

person mark since the 1920s was under the previous 

administration. 

You claim you're going to create 2,000 jobs in this province.  

The numbers are in saying there are 18,000 gone.  Now you tell 

me, Mr. Minister, how you are going to create those jobs by 

eliminating FeedGAP, closing rural schools, closing hospitals, 

reducing employment in bottling plants, breaking GRIP 

contracts and increasing income tax by 10 per cent? 

 

Mr. Minister, given the stark reality of all of that and no 

concrete evidence of job creation, simply people fleeing this 

province and fleeing your administration, will you now tell us 

what you're going to do to re-change your budget and come up 

with something positive for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I could tell the 

member what we're going to do when we started it.  We're 

going to take this province from the verge of bankruptcy to 

prosperity . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And we're going to, in a responsible 

and an honest and an open way, deal with the deficit and the 

debt situation which the former administration left behind, so 

that our children and our grandchildren will not be saddled 

with even a greater debt than they already have.  That's the way 

you deal with this situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the last thing we will do, I want to tell the member from 

Thunder Creek, is the last thing we will do is go back to the 

policies of the 1980s which brought us here. 

 

Aid for Drought-Stricken Regions 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  The agriculture sector 

unemployment is at an all-time high.  Drought is ravaging 

some parts of our province, and the '92 GRIP program will not 

adequately protect those affected by the drought.  And Mr. 

Hartley Furtan has substantiated that.  Especially the drought is 

affecting those areas in the North and the north-east. 

 

Would the minister have on hand the acres that have been 

ploughed under in those areas of Melfort-Kinistino areas?  Has 

he got those numbers available to him so he could provide 

them to the Assembly here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not have the 

numbers here today.  There has been a small amount of 

ploughing down of crops.  The drought is growing in the North, 

in that belt that the member opposite speaks of.  We are 

monitoring it and of course looking to help the farmers there.  

We had a drought situation in the south-west which fortunately 

was alleviated by a significant rainfall, and we are monitoring 

the situation. 

 

The comment that the member opposite makes about the GRIP 

program not being adequate, we knew that the old GRIP 

program was not adequate to cover disasters such 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

as droughts.  This program is as adequate or more so than the 

old one.  And we are calling on the federal government again 

for the third line of defence that we were promised, the disaster 

relief that we need, and we'll continue to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister of Crop Insurance tell us in 

which rural municipalities in the Melfort-Kinistino area have 

had meetings to discuss the possibility of withholding their 

municipal tax as a result of the drought that's there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not aware 

of farmers withholding municipal tax.  I certainly would be 

hopeful that they would not resort to those sorts of measures.  

If I hear about some, we will certainly be in touch with those 

RMs (rural municipality). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I would expect that the minister wouldn't 

know exactly what was going on there because he didn't go to 

the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

meetings to find out what was going on. 

 

Will the minister for Crop Insurance tell this legislature what 

contingency plans he has plans for that would alleviate the 

drought problems that they have in the North and the 

north-east. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have feed listing 

services.  We have Water Corp standing by to look at 

possibilities of helping with water-related problems in drought 

areas.  And we have those measures in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

minister of Crop Insurance.  This last week, Mr. Minister, there 

has been some rains throughout the province and it has 

alleviated some of the drought problems.  But Sask Wheat Pool 

are still saying that approximately 75 per cent of the acres, crop 

acres in Saskatchewan are seriously dry. 

 

I'm going to talk especially to you about the constituency of 

Humboldt-Watrous.  They've got an area in there, especially 

the easterly side, that is really dry.  These people are ploughing 

down some crops and will be ploughing down some more if it 

doesn't rain very quickly.  And you said yesterday you hoped 

that people wouldn't talk about not paying their taxes.  Well 

you don't seem to understand, Mr. Minister, when a farmer runs 

out of money and they can't pay, they can't pay.  You don't 

seem to understand that.  None of you do. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, will you tell me how many 

acres have been ploughed down now in that area, and how 

many acres in the entire province?  Because you, 

as minister of Crop Insurance, should know exactly the acres.  

Will you tell us that, Mr. Minister, and what you're going to do 

about it?  What are you going to do to help these farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not carry around 

numbers like that in my pocket.  The member opposite should 

know that those sorts of numbers are not likely to be available 

in question period at a moment's notice.  And that figure is 

changing, of course, daily, as farmers plough down crops. 

 

And again I point to the fact that we have . . . as Crop 

Insurance and the GRIP program are stabilization programs.  

They're designed for normal conditions.  We know the Prime 

Minister has admitted that these are not going to be adequate 

for situations of disaster and we're calling for a third line of 

defence to solve those disaster problems.  And again, this is a 

federal responsibility and we will continue to work for some 

disaster relief for areas that do turn out to be dry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister of Crop 

Insurance.  Naturally I guess you don't know what's going on in 

your department because you fired so many of the good people 

that there's nobody left there to inform you.  Mr. Speaker, I was 

minister of Crop Insurance for many years and I'd be ashamed 

to be sitting in this House if I didn't know all those details. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- They always had a paper in my desk every 

time I walked through that door informing me exactly what 

was going on in this here serious things that go on with farmers 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you inform us, if there's not some immediate 

rainfall, and what are you going to do for emergencies for the 

farmers in this Saskatchewan? Because they're losing their land 

daily.  You won't even bring in their Bills.  What are you going 

to do for them?  You've been talking about moratoriums for 

eight months and you've done nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we are trying to move 

forward to help progress with legislation.  We are trying to get 

the new changes to the GRIP Bill through the legislation.  

We're trying to get our debt legislation through the legislature, 

and if the members opposite co-operate I think we would 

progress in those terms. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the 

minister of Crop Insurance another question, a question on 

behalf of some of the rural MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) in the north-west part of this 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

province, Mr. Speaker, that can't ask because they're NDP 

MLAs.  They can't ask the type of question that we'd like to ask 

the minister. 

 

In the North Battleford district, in the North Battleford district, 

Biggar, Redberry, Meadow Lake, Turtleford, there's drought 

there as well, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you could tell us how 

many acres of crop have been ploughed down in those areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again while the 

drought is growing in those areas, there has not been large 

amounts of plough-downing of crop anywhere in the province 

as to date.  I do not have the number of acres in my pocket but 

it changes from day to day, as the members opposite certainly 

know.  And as to the members opposite, maybe you should talk 

to the MLAs up there; I'm sure they will enlighten you as to 

what's happening in those areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the point is, have you talked to 

those people in the north-west, your MLAs that are up in that 

area?  Maybe it would be useful if you'd bring something in 

your pocket to the legislature, some information on what's 

going on with respect to drought in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the north-west part of this province there is a 

very real drought going on.  Can you update us on any plans 

that you have for drought in that area? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I've answered 

that question about four times today.  We are working to 

alleviate drought.  We can't make it rain.  We can try to help 

farmers and we are talking to the federal government about a 

disaster relief fund for drought that occurs in the province. 

 

And we have, as again I say, the Prime Minister has 

acknowledged that the third line of defence is needed, that 

disaster relief is a necessary thing, a predictable, long-term, 

natural, third line of defence.  That's the support that I must 

remind the members opposite that when they didn't realize 

there was a drought they voted against that in this House; and if 

they'd have voted for it, we may now have had that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  For my 

colleagues on the government side from Nipawin, from 

Kelsey-Tisdale, and from Shellbrook, I'd like to ask the 

minister for Crop Insurance about the drought in the far 

north-east, as how many acres there of crop land has been 

ploughed down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I was at Tisdale last 

week and flew over the area, toured the area around Tisdale, 

looking at the alfalfa fields.  And I have to say that very, very 

few fields that I saw were ploughed down.  And 

e certainly are monitoring them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, it's nice that the minister 

can fly over, but I'm sure it would have been a lot better if he 

had driven and stopped and talked to some of the farmers that 

are being afflicted with the drought. 

 

To the minister again: what kind of plans does the minister 

have to help out the alfalfa industry in the north-east?  Their 

crop is very short because of the drought, and if they don't get 

any rain they're not going to have a second crop this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in talking to the 

alfalfa dehy association at Tisdale, they tell me that the first cut 

of alfalfa is coming in dead on the 10-year average.  They 

expect a somewhat shorter crop in the second cut.  They also 

have large surpluses left over from last year.  And so I think 

there won't be a huge shortage of product coming out of those 

areas.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I just talked to some 

people in the north-east this afternoon before coming into the 

House.  They say their crop is very short, that if there isn't any 

rain there will be no second cutting.  And what plans does your 

government have for those jobs that won't be there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there are no doubt 

pockets of drought, and we are not . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There was very little 

interruption when the question was asked, and I expect very 

little interruption when the answer is given.  Order.  The 

member from Arm River just had his turn at asking his 

questions.  I wish he'd let the minister answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again we're aware of 

the fact that there is drought in the north-east and in the 

north-west in the alfalfa growing area.  Again I say, our 

information is that the first crop will be average or close to it, 

that there will be second cuttings.  They may be a lower 

quality, maybe some that are not second cut.  But we do not 

anticipate large lay-offs in the alfalfa industry.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister of Crop 

Insurance.  You've acknowledged today that there is drought in 

the north-west and drought in the north-east, the north-central.  

There is drought, according to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

in about 75 per cent of the crop growing region.  You know 

that rural jobs are down by 2,000 people so far.  You also 

know, Mr. Minister, that professors like Mr. Furtan say that the 

'92 GRIP program is no good when it comes to drought. 

 

Under all of those circumstances and given that evidence, can 

you advise us whether in fact you're looking seriously at a way 

to get money into the hands of farmers who are suffering a 

crisis that is worse than last fall, compounded as a result of 

GRIP changes, and now 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

the higher taxes and the higher unemployment and the closure 

of opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I must point out again 

as I did here the other day, that with the predicted grain prices, 

the '92 GRIP will have at least as good a coverage as '91 GRIP 

had, and we'll have better coverage than what we would have 

got had we had the old program this year, which was what we 

were going to get, not the '91 program which never has been a 

possibility.  It's always been the old program with the '92 

numbers in it. 

 

And therefore I think that there is no lessening of coverage in 

those areas.  And again I'll have to repeat that we acknowledge 

last year's GRIP was not adequate, this year's GRIP is not 

adequate for drought situations -- federal government has 

acknowledged that, and we have been pressing the federal 

government to come up with some disaster relief. 

 

And if you would help us instead of voting against the 

resolutions when we're calling for federal government aid to 

force disaster relief -- just because there was no drought at that 

time, I think, Mr. Speaker -- that that would help us to 

accomplish what we need, some money for farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the minister of Crop 

Insurance to be on record here now because he just said that 

prices are lower and under '92 GRIP there's going to be a big 

pay-out.  Well I want him to be on record so all of his MLAs 

from Kinistino, Nipawin, Shellbrook, Redberry and the 

north-east, north central, and north-west area will know, that 

under the '92 program, you're saying that if you have a crop 

which is pretty good, you're also going to get a payment 

because you've got prices pretty low.  And if you don't have a 

crop, you're obviously going to be out all that money and 

you're not going to get as much money as if you did have a 

crop. 

 

So you're going to have a very, very serious imbalance for 

those that have no crop and no money.  They're going to get 

less money than those that have a big crop because it's based on 

revenue and prices. 

 

Do you want to acknowledge that today in this legislature and 

acknowledge that Hartley Furtan is right -- that is under the 

1992 GRIP a drought is a disaster in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, a drought in this 

province is always a disaster.  I think the member opposite 

does not fully understand the '92 GRIP program, or the '91 

program either for that matter.  That if you lose your crop 

under the new GRIP program, you will get crop insurance up to 

80 per cent at market value.  Plus if prices are low, you will get 

the price insurance, which the new GRIP now is, and you will 

get the money and as much money as you would have under 

the old program. 

 

Now if you don't understand that, you should maybe read 

the changes to the program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Britton. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well we've had 

since I was speaking here at 1 o'clock on Friday . . . my closing 

half hour remarks were talking about the front-benchers in this 

House, the senior members, the member from Churchill 

Downs, the Minister of Finance, the member from the North, 

the Minister of Finance, then the Premier.  And I asked them 

very sincerely to think it over over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, 

to think it over very carefully and come into this House and 

stand to their feet and speak on this motion. 

 

We had the Minister of Justice.  He's maybe not as senior as 

some of the members, but he's on his second term.  And he's a 

very knowledgeable man, and he must know, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is absolutely a Bill that is wrong for people in 

Saskatchewan.  This motion is wrong.  He knows that it's 

wrong, and I challenge him, as I did on Friday, to ask the elite 

members of the caucus or of the government to stand to their 

feet and say where they stand. 

 

I'd like them to stand up and say that we have a GRIP Bill that 

we're trying to get through the legislature, and we're having 

trouble.  And we have to get it to the court, so we can save 

paying the farmers so much money.  So they take it to the 

Rules Committee.  It goes to the Rules Committee and back 

here to be able to get what they are wanting, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is to not have to pay the farmers so much money. 

 

So I asked very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, very sincerely that the 

now Premier and the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 

Justice, the House Leader, and the deputy minister of Finance 

that they will stand up in this House and say this is right and 

proper.  I asked them if they would go home on the weekend.   

I asked many of the members here if they'd go home on the 

weekend and talk to their people and say to them the facts.  Just 

don't say what isn't happening here.  Say what is happening, 

that we have introduced a rules motion in this House to stop 

bell-ringing so we then can have a GRIP Bill so we pay the 

farmers less money and see if they agree.  And not one will 

stand to their feet.  There isn't one member will stand to their 

feet and say that that's what they did on the weekend. 

 

But if they did and got the answer that I know they . . . I'm sure 

they received, as I did, then they won't be standing to 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

their feet.  But in case that they did, and they're sure what 

they're doing, absolutely certain, they know that they're on the 

right track.  They know that it's right to do . . . the first time in 

the history of the Commonwealth, first time in history, to 

legislate a Bill through the Rules Committee that has never 

happened in England, that's never happened in the 

Commonwealth.  I'm sure that these people will stand to their 

feet and defend it.  If they can't stand up and defend it, how can 

they be so sure they're right? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spent a lot of time on the weekend talking to as 

many people as I possibly could, and I even phoned out of the 

constituency to talk to key people.  And I'm telling you, this is 

a serious impasse we're at here.  I asked sincerely on Friday if 

my House Leader and the Government House Leader, the 

government whips will get together, and they will try to solve 

this impasse why we are speaking in this House. 

 

Because as sure as I'm standing here, we all know -- the media 

knows and all Saskatchewan know -- that it's a straight 

filibuster.  That's all we're doing.  But our motive is to try to let 

people know out there what's going on so cooler heads -- so 

cooler heads, Mr. Speaker -- will be able to sit down and use 

their heads and come up with some way to solve this impasse.  

They must come up with some better way.  There must be a 

better way to get a Bill through the legislature other than using 

the Rules Committee for that procedure.  That is wrong, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is wrong to use the Rules Committee. 

 

When the Rules Committee changes their rules . . . we tried to 

change it in 1989.  The members opposite over there had every 

reason in the world why it was not right.  We couldn't get an 

agreement, Mr. Speaker.  We weren't able to get an all-party 

agreement at that time, and so we had to drop it.  But I'm sure 

that these people would do the same thing. 

 

But the Minister of Agriculture's made the biggest blunder of 

any minister has ever made in the history of this province by 

trying to force GRIP upon farmers without that letter going out 

prior to March 15.  He knows it.  His ministers are covering up 

for him.  Not one of them will stand up and say, the reason why 

we're at the Rules Committee and we're into this here impasse . 

. . the deputy minister of Finance has to stand to his feet and 

bail out the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

(1415) 

 

The Minister of Agriculture said to Hartley Furtan and his 

committee, well don't worry about it.  If I don't get the letter 

out prior to the 15th, there's ways to work around it.  He has 

said that.  Now they're trying to work around it. 

 

We should not be here.  There's no reason we should be sitting 

here . . . standing here in this House and wasting the time we're 

wasting.  We are wasting taxpayers' money, Mr. Speaker.  We 

are doing it.  But don't blame the opposition for it.  Blame the 

government.  Blame the government why we're doing it 

because they know that we should be talking about important 

Bills instead of the Rules Committee.  We should be talking 

about some of the important Bills for farmers that is before this 

House, 

that is before the House. 

 

They have a lease program that we may or may not be 

supporting.  In generalities we likely will because it was one of 

our formats in the last election -- lease to own.  But at least we 

need to be discussing it and getting it done. 

 

But no, this House is held up for ransom by the Rules 

Committee.  It's held up for ransom because the Rules 

Committee says we have to control this here bunch of Tories 

and control Saskatchewan farmers by the Rules Committee to 

stop the bell-ringing so they can introduce their GRIP Bill.  

And we're not going to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have 10 people on this side of the House that I 

can assure you will still be talking when it comes 1 o'clock on 

Friday, because we have lots of clear speakers and amendments 

we can put in.  So you might as well all relax and just . . . either 

listen to us, and if you don't like listening to us, then go to your 

House Leader, go to your Premier, go to the Deputy Premier 

and go to the Deputy Minister of Finance.  They're the elite of 

this party.  They're the power-hungry people that I used to call 

pretty good individuals back in the late '70s when they were in 

government -- early '80s.  But something has gone wrong.  

Something has gone wrong in the last 11 years. 
 

And now they're using the Rules Committee.  I can't believe 

this, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would like to draw to the 

attention of the member from Kindersley and the member from 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster, that we have another speaker on the 

floor in case they weren't aware of that, and it's his privilege to 

speak and they'll have their turn. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that 

and I'm sure that when I'm through that they'll be taking their 

place in this Assembly and standing up and defending what this 

here government is doing.  I'm sure that . . . oh, I'm sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that they will. 
 

Because any . . . this is one of the biggest things that's ever 

happened in my life as an MLA, Mr. Speaker.  And this is on 

my 15th session, and I've never seen anything like this ever 

happen.  So when it does happen, when it is happening, surely 

they can stand to their feet and defend what they're doing.  

They must stand to their feet, and I'm sure they will, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm sure they will. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there was one member when he spoke, the 

member from Churchill Downs and then the member from 

Prince Albert, I'm not sure, Carlton I believe it is.  Prince 

Albert Carlton; when he spoke the other day in the House, they 

seemed to blaming this impasse on the Tories.  They were 

blaming at us.  They go out to the press and they blame it onto 

us.  How can it possibly . . . how could it possibly be our fault 

that we're in this position? 
 

It isn't us that made the blunder, Mr. Speaker, that didn't deal 

with the farmers right last winter.  It isn't us, the Tory 

government or the Tory opposition that let the farmers start 

planting in the end of March, the first part of April under the 

'91 GRIP, and now have to deal . . . and borrowed the money 

and had to borrow their money, and now they have to be 

pushed a '92 GRIP upon them. 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

It's not us that caused this problem -- it's them.  And they're the 

ones that didn't know how to get out of it, and it was brought 

up at the Rules Committee, how do we handle this?  So they try 

to camouflage it through the ringing of the bells.  We've got to 

stop the ringing of the bells, put a three-day hoist on it.  And 

we all know that three days is going no place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some statements that I want to just read 

into the record here, Mr. Speaker, if I may.  And it's pertaining 

to the . . . at what we're doing here.  Mr. Speaker, in addressing 

the amendment, a number of points need to be made.  This is 

very serious. 

 

First the government says the reason it needs to end 

bell-ringing is that the opposition cannot be trusted not to veto 

to everything they disagree with.  Now that's an awful 

statement for them to say.  It is a terrible statement. 

 

The member from Swift Current sits there and mumbles.  Why 

doesn't he stand up?  He's the moral man from the south-west.  

Why doesn't he stand up and be counted and say exactly what 

he believes?  Stand in this House and say retroactive legislation 

is good. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Let's vote and I'll stand. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You see, Mr. Speaker, that's the arrogance -- 

let's vote; let's don't stand up and talk.  Let's vote, he says.  

Let's vote. 

 

Well I'll tell you, that just shows that . . . I can't believe that a 

man like him is going to go along with the arrogance . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Let's get back on the 

topic.  All right? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can't help it.  

When I see this arrogance, I can't help it.  But I'm sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'll try to stick to the amendment. 

 

The amendment proposes that the Rules Committee reconsider 

the length of the suspension and the possibility of a public 

hearing phase.  And the point is this, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

government is worried about bell-ringing becoming a routine, 

they should understand that in fact a three-day suspension is far 

more likely to become a routine.  A three day can't help but 

become a routine. 

 

In fact I would say that if this rule change goes ahead, 

three-day suspensions will become the normal process, just as 

there is a two-day notice requirement now.  Effectively, all the 

government proposes is to insert another period of notice.  Just 

as the opposition agreed to extend the time allowed for replies 

to written questions from two to five days, adding three days, 

now the government is saying it is equally willing to extend the 

notice of motions period from two days to five days, or three 

extra days.  Now is that being fair to the opposition and to the 

people that oppose controversial Bills in this province? 

 

Some of the members have said there's nothing wrong 

with what we're doing and it's just . . . and the Tories are . . . I 

said a moment ago that they say blaming us for stopping and 

vetoing all Bills.  That's not correct.  And it's not correct of the 

government members either, Mr. Speaker.  Because, Mr. 

Speaker, in my 15 sessions that I've been here, I've only seen 

two real controversial Bills, and that's one in '89 and one now. 

 

And they had to have some mechanism.  And there has to be a 

better mechanism than the bells ringing.  I agree that we have 

to have a mechanism.  The Rules Committee must come up 

with a mechanism.  They must come up with a mechanism that 

this here House can go along with their regular working of the 

legislature, but there must be some extension to the three-day 

heist period because that's not fair.  You can't do anything in 

three days. 

 

You can tell . . . you can well understand that it will become 

routine very quickly when they use the three-day suspension, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let us just look at the order paper to compare what did happen 

here -- what would have happened under a three-day 

suspension and what would happen under a longer suspension 

accompanied by public hearings.  The whites of last Friday can 

be looked at as the record which incidentally reflects a record 

of co-operation, co-operation with which the official opposition 

conducts itself. 

 

Our conduct is, Mr. Speaker . . . but we will get into that in a 

bit.  Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Churchill Downs 

stated on July 7, 1992 when he introduced this motion that: 

"We (meaning the NDP government) have no assurance . . . 

that this (meaning bell-ringing) won't be used again and again." 

Hansard, July 7, 1992, page 1276. 

 

And that similar argument is why they, the government, says it 

must limit a suspension to three days. 

 

Well, Mr. Member from Churchill Downs, there have been 

many pieces of legislation put forward in this House that we 

have not agreed with.  Did we ring the bells?  No, we did not. 

 

Let me make my point.  I'm going to refer to the whites of July 

3.  I see recorded on the whites that on May 13, 1992, Bill No. 

5, An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act . . . not to create 

confusion, I am referring to the Votes and Proceedings dated 

July 3, 1992 which contained within them the notation on An 

Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act as having received first 

reading on May 13, 1992. 

 

On that day Bill 1 passed first reading.  It passed without 

incident.  Did we ring the bells?  No, we did not ring the bells.  

Was there a great shouting and movement around the 

Chamber?  No, there wasn't, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill was 

introduced very swiftly, no problem; there was no problem, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if there had been in place the proposed three-day 

suspension, what would have happened? Whether we're in 

opposition or if they're in opposition, what would have 

happened? 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

Well probably on that Bill, it would have been used at first 

reading stage because we didn't have any forewarning of what 

would be in the Bill.  Nobody knew what was going to be in it, 

so that would be the time to use it, whether it's a good Bill or a 

bad Bill.  It may be a Bill this province needs, and it'd be a Bill 

that we agree with.  But we wouldn't know, so we'd probably 

hoist it for three days.  So no three-day suspension would have 

been declared if we didn't have the new ruling they're talking 

about. 

 

By the same token, if there were instead a 60 or even a 30-day 

suspension period, it would assuredly not have been used at 

that stage.  You'd never use it if you know you had 30 days or 

whatever the day could be that could be agreed upon.  And we 

know that this could easily have happened.  We know that if 

the Rules Committee could have very, very easily have come 

up with agreement on 20 days, 30 days, 40 days, whatever, 

even 20, whatever it be.  They could have come up with it. 

 

But three days is not long enough to know what's happening 

when a Bill is being tabled in this House.  So you'd use your 

three-day heist right there in the first reading.  A prolonged 

suspension is very serious stuff in treating public hearings, a 

very big step.  You must have this mechanism so you can get 

some public input -- not quite as dramatic or serious as ringing 

the bells for a prolonged period, particularly since it only 

affects one Bill, and it does not stop the Assembly from 

operating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the cooler heads of this Assembly, the 

members in the front row and many back-benchers . . . I look 

around me and I see some back-benchers that are . . . I talk to 

them daily here.  And there's some good heads, good thinkers.  

But they're not getting their word through.  I'm sure they're 

going to their caucus, and I'm sure they're saying to the caucus, 

hey, this is not even a democratic thing we're doing.  This is not 

even morally right. 

 

But the front row, Mr. Speaker, they seem to be completely in 

control.  It's not hard to pick up what the members really think 

when you get talking to them one on one.  They're worried 

about this because . . . especially in the rural seats.  They're just 

as normal as the members . . . constituents from Arm River and 

Thunder Creek and seats I'm involved in -- Rosetown-Elrose 

and Last Mountain-Touchwood, Humboldt, Watrous-Humboldt 

area, Kinistino.  And I talk to people in these areas and they're 

all the same.  So that means their members must be getting 

notified constantly. 

 

If I'm getting it constantly . . . Like I had an individual ask me 

yesterday -- I was at an 80th birthday party in Davidson, Mr. 

Speaker -- and this individual asked me, do you get paid your 

salary when the bells are ringing?  And I said, we get paid our 

MLA salary for our constituency work and other government 

work, but our work for a session is $155 a day per diem, and 

we don't get that.  Good.  Keep the bells ringing. 

 

And that's normally what the people think out there.  And we're 

not getting paid.  We don't hold up the province for ransom 

when the bells ring twice for extended time in the last 15 years 

-- 17 days in 1989 and 11 sitting days in 1992.  That's not 

holding the province up for ransom.  That's trying to get the 

people out in Saskatchewan, get 

the word to them.  We're trying to get the word to them at every 

day that goes on, every day that we as opposition members 

speak here.  And we get calls and we're talking.  The word is 

getting out there. 

 

But if only you people, if only the members opposite would try 

to get the word out to their constituents, then you could get the 

word back to the upper echelon of the front row and say stop it; 

it's gone far enough; you must stop it.  I'm sure that the member 

from Riversdale, the now Premier, would never, ever go 

against his entire caucus.  I'm sure he wouldn't do that.  I know 

that there's some awful left-wing socialists around him but he's 

kind of a down-the-centre . . . he was an individual, Mr. 

Speaker, that was always considered to be kind of the middle 

of the road and I think that he would overrule on this Rules 

Committee and on this GRIP Bill.  I think that he would 

overrule if the back-benchers would get the message to him. 

 

(1430) 

 

And I again, I again plead with you.  If you didn't do it on the 

weekend, and if you did, for goodness sakes, stand up this 

week and be counted.  And I'm sure that they will.  I'm hoping 

that they will, that they'll be in their caucus tomorrow or 

whenever it goes on that you'll be talking about, is this right?  

Is this right what we're doing, to use the Rules Committee to 

get a Bill to the courts that will likely, when it hits the Supreme 

Court of Canada, be ruled unconstitutional. 

 

See that's the worry about this here Bill, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

the whole problem that the people are worried about out there, 

legislating this here letter that they're supposed to have got in 

March 15, that is it constitutional?  You can make this here to 

the Rules Committee and through this Chamber you can make 

it provincial law that this is a legal Bill.  And they, the judges 

may have to rule . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind the member 

that he has already spoken on the main motion.  He's now 

speaking on the amendment.  Although I said it's concurrent, 

the member must not repeat what he has said in the main 

motion and I would want to direct him to get to the 

amendment, please. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll go ahead with 

these written statements I have here. 

 

It would be a serious thing to do so and you can be assured, 

Mr. Speaker, that we would not have exercised the right to 

suspend on Bill 5.  And on May 21, 1992, Bill No. 5, An Act to 

amend The Wascana Centre Act passed second reading.  But 

by that time we did not know what was in the Bill.  We had a 

chance to review the Bill and could have made a determination 

of what to do with it.  And the official opposition did not stand 

in the way of this piece of legislation.  We did not like all this 

Bill contains, Mr. Speaker, but we certainly didn't walk out of 

the House and let the bells ring.  How many times has that 

happened?  It just doesn't happen very often.  It's got to be 

something that's serious before any responsible members will 

do that. 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

We are responsible; therefore we act responsible.  But now, ask 

if the three-day suspension were in place, what would have 

happened? 

 

Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that on second reading of 

an important Bill to the people of Saskatchewan it is very likely 

indeed that we would have asked the Bill be delayed from a 

second reading for three days to give the public a chance to 

gather their thoughts on the Bill.  We almost certainly would 

have used such a small and insignificant measure in the public 

interest. 

 

So on the second reading of Bill 5, the three-day suspension 

would have been invoked, and it would have been used to give 

the public their first chance to get more than a passing glance at 

the Bill before it was debated in principle. The debate in 

principle, being the second reading stage debate, gives the 

public a chance to know what is going on before the process 

becomes irrevocably committed to passage. 

 

So Bill 5 would have been the subject of a three-day 

suspension at second reading.  Now what would have happened 

if a 60-day suspension . . . or we can say, Mr. Speaker, a 20 or 

30, whatever.  But let's just use the example of a 60-day 

suspension with public hearings as the alternative.  What would 

the opposition have done then? 

 

Let's say the government was over here when the energy Bill 

was such a serious thing.  Let's say they were over here then.  

What would have happened if a 60-day suspension with the 

public hearings was the alternative?  What would the 

opposition have done then?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we would not 

have triggered the process on Bill 5.  We would not have done 

that because it would not have been reasonable in those 

circumstances.  There were no extremely basic issues at stake, 

and the will of the people was reasonably clear on the subject 

of the Bill, certainly clear enough that what further needed to 

be brought out could be brought out in a second reading debate 

itself.  So it wouldn't be necessary. 

 

So a long suspension period would not have been used, would 

not have been triggered on Bill 5.  They never would have used 

that 30 or 40 or 20 days, Mr. Speaker.  It just wouldn't happen.  

There'd be no sense to it whatsoever. 

 

Just as I have said before, the Bill that came through the House, 

Bill 13 and 14, that was the adoption Bill and the child care 

Act.  We went on for a long time, Mr. Speaker, and it didn't 

have to be dealt with under the rules.  But it was at least several 

weeks.  And it was just the minister and myself not 

understanding.  When she finally stood to her feet and I got her 

to answer some questions and I apologized for the delay and let 

the Bill just go like that.  We went through just . . . they were 

gone in 15 minutes, soon as I got her to explain a few things 

about that Bill. 

 

So if the government just stands up, brings a Bill in, and stands 

up and says this is what the bottom line is, this is what it means 

-- there's be no problem on this side of the House.  But if it's a 

Bill like the Bill that we're talking about here, this GRIP Bill, 

naturally we're going to fight it with every bit of power we 

have in it because the people in 

Saskatchewan don't want it. 

 

A three-day suspension with regard to Bill 5 would not have 

accomplished what the Rules Committee intended.  The Rules 

Committee intended a suspension to serve as a replacement for 

a prolonged bell-ringing.  We understand that.  That's what the 

suspension, three-day suspension means, for a prolonged 

bell-ringing, which I've only known of two.  We've had some 

more where we've had a few hours, but I can't remember any 

long, long bell-ringing in this House in my 14 years.  But it's 

also clear from our examination of the process as it would 

affect Bill 5 that the intention of the committee would not and 

will not be served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at the next example.  And we need to 

be very comprehensive in our examination of this amendment.  

We need to be very, very comprehensive in examining the 

cases we have experience with, because the government's entire 

argument rests on the fact that if there's more than a three-day 

suspension, it would become routine; that the opposition would 

use a prolonged suspension without discretion. 

 

So we must be comprehensive and look at each instance to see 

what would have happened under three days, what happened 

under the existing rules, and what would happen if the 

committee reconsidered and expanded the time to some longer 

period -- perhaps 45 days, perhaps 60, perhaps 30, or whatever. 

 

So if we return to look at our Votes and Proceedings -- what is 

frequently referred to as the whites -- if we look back into the 

whites for July 7, 1992, we can examine the next example.  I 

stand corrected, Mr. Speaker.  It is actually the Votes and 

Proceedings for July 3, '92, not July 7.  I'm sorry.  It's July 3, 

'92. 

 

So if we look to the whites for that day, we find the next 

example.  On May 13, '92, Bill No. 6, An Act to amend The 

Meewasin Valley Authority Act, passed first reading.  It passed 

first reading without any hesitation on the part of the 

opposition.  There was no problem.  But if the three-day 

suspension is there, it would have taken another three days. 

 

Under the current rules, the procedures this Bill was considered 

next on . . . this is another one of the member from Melfort's 

Bill.  I ask the member from Melfort:  did we ring the bells?  

We did not ring the bells on this Act to amend The Meewasin 

Valley Authority Act.  We did not ring the bells, and Bill 6 

received first reading without any disruption of any kind.  It 

was brought into the Assembly and it received first reading as 

it is recorded in the Votes and Proceedings. 

 

We take bell-ringing seriously and would never abuse it.  I 

think any responsible member in this House would take 

bell-ringing seriously.  I know that the members opposite in 

1989 took it seriously.  And we definitely have taken it 

seriously now. 

 

It's not something that somebody . . . You might let it ring for 

an hour or two or whatever till you gather your thoughts and 

make a few phone calls and your caucus talks it over.  That's 

different, Mr. Speaker.  But going out 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

and having extended bell-ringing is not a habit that I'm sure 

that responsible members would ever do. 

 

On May 12, 1992, another of the Environment minister's Bills 

was considered.  An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act passed first reading and I'm 

sure everybody recalls this.  On July 3, 1992, Bill 3, An Act to 

amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act 

passed second reading. 

 

Bill 4, An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act 

passed first reading on May 13, '92.  On May 21, 1992, An Act 

to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act passed second 

reading.  On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The Wakamow 

Valley Authority Act went into committee.  On May 25, 1992, 

An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act passed 

third reading.  On June 3, 1992, Royal Assent was given to the 

Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 

 

Bill 7, An Act to amend The Assessment Management Agency 

Act passed first reading on May 13.  On July 3, '92, An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act passed 

second reading. 

 

Bill 8, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

passed first reading on May 13, 1992.  On May 21, 1992, An 

Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act passed 

second reading.  On May 25, 1992, An Act to amend The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act went into committee.  On May 

25, 1992, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've listened very carefully to 

what the member is saying.  I fail to see how he is relating 

when the various Acts passed in the legislature has anything to 

do with the motion or the amendment that is before us.  And 

unless the member connects it with the motion that is before us, 

I will call him out of order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it is very, very clear that all 

these here Acts that I'm talking about here -- and I said at the 

beginning if you go back and read my words at the beginning, 

Mr. Speaker -- that if we use the three-day suspension on all 

these little Acts, the three-day suspension is what we're talking 

about, if we had of used them at all it would have taken three 

days longer on every one of them.  And so, Mr. Speaker, that's 

what's being talked about.  That's what our amendment was, to 

go back to the Rules Committee and go out for public hearings 

on these here important Bills. 

 

The Speaker: -- I just want to remind the member that that's a 

good point.  But to read when all these Acts are passed each 

day has absolutely no relevance to the amendment that is 

before us.  Your point on suspension, that's fair enough.  But to 

read when each . . . on the date that each one of these had 

passed each stage in the House has no relevance to the motion 

that is before us.  And I want the member to get back to the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, is it in . . . if I went 

through each Act and take each one back to what could have 

happened throughout the province over three days, would that 

be in order, Mr. Speaker? 

The Speaker: -- I have no intention of debating with the 

member, if he wishes to make a debate.  If I find him out of 

order, I will so rule. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I wasn't asking for a debate 

with you; I was just asking if that would be in order for me to 

take each one of these Acts and say that we could have taken 

those out and talked about the three-day suspension.  Would 

that have been in order, Mr. Speaker?  Because if it's not, I 

won't continue. 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member wishes to speak, he's allowed to 

speak. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, we have quite a few of those 

Bills here.  We can for now just put them aside.  That's not a 

problem, because I can bring them back and go through them 

one by one, Mr. Speaker.  But I don't need to do it right at this 

time.  And we can definitely connect them with the Rules 

Committee and what could have happened with these Bills, 

because it's very, very important to the record that these Bills 

did go out, that we didn't hold these Bill up, that they did go 

through. 

 

But in the mean time, Mr. Speaker, let's just move to some 

quotes then.  Let's just do that.  There's some quotes that I want 

to put on the record, made by the members opposite.  We can 

do that now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from . . . on June 9, 1989, the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University.  Here's a quote from him out 

of Hansard: 

 

 This government has an agenda . . . This government wants 

to bulldoze ahead . . . willy-nilly and ignore public 

opinion and ignore the democratic process. 

 

Now if he can say that in those days, well I wonder why he 

didn't stand up today three years later and explain why he's got 

such a turn around now.  I wonder why the member could say 

such a thing then and not stand to his feet and apologize for 

that and say, I've changed my mind. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 And I think that is beginning to be a damning indictment of 

this government, that it rejects a democratic process 

. . . 

 

Well that's what we've been saying here for nearly a week, that 

this government is bypassing the democratic process. That's 

exactly . . . I agree with exactly what this member says from 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University.  I agree exactly, that it 

rejects the democratic process.  And that's what we've been 

saying to you. 

 

And that's why in '89 that we didn't get our impasse solved 

then.  We had to drop it because we weren't getting an all-party 

agreement.  And unless you get an all-party agreement at the 

Rules Committee, this process is not going to work.  We have 

to have something in that manner that we all agree upon. 

 

He goes on to say: 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

. . . the government has an agenda to ignore the legislative 

process . . . and to, as a consequence, put forth a motion to 

muzzle the opposition, to muzzle the people of this province, 

and to change the rules for bell-ringing. 

 

(1445) 

 

Well now isn't that exactly, Mr. Speaker, what the members 

opposite are doing today?  That's exactly what they're doing to 

us. 

 

The government (they have) an agenda to ignore the 

legislative process and . . . as a consequence, put forth a 

motion to muzzle the opposition, to muzzle the people of 

this province, and to change the rules for bell-ringing. 

 

. . . it must have a bell-ringing motion that limits 

bell-ringing so that it can do what it pleases against the 

will of public opinion, against overwhelming sentiment 

of public opinion. 

 

It is a tool to the government to muzzle the opposition. 

 

He continues, the member continues: 

 

. . . I say, Mr. Speaker, that this issue of bell-ringing is 

bogus and silly for the overwhelming majority of (the 

people of the province of) Saskatchewan . . . 

 

That's what they said in '89.  They're the ones that said it, Mr. 

Speaker. They're the ones that said it, that "bell-ringing is 

bogus and silly for the overwhelming majority of (the) 

Saskatchewan people . . ."  They said it; we didn't say it.  But 

stand to your feet now and repeat it and say it now. 

 

Say that you're sorry for saying these words; that you heard 

wrong from Saskatchewan; that we weren't listening in 1989.  

We were wrong when we brought in 100,000 petitions.  We 

were wrong.  We misled the people.  That we want to now 

change our mind and say, this is the way we believe, we want 

to walk over you and be arrogant and just walk right over 

Saskatchewan people.  Be truthful and stand up and be 

counted. 

 

Then he goes on: 

 

And the question might well be asked then, of people 

across the province, what does the particular motion by the 

hon. member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, 

what does this particular motion, this proposal to change 

the rules, do to democracy?  What does it do for the people 

of the province? 

 

Keeping in mind, Mr. Speaker this is not us speaking, this is 

the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, June 9, 1989.  Is he 

going to stand to his feet and correct this whole statement here? 

 

Does it do a service or does it do a disservice to the people 

of the province?  Is it a genuine service to practical 

democracy and to facilitate democratic 

interaction in the province outside of this Assembly?  And 

I think that's one of the hallmarks of scrutiny that this 

legislation has to bear.  It isn't a question of whether it 

serves simply the democratic process here in the 

Assembly, but we have to ask ourselves, does it do 

genuine service to the practice of (the) democracy outside 

of this Assembly. 

 

And that's what I say to these people today, Mr. Speaker.  Are 

we doing a duty and a proper practice to the democracy, to the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan?  These people sit with 

their heads down, Mr. Speaker.  They won't look up.  They're 

very quiet.  They just know what they're doing is wrong.  And 

if anybody does look up and smile, for goodness sake, stand to 

your feet and speak. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is continued on from the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in terms as forceful as I 

can that the present rule that we have for this Assembly 

guarantees -- guarantees the democratic process outside of 

this Assembly.  And that's why we on this side of the 

House, as New Democrats, are so insistent that this rule 

change be opposed. 

 

What's caused the turn around, Mr. Speaker?  What has caused 

the turn around?  Why can't one head look up at me -- one head 

-- and be proud of what they're done?  What's happened to the 

moral person from Nipawin?  Why can't he look me in the face 

and look the Speaker in the face and say that these people were 

wrong in 1989?  That we believe it is right to be arrogant and 

walk right over Saskatchewan people?  Where are they?  They 

can't be counted. 

 

Where is the minister from Rosetown, the Minister of 

Agriculture?  The person that caused all this problem.  The 

person that bungled in the GRIP program and had to get his 

front row to come and bail him out.  He's the one that caused 

all this problem.  And they know they have to cover for him, 

and they won't do it. 

 

And he continues to say: 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in terms as forceful as I 

can that the present rule that we have for this Assembly . . 

. 

 

I've already said that, Mr. Speaker.  I've got to jump down here. 

 

. . . that's why we on this side of the House, (and I want to 

repeat it) as New Democrats, are so insistent that this rule 

change be opposed. 

 

And in closing, for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland.  

Somebody said, is there any preachers over there?  Yes, there 

is.  There's several preachers and there's a lot of good, moral 

people over there, but they won't stand up and be counted. 

 

 It's not without scorn for the people of  



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

Saskatchewan that a government would say, there's no 

need for the bells to ring more than an hour.  That will do 

quite well; that will suit our purposes; that will serve us 

quite conveniently to have the bells ringing for only one 

hour.  It will present only one minor inconvenience, and 

then we can get on with doing what we bloody well 

choose. 

 

That's his thoughts on this thing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask that member, for goodness sakes, 

stand to his feet and put it on the record that he was wrong in 

'89, or he was right in '89 and wrong now. 

 

I think -- and I've said it many times, Mr. Speaker -- that it's the 

back-benchers, the people like this gentleman right here, the 

man from Saskatoon Sutherland, him and about 25 more that 

need to stand up and be counted and tell the front row, the 

upper echelon, exactly where it's at. 

 

Tell them, and see if the member from Riversdale will listen.  

Because I said before, if you take your message to it, if you got 

the fortitude to stand up, take the message to him, he will 

change his mind. 

 

Now I have a quote, Mr. Speaker, from the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser.  These are some very interesting ones.  

And I'm sure not going to get into very many of his because he 

went on, I think, 16 hours -- 15 or 16 hours.  But I have a small 

page of quotes here.  The member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

states: 

 

We're debating this motion, not because it interfered with 

the government's plans but because the government is 

hurting.  And it's hurting over the public response more 

than anything else. 

 

And when we consider these kinds of motions having to 

do with the conduct of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to put them into their context as how 

they serve the democratic process, and most importantly, 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There's the member from Moose Jaw Palliser said the most 

important thing is the people of Saskatchewan.  How could he 

forget so quickly?  How could he just up and just say well, 

members, my constituents from Moose Jaw Palliser, I have 

forgot you.  I've been dictated to by the upper echelon of the 

party.  I've been dictated to by the Deputy Premier and the 

Premier and the House Leader, the member from Elphinstone 

and the member from Churchill Downs.  He has dictated to me 

to take the message back to Moose Jaw that we must stand up 

against farmers and make sure they do not get paid their GRIP 

money so there's maybe more people for you people in Moose 

Jaw.  He continues to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

If there's anything that I know about rules of the game, Mr. 

Speaker, there's a very clear rule and that's this: you don't 

change the rule in the middle of the game. 

 

We've been arguing that here for a week, Mr. Speaker. 

Nobody worried about it last fall or during the winter meetings 

when the Rules Committee met.  Nobody thought that we had 

to change it in the middle of the game, that we had to work 

something out over this . . . can't get it done before the session.  

We got to do it before the next session.  Nobody would ever 

suggest that it's appropriate to change rules in the middle of the 

game. 

 

Well now what happened to the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser?  He wants to change the rule in the middle of the 

game now.  He said change them.  Don't worry about the 

democratic process; don't worry about it.  He said: "let's 

consider", the member from Moose Jaw Palliser goes on to say: 

 

 Let's consider, let's consider, Mr. Speaker . . . we're into the 

ball season, and the Toronto Blue Jays are playing ball in 

here in Saskatchewan last week. 

 

And he goes on to talk about the Blue Jays and a game and 

who won and what not.  I'm not going to continue that one, Mr. 

Speaker, because I had that quote once before and I just bring 

you the highlights and I won't repeat it, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry, 

I didn't realize it was the same quote until I got into it. 

 

Then he goes on to say . . . I'm going to move on.  I got so 

many quotes here that I'm going to move on to another one 

here.  Then when I finish this quote I've got a statement that I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to be making a statement 

to the House.  This is from the member from Humboldt: 

 

 When we talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion before 

us to limit the number of hours the bells can ring in this 

legislature, to limit the effectiveness of the official 

opposition, we have no option but to stand up, each one of us, 

and voice our opinion on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan to this government's high-handed, arrogant, 

undemocratic method of running government. 

 

Now doesn't that bother a lot of people in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that these are quotes from the members of 1989 

talking about the arrogant government that was trying to stop 

the ringing of the bells.  But we didn't get so arrogant as you 

people.  We didn't get arrogant.  What we did is, when we 

couldn't get an agreement in the Rules Committee, we pulled it.  

And these people can't pull it and they won't pull it, because it's 

the only way they can take the money away from the farmers 

on the GRIP Bill. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . I'm not doing this for my own political purpose; I'm doing 

it because the people of Saskatchewan, the feeling that we 

(must) have for the people of Saskatchewan must be heard, 

their concerns must be heard. 

 

May 29, 1989, Hansard. 

 

Now I'm wondering what the people at Humboldt, Watrous, 

would think.  When I was up there last week in 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

the Watrous pool and I hear the people up there complaining, 

what's going on, I wonder if they would think, if I sent a 

mail-out, Mr. Speaker, to what their member said in 1989 about 

this arrogant government.  And now it's turned around and 

they're the arrogant government. 

 

Why is the government trying to stymie the whole process by 

limiting bell-ringing?  That's the questions he asked.  But I 

want him to stand to his feet -- like I do the Premier of this 

province and the Deputy Premier -- stand up to say why you're 

doing it.  Mr. Speaker, I want the Deputy Premier to stand to 

his feet and tell us that we cannot afford to pay out the farmers.  

I want him to do that, and I'm sure he will do that.  Give us the 

figures.  It's going to come . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member may well like to 

talk about that topic, but that's not before this Assembly.  And I 

ask the member to get back to the amendment that is before the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That's no 

problem, because I've got a lot of other things to talk about. 

 

But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the present rule, the present rule 

in this legislature, gives the opposition the opportunity to 

engage the people in an exercise known as democracy. 

 

May 29, 1989, Hansard: 

 

Not only will this motion to limit the length of the time 

that the bells ring, not only will it muzzle the opposition, 

an opposition who, like I said, gave the people the 

opportunity to speak, but it will also muzzle the people of 

this province, because if we have to depend on the media, 

we have to depend on general elections, what opportunity 

do the people of this province have to speak in between 

elections and if the media don't pick up their cause?  That 

is the role of the official opposition. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

. . . the government is attempting to muzzle the people of 

Saskatchewan by limiting the length of the time the bells 

can ring. 

 

Well of course we did.  We tried, but we didn't try to muzzle 

Saskatchewan people.  We tried to bring it to a Rules 

Committee.  We couldn't get an all-party agreement, so we 

dropped it.  And that was in Hansard, May 29, 1989. 

 

The member from Humboldt goes on to say: 

 

And what we have here, Mr. Speaker, with this 

bell-ringing motion, I think, is a total disrespect for this 

institution. 

 

A total disrespect for this institution.  How many people will 

stand up and say what you people are doing is a total disrespect 

for this institution.  You must believe it because you said it.  

Every last one of you that spoke, and most of 

them did, in all the days that they filibustered, this here 26 

members, and most of them spoke -- some of them for 10, 12 

hours; one for 15 I believe -- and they all said it's a total 

disrespect for democracy. 

 

Now what are they going to say?  What are they going to say?  

Don't tell us we're wrong on what we're doing.  Rule changes in 

this House are traditionally done with the consensus of both 

parties.  They said that.  Both parties.  They're saying, 

everybody over there knows that we should have a full 

agreement.  This can't work if you're going to just choke it 

down Saskatchewan's throat, choke it down the Liberal Party 

and the Conservative Party and said, we the Gestapo say this is 

the way it's going to be. 

 

You can't get away with it.  The people of Saskatchewan will 

not let you get away with it.  You'll never get away with it.  As 

I said before and I've said in this House and I'll say it again, 

that if you want to take a look at what's happening in this Rules 

Committee, it used to be when I sat there and looked at that 

Rules Committee back in '78 it was a pretty good bunch of 

people.  You could look around and see some socialists, you 

could see some Fabian socialists, you could see some 

capitalists.  Well now when you see things that can happen 

here in Saskatchewan that wouldn't be allowed to happen in 

Russia today . . . No way. 

 

This government, first of all they said they were going to bring 

in the rule of bell-ringing motion to limit the number of hours.  

And then they said, well maybe we should do it the right way.  

Maybe we should ask the opposition to be a part of this. 

 

We on this government side, we should have the opposition.  

So we said and we discussed and we discussed and we couldn't 

come to settle the impasse and so it was dropped. 

 

Then the member from Humboldt goes on to say: 

 

 So that little procedure went forward, and we have members 

from the government side, and members from the opposition, 

getting together and talking about some of the changes that 

could be made to the rules, some positive changes, a number 

then that we could bring forward and help this democratic 

institution become a better institution. 

 

(1500) 

 

And that was okay.  But what happened just a few days ago, so 

what they said is that we're not going to make this democratic 

process work.  They said that.  We're not going to make this 

democratic process work. 

 

Well that's exactly . . . this statement is the only one that's 

correct.  That's what they're saying today -- we're not going to 

let the democratic process work.  They don't believe in the 

democratic process.  We're going to change our minds, they 

said.  We're going to change our minds and we're going to go 

ahead and change the bell-ringing for one objective, and that is 

because they do not want anything to stop the procedure of this 

Bill to pass.  May 29, 1989. 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, we have been talking here last Tuesday for six or 

seven hours.  We talked here on Wednesday for two and a half 

hours, Thursday for two and a half hours, Friday for two and a 

half hours.  And we know what we're standing here talking for, 

because we want the House Leader here, our House Leader and 

our whip and deputy whip, and perhaps the leaders should be 

involved with the leader, the Premier, and their House Leader 

and try to solve this impasse.  That's what's got to happen. 

 

But while this is going on . . . and I know there is talk going on.  

There's talk been going on in this legislature trying to solve this 

problem.  And so I suggested here last Friday that maybe we 

should be getting back to government work, getting back to the 

work of the government.  The reason why I suggested . . . 

because it was heckled from many, many areas and seats from 

that side of the House -- why don't you sit down, and let's get 

back to the government process. 

 

I'm suggesting, Mr. Speaker, I'm suggesting that perhaps we 

should not be sitting here talking hour after hour while our 

House Leaders . . . and I'm sure the Premier and our leader are 

going to get together.  They've had a little talk now.  I think 

they've talked several times.  And I think that if they could sit 

down, they had a good conversation.  And they both put some 

suggestions forth that may solve this here impasse we're in. 

 

But some how or other, before it even got back to the caucuses, 

we had this here Rules Committee send motion right to the 

House before either one of them could have got the message to 

the caucus.  So while this is happening . . . and I'm sure that the 

House Leader and now that . . . I understand that the House 

Leader is . . . I don't know whether he's away or what, Mr. 

Speaker, but he's . . . I understand that the deputy minister of 

Finance and our House Leader have been talking today.  So I'm 

going to make a motion, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to make a 

motion: 

 

 That this Assembly now proceed to Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member I think well knows that 

that motion cannot be made.  We have a motion and an 

amendment before the House right now, and you can't have two 

motions simultaneously before the House.  So I think that the 

member knows that that is out of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I wish this Assembly would get their 

rules and regulations correct because I asked this on Friday, 

and the Clerk talked to the Deputy Speaker and said it was 

definitely in order so . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Would the member let me have his motion.  

My apologies to the member.  That is a superseding motion, 

and therefore it is in order.  The member from Arm River has 

moved that the Assembly now proceed to the Committee of the 

Whole.  Before I put the question, I'd like to have one of the 

Clerks come.  I want to discuss with the Clerks . . . 

 

The question before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 

member from Arm River that the Assembly now 

proceed to the Committee of the Whole.  This is a 

non-debatable motion, so is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

The division bells rang from 3:06 p.m. until 3:32 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Britton 

Muirhead Toth 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd Haverstock 

Martens  

-- 11 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Teichrob Trew 

Shillington Draper 

Atkinson Sonntag 

Kowalsky Roy 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Calvert Renaud 

Murray  

-- 29 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave of the Assembly 

to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly two of my 

uncles who are visiting the legislature today, seated in the west 

gallery -- David Cline, who is a retired United Church minister, 

and Edwin Morgan, who is a retired archivist with the 

Provincial Archives here in Regina.  And they've come to 

witness the exciting proceedings in our Chamber and I know 

that they will enjoy them.  And I would ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- By leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like also to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to you 

and through you to introduce to the Assembly a constituent of 

mine, Dale Hassett, who is in the gallery behind us.  And he 

has come all the way from Leader, Saskatchewan, to discuss 

various matters that concern him in our constituency.  And I 

would appreciate it if you 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

would all join me in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

interesting to stand in my place right now and re-enter the 

debate on the motion and the amendment to the motion in light 

of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague just proposed a 

motion that would have allowed the government to move to 

government business and certainly allowed this Assembly to 

proceed with the workings of government. 

 

And I believe many members in this Assembly, both on the 

opposition side and the government side of the House, have 

indicated over the past number of weeks that they're more than 

willing to work and more than willing to enter the debate and 

more than willing to allow this Assembly to operate. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we go back not that long ago to a ruling in 

this Assembly that suggested the House move along and enter 

into the debate and enter into government business by giving 

the opportunity for the opposition and the government to put 

aside any Bills, contentious Bills, that would defer the normal 

process and the normal proceedings in this Assembly. 

 

It boggles my mind and I'm rather surprised, Mr. Speaker, that 

some of the members on the opposite . . . on the government 

side of the House would not have taken the opportunity this 

afternoon to enter into the debate on this issue in light of the 

fact that the debate back in 1989 regarding the question of the 

bell-ringing and regarding a number of changes to the rules and 

the changes that have been suggested through this motion and 

certainly through the amendment, many members did stand in 

this Assembly and take the time to voice their concerns about 

limitations that were proposed and would have been brought 

forward. 

 

I would also like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the motion that 

was presented by my colleague I think in today's paper, the 

feeling was in the media that a dispute was being worked on 

and certainly the parties . . . and I think I can indicate that the 

parties are all working towards an agreement and some kind of 

a solution to the stalemate that we have found ourselves in this 

Assembly. 

 

But as we work towards that stalemate, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think it would have been appropriate for the 

House to get along with the normal business of the Assembly 

as well.  And I would have expected, or I would have thought 

that members, government members and certainly ministers in 

this Assembly would have been more than willing and more 

than happy to get on with the proceedings of the House as far 

as the normal business so that we wouldn't delay the number of 

Bills that are still sitting on the order paper, delay passage of 

the Bills. 

And as I read it, to date 70 Bills have been introduced into this 

Assembly and only 20 have received third and final reading, 

which when you find that there are 50 Bills still before this 

Assembly, we realize that there are a number of days that we as 

members in this Assembly are going to have to spend in this 

Chamber debating the workings of the government, debating 

the Bills, debating the motions that are before us so that the 

people in the province can be served and served well. 

 

We're all aware as well, Mr. Speaker, that of the 32 

government departments and agencies, so far none of them 

have passed the Estimates in this House.  I find it very 

interesting that we would be at this time . . . and our Legislative 

Assembly having been here for some two months and now into 

our, I believe it's about our 38th or 39th day, Mr. Speaker, the 

fact that we still haven't spent . . . or haven't passed any of the 

Estimates with regards to spending of the government for this 

fiscal year. 

 

And if I'm not mistaken, the Minister of Finance has indicated 

that certainly it is very imperative that his budget be passed.  

He's indicated that he needs the passage of his budget so that 

people across the province will know where the funds are 

coming from for them to operate. 

 

And as we sit here and discuss the bell-ringing question, as we 

sit here and discuss proposals to change the rules, as my 

colleague from Wilkie has suggested, that it would be 

appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for this Assembly at this time 

to take the time to send this debate back to the special Rules 

Committee with . . . and possibly setting out some specific 

guidelines asking the committee to work towards a consensus 

regarding the contentious issue of bell-ringing. 

 

I think and I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I speak for 

many people in my constituency, people who have indicated 

their feelings over the past, certainly back in 1989 and again 

through the past couple of months.  They've indicated that 

bell-ringing is an issue that they feel there should be some 

limitations to.  They feel very strongly that there should be 

another avenue by which opposition members can raise a point 

and at the same time bring that point out to the public. 

 

The amendment that is placed by my colleague from Wilkie 

suggests that the committee be given the ability to address the 

motion that is before this Assembly, and that they sit down and 

after further consultation and consideration of this motion 

arrive at a time period that would be favourable to all members.  

And as the media have indicated today, certainly their feeling is 

that it would be appropriate for members in this Assembly to 

arrive at a process by which we could address the bell-ringing 

question and allow for the House to proceed. 

 

But more specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all must realize 

that it isn't the role of the opposition just to totally be 

contradictory to all the motions put forward by government or 

the Bills.  Certainly we must be very careful in perusing the 

Bills, perusing the motions, going through government 

Estimates so that we can be good stewards and hold the 

government accountable.  We all must be 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

good stewards of the fiscal responsibility that the government 

carries and we as elected representatives carry on behalf of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I firmly believe that this motion must be referred back to the 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures.  And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think it is imperative that this committee be given 

the mandate to address a number of rule changes such as we've 

already seen in this House. 

 

I believe the committee came forward with a suggestion earlier 

on in the Assembly, and we at this time are in a time period 

where we are experimenting with some changes to the rules to 

this Assembly.  And we are all aware of the fact that at the time 

when the committee moved and brought forward the motion -- 

I believe it was 15 days into this sitting -- regarding some of 

the rule changes that the bell-ringing was one area in which 

they had difficulty reaching consensus and that asked and 

suggested that there were a number of changes . . . that there 

was a process that was needed to continually allow . . . 

continue to work allowing the committee to address the other 

contentious issues. 

 

And no doubt we are going to find that there will be many 

contentious issues that will continue to surface as we are in this 

Assembly and as we look at rules in this Assembly. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the motion before this Assembly 

suggests that a three-day hoist would be appropriate.  The 

amendment that my colleague brought forward suggested that 

this motion go back to the committee because a three-day hoist, 

in our opinions as opposition members, is not appropriate.  It 

doesn't given an opposition adequate time to consult, adequate 

time to meet with people, and to let the public of Saskatchewan 

know what the particular points of a special Bill or a motion 

are before this Assembly and how it will affect them directly or 

indirectly. 

 

And we have offered on numerous occasions . . . in fact my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern, the opposition House 

Leader, has conferred with and brought to our attention some 

of the proposals brought forward by the government members.  

But he has also on a number of occasions thrown out ideas to 

the House Leader . . . the opposition leader has approached the 

Premier of this province with some suggestions.  And to date, 

Mr. Speaker, we still are waiting for some concrete counter 

arguments by the government other than the fact that they just 

want to proceed unilaterally with changes to the rules without 

allowing for a voice or an expression, giving the opposition an 

opportunity to express concerns on any issue or Bill that we 

may face in the days to come. 

 

When you look at the suggestion that this Assembly just allow 

for a three-day hoist, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rules of this 

Assembly already allow, or if you will give the House the 

ability to lay aside a motion for three days, maybe four days, 

maybe five days.  And we're all quite well aware of how the 

House works on notices, given that a Bill is going to be coming 

before the House and that is given with 48 hours notice.  And 

then when the first 

reading is given, it's a day or two before the Bill again comes 

before the Assembly. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can realize the difficulty 

that we in the opposition side of the House were facing when 

the bell-ringing motion came to the floor.  And the bell-ringing 

motion came to the floor because on this side of the House we 

had a lot of difficulty with the Bill that was presented to the 

floor by the Government Leader . . . Government House 

Leader.  And it doesn't matter where you go, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, people across this province realize that the two are 

intertwined as they were in 1989. 

 

I'm going to go for a few minutes to some comments and make 

some observations from a speech that was made in this House 

the other day by the member from P.A. Carlton, Prince Albert 

Carlton.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me just quote for a minute.  

The member from Prince Albert Carlton said, and I quote, on 

July 9, 1992: 

 

 . . . while members have always tried to reach consensus on 

changes to the rules and procedures in this Assembly, that 

consensus sometimes has been rather illusive.  In fact 

previous rule changes have occasioned considerable debate in 

this Assembly. 

 

And we're all well aware of that debate that has taken place.  

I'm sure members on the government side, many of the 

members on the government side are aware of the debate that 

took place in 1989 regarding rule changes.  And I will get to 

some of the comments regarding that debate as I enter into my 

speech this afternoon regarding the amendment before this 

Assembly and indeed the motion, as we are allowed to speak 

concurrently to the motion. 

 

Clearly agreement and consensus are laudable objectives. But 

as we all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are not always 

achievable, and they certainly do not extend to any requirement 

for unanimous consent. 

 

Now we're well aware of the fact that any time you endeavour 

to reach consensus amongst people, amongst two parties, it 

takes a fair bit of debate.  It takes a long period of debate.  

There's give and take on all sides. 

 

And on any occasion when debate takes place regarding 

consensus or regarding give and take, or regarding in this case 

a motion, or as we have just seen in our country, the debate 

over the constitution, when you have a number of parties 

around the table you are going to find that it is going to take a 

period of time for all party members to be able to sit down and 

be able to present their points of view.  And there's ample give 

and take back and forth so that parties can feel that they have 

achieved the best that was available to them without 

unilaterally being forced into changes that they have difficulty 

in accepting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I continue to quote from the July 9 Hansard and 

the member from P.A. Carlton: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the members opposite limited the bells in this 

Assembly to 10 minutes on all recorded divisions related to 

that piece of 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

legislation. 

 

He was referring back to 1989.  He says: 

 

 So you see, Mr. Speaker, this House has already seen limits 

on bell-ringing under the previous administration.  And 

believe me, Mr. Speaker, there was no provision for a 

compromise or for compensation of the suspension provision 

which we are offering at this time.  There was no such move 

by the members opposite at that time. 

 

Well I want to again indicate -- and I believe my colleague 

from Wilkie indicated that; I believe he indicated in his speech 

-- but I want to indicate to the people who may be watching 

today, and being such a beautiful day there may not be a lot of 

people inside with their televisions on, but if anyone is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the fact is, the bells in this House are not 

limited.  That's why we continue on this debate. 

 

The fact is that the government of the day did eventually listen 

to people, listened to the arguments presented by the then 

opposition, and at that time tabled the Bill and sent it back to 

the Rules Committee for further debate. 

 

And so if people may think from the comments made by the 

member from P.A.-Carlton that changes were made, in fact, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we stand in this House again debating 

bell-ringing because those changes were made for the simple 

reason that if they would have been made, it would have been a 

unilateral change to the motion and to the rules.  And of course 

we're all well aware of the fact that the government of the day 

would certainly have been reprimanded for changing the rules 

without consent.  And so with the same thing that members in 

1989 asked for, we today ask for. 

 

The member quoted from a Star-Phoenix editorial on July 4, 

'92.  And this is the quote he read: 

 

 Reasonable people should need about five minutes to agree 

on a time limit for the bell-ringing tactic.  Let the MLAs just 

do it, then get on with what the public pays them for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no one disagrees with that.  People agree 

that we need to look at the rules.  We need to address the 

bell-ringing question. 

 

The member goes on to say: 

 

 In doing so, Mr. Speaker, we understand that we are 

removing from the Assembly a tool that has been used rather 

efficiently and effectively by members of this Assembly.  

And we felt that it was very important not to just remove 

something without compensating, without putting something 

else in place. 

 

Well I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would suggest that there isn't a member in this Assembly who, 

if they really sat down and thought about the compensation or 

the changes that have been proposed by the government, that 

would suggest or would even think or dare to believe that a 

three-day hoist would be 

sufficient to allow members to address the public.  And that's 

why we on this side of the House suggest that, as in 1989, this 

motion should again be returned to the Rules Committee. 

 

So what have we decided to do, Mr. Speaker, and what we are 

offering . . . the opposition offering this Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan is a way of suspending the business on 

a specific item or a specific Bill that is in contention and 

allowing the House and the proceedings of the House to 

continue without disrupting the total proceedings of the House. 

 

And we agree with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I believe 

many members in this Assembly -- government members, NDP 

members, Conservative members, and the Liberal leader -- 

have all indicated that they believe the House should be 

allowed to work. And we have thrown out some suggestions 

that would allow the House to work.  We have asked the 

government members and other members on the committee to 

consider the fact that . . . of lifting a Bill for maybe 60 days, 

maybe 45 days. 

 

We all know when you're negotiating, when you're trying to 

reach consensus, all sides lay out what they specifically would 

like, and in fact in most cases lay out arguments even a little 

broader than what they're anticipating of receiving, in light of 

the fact that hopefully at the end of the day they might get close 

to what they really felt they could receive.  And we all know . . 

. most of us have bartered at one time or the other, and we all 

know you never start off with what you hope to receive.  You 

always leave . . . let say you're selling a car, you always . . . if 

you hope to get $7,500 out of it, you will make a suggestion or 

you will set out a price of maybe 8,500 to 9,000 so that you 

have something to barter with. 

 

We as Canadians, being as we come from all different 

nationalities from around the world, have also learned like 

other groups of people that you must barter in order to survive. 

 

And so what we're suggesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

opposition is not saying don't eliminate the bell-ringing . . . or 

what the opposition is saying, Mr. Speaker, we must address 

the question of bell-ringing, but we also must have a way of 

raising concerns we may have.  And whether it's as it is, the 

Conservative Party today, whether it is the NDP government 

down the road, I believe anyone would argue we need . . . an 

opposition needs the opportunity and the ability to raise 

specific concerns to the public, to bring to the public's attention 

Bills that are brought forward such as the GRIP Bill at this 

session, Mr. Speaker, that has a very, very threatening clause in 

it regarding retroactivity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel very strongly that it is appropriate for us to 

ask that this motion be again sent back to the Rules Committee. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I continue on reading from the quotes 

by the member from Prince Albert Carlton when he was . . . as 

he is talking about the Special Rules Committee and talking 

about the difficulty of reaching consensus, he indicates too: 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

And last of all, there was the bell-ringing -- the 

bell-ringing tool.  And I mention again, Mr. Speaker, 

there's only one problem with the bell-ringing tool, and 

that is that in addition to stopping the process on a specific 

Bill, it stops the process of the entire government. 

 

We realize that, Mr. Speaker.  That's why we are suggesting we 

need a tool that allows the opposition to bring to the attention 

of the general public the concerns they have while allowing the 

government to continue to operate, while allowing members of 

this Assembly to continue to address the specific items, Bills, 

and Estimates that would come before this Assembly, to 

address the question of health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And 

we all are aware of the concerns that are being raised out in 

rural Saskatchewan and across Saskatchewan with regards to 

health care. 

 

And the fact that if we had a change in the rules and if we 

allowed the parties to work towards a consensus, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a consensus that would allow the business of the 

House to proceed, we would be able to address the concerns 

that were, as I found over the weekend, the concerns that were 

raised with me regarding agriculture and the drought across this 

province that is affecting many people, regarding hospitals and 

hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan, regarding the fact that 

many people are finding it even more difficult, specifically our 

seniors, in trying to make ends meet in light of the fact that 

they must now pay for optometric services or they must pay a 

higher deductible for their drug fees, Mr. Speaker, and many 

other concerns that they are raising. 

 

And those are the reasons that we stand here today debating 

this motion, so that we can indeed let people know what is 

taking place so they can indeed have the opportunity to voice 

their concerns with us.  So I don't think it's unreasonable for 

this opposition to ask for the ability to address the Rules 

Committee and to put suggestions forward. 

 

We know where the government's stand is.  Of course any 

government would like to . . . and would feel that a three-day 

hoist is appropriate.  But I believe if you asked any member on 

the government side of the House today, if you would've asked 

them in 1989 . . . and as the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton indicated, even a ten-minute hoist wasn't appropriate at 

that time.  And at that time the House felt it appropriate to 

move to the motion back to the Rules Committee. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- For leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask for leave to 

introduce a guest, and introduce to all members of the 

legislature, Dr. Frieda Beberfall who is in the Speaker's gallery.  

Dr. Beberfall is a Spanish professor at the University of 

Saskatchewan and she used to be a former 

constituent of mine.  She's now living in the constituency of the 

Speaker.  So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Dr. Beberfall and her guest.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Certainly all 

members of this Assembly welcome those who would take the 

time to come and watch the proceedings today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert Carlton also went 

on to say: much has been said, Mr. Speaker, about the issue on 

which the bells were rung.  And remember, he talked about the 

process and had talked about the fact that opposition members 

or members have used bell-ringing at any time before 

efficiently and effectively. 

 

I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that there will always be an issue.  

In 1989 it was SaskEnergy privatization.  This year it's the 

GRIP.  Next year it could be something else.  There will 

always be an issue. 

 

And we're not arguing that fact, Mr. Speaker.  That is the 

purpose of this Assembly -- for us to find ways, for us to 

debate issues, and then to figure out ways of resolving them. 

 

And that's all we're asking of this Assembly.  We're asking this 

Assembly to move the motion back to the Rules Committee 

where it belongs so that all members in this Assembly, through 

their representatives on the Rules Committee, can work 

towards finding out ways in which we can resolve the issue of 

bell-ringing. 

 

And as I indicated just a few moments ago, certainly a number 

of ideas have been put forward.  And I don't believe the ideas 

put forward are without merit.  I believe they all have merit.  I 

believe they give, not only the government but the opposition, 

the ability to raise the question that may come before this 

House that would affect people's individual rights. 

 

So I believe it's very imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we indeed 

allow this motion to go back to the Rules Committee.  As I 

indicated just a few moments ago, three days certainly is not 

long enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the motion before this 

Assembly, when we look at the normal format that has taken 

place over the years and all the talk we have had regarding 

consultation, regarding consensus -- and I believe many people 

have indicated and many people felt that when they voted in 

October of 1991 they were electing a government that was 

going to be more consultative, a government that was going to 

work more on the basis of consensus, a government that was 

going to respect the wishes of the people -- I think, Mr. 

Speaker, what we have seen over the last while despite all the 

rhetoric, despite the fact that the government in their 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

throne speech indicated that they were going to be consultative, 

that they were going to take the time to speak to people, that 

they were going to bring a brand-new face to government, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, what we see is the government seems to 

have forgotten all their promises. 

 

And I think back to the debate that took place in this Assembly, 

I believe it's somewhat of a year, two years ago regarding 

Consensus Saskatchewan.  We're all well aware of the fact that 

group of people that went around the province seeking input 

from people across the province as to how we should address 

health care, how we should address education, how we should 

address rural programs, and how we should address agriculture, 

and, Mr. Speaker, at that time the opposition of the day 

suggested it was just . . . it was a political sham; that it wasn't 

the proper tool; that you really didn't need Consensus 

Saskatchewan because they indeed were the voice for the 

public. 

 

Well I would suggest that if the opposition at that time felt that 

they were the voice of the public, then I believe the members 

on the opposition side of the House at this time must take their 

proper place and be a voice for the public as well.  And even 

though the public speak out against bells, they speak out 

against any government that would use its position, its large 

majority at any time, not only to change rules but to change the 

way the people across Saskatchewan are able to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think also of the consultation process and I think 

of the promises of the present government to consultation.  And 

we're all well aware of the recent paper that was released 

regarding health care in this province.  And again, as was 

indicated in question period on numerous occasions, the 

question was asked: well what consultation took place?  Who 

have you contacted?  Who have you consulted with, Mr. 

Speaker?  And we were continually promised that consultation 

will take place. 

 

Well I would suggest consultation should take place prior to 

any changes made, prior to any motions, prior to any approvals 

given to changes, whether it's in health care, whether it's 

education, whether it's in rules -- rules that come before this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- consultation must take place.  And 

that's what we're asking for through our amendment. 

 

We're asking for a consultative process to work.  We're asking 

the committee to sit down and take a very serious look at the 

rules.  We're asking for this committee to sit down and address 

a way that would be workable and favourable to all parties, that 

the government can agree with and that opposition members 

can agree with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking of the comments being made by 

the member from P.A. Carlton just the other day regarding the 

motion laid before us, I also look back to the May 29, 1989 

debate that took place and some comments by the members.  

And in light of the motion that was just brought forward by my 

colleague, the member from Arm River, asking for the 

government to move on, allowing this Assembly to move on to 

business of the House . . . And this is what the member from 

P.A. Carlton said: 

So what you should be doing at this time is you should be 

dropping that legislation.  (Talking about the privatization 

legislation, the SaskEnergy Bill).  You should be dropping 

the debate on this legislation.  You should be coming 

forward with Estimates.  You haven't passed any but one 

yet.  You haven't done any but one yet.  Why?  Because 

you haven't brought it forward.  You are the people that 

bring forward the agenda.  Day in and day out you bring 

forward the agenda. 

 

 What have we got here?  How many days have we been 

here for?  Forty-five days you haven't brought in a second 

estimate -- 45 days and you haven't brought one in. 

 

The member from P.A. Carlton brought the same argument at 

that time as I'm bringing right now in light of the motion that 

we just voted on.  And he says: 

 

 That's unbelievable, unbelievable that here we've gone this 

far into the session and there hasn't been anything 

accomplished whatsoever.  Why?  Because you choose to 

deal with this that the people of Saskatchewan soundly 

rejected. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I didn't research it 

thoroughly, but the indication was that we really hadn't 

accomplished a lot of government business at that time, that 

45-day period.  But certainly at this present time, yes, we 

haven't accomplished much in the area of Estimates, but we 

have passed 20 Bills in this Assembly -- 20 Bills that allow the 

government to continue governing and working and meeting 

the requirements of the people across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the same time the member from P.A. Carlton 

was arguing the fact that the opposition needed a way to 

communicate.  And he says, and I quote: 

 

 You've got to have some way, some way of communicating.  

The bell procedure provides an opportunity and provides a bit 

of time to be sure that the people of Saskatchewan are able to 

hear exactly what's going on.  And you know, it wasn't such a 

bad . . . it didn't turn out to be such a bad thing for the people 

to find out what this government was trying to do with the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation.  In the first place there 

was a promise that was about to be broken.  And secondly, 

they were going to do it quietly, as quickly as possible, and 

pass the thing away . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have to ask, in light of the current debate 

in this Assembly, if it doesn't resemble the 1989 debate.  If 

indeed we are not facing the same circumstances.  And it 

would be appropriate in light of the 1989 debate, Mr. Speaker, 

that we indeed do the same thing, or the suggestion that was 

made in 1989 and that the government of the day moved on, 

that the Bill was voted on and then tabled and that the motion 

on bell-ringing went back to committee, went back to the 

special committee on rules and regulations for further 

consideration. 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

And if it was appropriate at that time, Mr. Speaker, I believe it 

would be very appropriate right now to indeed adhere to the 

amendment that my colleague from Wilkie brought forward, 

asking this Assembly to move this motion out of the debate in 

the Assembly back to the committee. I think it would be very 

appropriate. 

 

It would also be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, in light of the 

circumstances that we have seen take place across this country 

recently, and in light of the fact that the House was allowed . . . 

or suggested the House get on with business a few weeks ago 

and that members pursue the proper channels of changing the 

rules, that members work on consensus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at consensus and I believe people 

right across . . . not only across Saskatchewan but across 

Canada believe in operating and working on consensus, believe 

in consulting, believe in working together, sitting together and 

discussing their issues and coming to an agreement. 

 

And I refer to the specific debate that took place in this country 

regarding Canada's constitution.  Back on July 8 the headline 

is: "Premiers make a deal."  And it says: 

 

 'Historic day' as nine provinces and Ottawa agree on a unity 

package. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that unity package would not have been agreed to 

if the government, the federal government of the day would 

have indeed said no, no more extensions of deadlines.  And we 

can think back to early January, and even into last fall, of the 

deadlines that have come and gone as the Prime Minister and 

the minister responsible . . . the Hon. Joe Clark sat down and 

continued to negotiate with the premiers and with the 

provinces.  In fact, it says: 

 

 Saskatchewan Premier Roy Romanow (and I'm quoting) was 

concerned about some aspects relating to removal of 

interprovincial barriers, but was heartened to see conditions 

to equalization and federal transfer payments to the provinces 

entrenched in the Constitution, should the package eventually 

be ratified.  He also praised the final Senate reform 

agreement, saying it contained elements of the Saskatchewan 

proposal that had been put forward previously to bridge the 

distance between Triple-E supporters and opponents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate on the constitution, yes . . . The 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 

didn't get all it was bargaining for and all it was hoping to get.  

But the Premier of this province realized that if he was going to 

reach some kind of consensus with the other premiers across 

this province, with the other provinces and with the federal 

government, with the Northwest Territories, the two territories, 

and the aboriginal community, we had to sit down and there 

had to be give and take on both sides, on all sides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another comment in the same paper said, the 

headline read, "Much consultation . . ."  Much consultation.  

And I have to ask you, how much consultation have we 

actually seen in this Assembly to 

address the problem of bell-ringing, the problem of the motion 

that has been brought before the Assembly? 

 

The article goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 When the Meech Lake accord died in 1990, Canadians 

demanded more consultation.  Consultation they got. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're aware of the consultation that has 

taken place and it hasn't been easy.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the time allotted and the allowable time given for 

consultation, we find that in the process that has taken place 

since 1990 or the Meech Lake Accord back in 1986, the 

province of Quebec has been sitting on the sidelines because 

they felt there wasn't an ability to . . . they didn't have an ability 

to compromise and they weren't quite willing to consult.  And 

it would almost appear that the same process is taking place in 

this Assembly today. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is appropriate that we allow the 

process of consultation to continue.  Another article in the 

Leader-Post indicated: "In the end, it was a compromise on the 

Senate that few had expected."  That allowed an agreement to 

take place between our leaders in this country regarding the 

constitution -- a compromise on the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's all we're asking for.  We're asking for an 

opportunity for our representatives on the Rules Committee to 

sit down with the government representatives and the Liberal 

leader to work out a compromise.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

it is very imperative that the opposition not be totally limited in 

their ability to debate in this House.  In fact I would suggest 

that the Premier of this province has those same views. 

 

Let me go back to the 1989 debate.  And I'm quoting from 

Hansard, May 11, 1989, quotes made by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, the then opposition leader, now Premier: 

 

 What new-found Democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

(He's speaking of the government.) What new-found 

democracy is this?  What kind of charade is this?  What kind 

of an unprecedented action it is for these people to bring 

forward a motion for rules change without consultation . . . 

without any consultation from us. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 They know that the people of Saskatchewan oppose what 

they have done and oppose it vigorously, and they wanted the 

opposition to do what was being done, and they've gotten 

beaten up. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, many people across this 

province believe the same thing.  They believe that yes, 

bell-ringing must be addressed.  But they also believe that 

opposition must speak up for what the people of Saskatchewan 

believe in, and the virtues they believe in. 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

(1615) 

 

I continue to quote the member from Riversdale, the Premier: 

 

 I don't mean beaten up politically; I don't care about the 

politics.  They got beaten up on this fundamental policy of 

theirs, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They got beaten up and now 

they're coming in and they're going to show us who the 

bosses are. 

 

Again, what king of democrats are these?  He goes on, and I 

continue to quote: 

 

 . . . for the first time in the record of the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . they come forward to change the rules of 

this House in the name of democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

What kind of a double standard is this? 

 

I find that very ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the then opposition 

leader, now Premier, would have found it very undemocratic 

for the government of the day to unilaterally change or ask for 

a change of the rules.  And now today, where is the Premier's 

voice? 

 

Has the Premier taken time to speak in this Assembly?  He has 

the same opportunity as he had back in 1989 as the opposition 

leader.  How ironic that he hasn't taken the time to speak out on 

this issue.  I believe he would have a difficult time reversing 

the feelings he had in 1989.  He would have a difficult time 

supporting the motion as it sits before this Assembly today, a 

motion which he defended, he spoke so vehemently against 

back in 1989. 

 

And I believe because of his principles and because of his 

belief in individual rights and freedoms and the democratic 

process, that the Premier of the day would have a difficult time 

standing up and speaking against the motion that has been 

brought in by his colleague and his colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I go back to some further comments that were 

made by the then opposition leader: 

 

 These are the people who say they're the defenders. If they're 

the defenders, why didn't they approach us in this kind of a 

fashion -- traditionally -- of trying to define the rules in a way 

that we could all accept and agree, these self-proclaimed, 

new-found democrats? 

 

The opposition leader as he was debating in the 1989 debate 

continued to bring to our attention the fact that it was very 

improper for the government of the day to unilaterally change 

the rules.  He says, and I quote: 

 

 That's the context in which this motion is to be done, and let's 

not fool ourselves as to what's happening here.  This 

government, if it was really genuinely committed to 

democracy, would have, as much as it hurt the Minister of 

Justice, as much as he opposed what we did, they would have 

done it in the traditional and normal democratic way.  Let's 

not be fooled about what's being planned here. 

I believe that argument exists today as well.  I believe that 

argument is just as appropriate for the debate as it is taking 

place today as it was in 1989.  I believe it would be very 

appropriate for the member from Regina Churchill Downs to 

indeed come to this Assembly and say, Mr. Speaker, or say to 

the Assembly, let us indeed rethink this change to the rules; let 

us allow the debate on the rules to go back to the special Rules 

Committee as it has been brought forward, as the amendment 

brought forward by the member from Wilkie has indicated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we could live with that; we could work with 

that.  And I believe the Premier of the day could work with that 

as well. 

 

Back in 1989 the then opposition leader indicated, or said: 

 

 Now they want to introduce the bell-ringing motion to come 

back and to say to us that on top of all of this artillery that 

they're going to use to submerge the opposition -- forget 

about the opposition -- and submerge the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  On top of all that they say, we are 

going to muzzle you for ever on this issue. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we are facing today.  

Because let me just bring to your attention and bring to the 

attention of the Assembly and the people of this province the 

fact that in 1989 the numbers in this Assembly were some 36 

government members and I believe 26 opposition members.  

And today it's 55 government members and 11 opposition 

members. 

 

So if there is an effective way to muzzle the opposition, it is to 

remove the bell-ringing question without allowing a process in 

place that would give the opposition the ability to at least stand 

the Bill. 

 

And even for that fact, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that a 

government wouldn't mind having the opportunity of just 

putting a Bill on the shelf to let the public decide whether this 

is the appropriate process that they should be following other 

than, as in 1989, the opposition of the day believed very 

sincerely that the SaskEnergy Bill was the wrong process at 

that time, although it appears today that they whole-heartedly 

agree with it now because it's before this Assembly to split 

SaskEnergy from SaskPower. 

 

But I also believe that the government of the day believed 

when they were in opposition that it would be muzzling them 

to limit the bell-ringing to 10 minutes or to take the time and 

even only allow for only a two- or three-day debate to take 

place, putting a Bill on the shelf for three days.  And I think 

they would feel just as strongly today, that the opposition needs 

that process of allowing a motion or a Bill or any amendment 

that would come before this House that would affect people's 

rights allowing the opposition, whether it be a lone opposition 

member or whether it be an opposition of 10 members or 

whether it be an opposition of 20 members or whatever the 

format or breakdown of any opposition may be following a 

provincial election. 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that anyone in this Assembly believes 

that the opposition must have the ability to speak and to raise 

the concerns of people, raise the concerns of the electorate out 

there, because that's what we're elected for.  Everyone in this 

Assembly is elected to represent their constituents. 

 

And one of the five things I find difficult and I found difficult 

since my election in 1986, the process of the parliamentary 

system that basically dictates that members follow the wishes 

of their party and party consensus. 

 

And I will agree that, at least from the processes that have 

taken place in our party, many times as members argued on 

certain rules or certain changes they'd like to see brought 

forward to the legislature, certain issues that concern their own 

constituents as you ruled in caucus, we didn't always receive 

consensus which reached that . . . didn't necessarily go along 

with the viewpoints that I may have expressed or that my 

colleague from Rosthern may have expressed or that my 

colleague from Thunder Creek would have expressed, Mr. 

Speaker, but we went along with that consensus. 

 

I would suggest that we take a look down the road and maybe 

I'll throw this out as another idea for the Rules Committee to 

look at, that MLAs should be given the ability in a number of 

circumstances to even speak out very freely about concerns that 

affect their constituency that in some cases may go against 

what the government is trying to do, may even go against what 

their opposition is bringing forward in consensus. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very appropriate that this 

Rules Committee be allowed to broaden its base and to take a 

more serious look at some of the changes that I believe we 

need or we should see take place in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many arguments that we can bring 

forward regarding the rules changes.  We also . . . we are aware 

of the fact that other jurisdictions have changed the rules.  We 

are aware of the fact that very serious and heated debate has 

taken place whenever rule changes have come forward.  We're 

aware of the fact that the government has used its mandate on 

many occasions to bring in closure to limit debate.  As 

opposition members, we're also aware of the fact that we can 

take the opportunity to speak to a motion or to speak to a Bill 

and, if you will, filibuster. 

 

But I think we'll all agree that in this case with 10 members, 

and certainly going back to 1982 when the opposition of the 

day had eight members, there was a limit, a limited time period 

in which opposition members can place their concerns.  

Therefore it is imperative that we have appropriate changes that 

would allow opposition members to be truly true opposition 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I continue speaking to the amendment and the 

motion, I want to take a few moments to go back to some of the 

debate as well that was brought forward by a number of 

members in this Assembly.  And I've talked regarding a few 

members so far.  And certainly this is an ongoing debate that 

allows us and gives us the ability to 

look at where members were years ago and the particular 

debates that they brought forward and the particular reasons 

that they gave as to why this Assembly should not allow the 

motion to proceed as it had been brought forward by the then 

Justice member, the then member from Kindersley. 

 

And I go back to some comments made by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, I believe is the new riding.  But 

it was Saskatoon Eastview at that time.  And he says, and I 

quote: 

 

 This rule change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very instrumental to 

the government in ramming its unpopular privatization plans 

down the throats of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I believe over the last few days, over the period of time 

that we have been in discussion regarding the rules and 

regarding the bell-ringing debate, motion that has been 

presented to this House by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs and the amendment to that motion, Mr. Speaker, we 

have endeavoured to bring to the attention of the Saskatchewan 

people, the Saskatchewan public, the electorate out there, that 

the only reason the bell-ringing question is before this 

Assembly today is the same reason that the then opposition 

members indicated why they were taking such a strong stance 

against the unilateral change to the bell-ringing. 

 

At that time it was SaskPower and the privatization of 

SaskPower. Today it's because of a legal aspect in which we 

believe and many people across this province believe, not just 

the farm community that are affected by the particular Bill, the 

GRIP Bill, but certainly people right across this province, from 

seniors to young people to business men and women, to the 

wage earner -- the fact that this government needs the Bill, 

needs a change in the bell-ringing to change the Bill, to 

unilaterally change a contract, to unilaterally go against the 

wishes of the electorate who voted for them, believing that they 

would be more open and honest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member goes on to say, and this is the May 17 

Hansard, 1989. 

 

 I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the proposed rule 

change will go a long way towards perhaps putting in the 

hands of the government the power to steamroll over the 

wishes and the will of not only the opposition but the people 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, when we take a very close look at 

that, we have to agree that what we face today is indeed going 

to give the government the very thing that the member spoke 

out against in 1989, and that is the ability just to steamroll over 

the opposition, steamroll over the electorate of Saskatchewan 

whenever an opposition would dare to speak up against the 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't deny the fact that a government 

needs the opportunity to govern.  I don't deny the fact that the 

government, regardless of politics, regardless of who may sit 

on the government side of the House, needs the 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

ability to make changes. 

 

And on many occasions changes are difficult; they're not easy.  

It's not easy to make changes when people become very 

complacent.  It's not easy to make changes, especially in 

difficult times or when people are facing situations where, as 

we see across this province today, Mr. Speaker, a large area of 

this province is facing a very severe drought situation.  And I 

find it hard to believe in light of the fact that my area has been 

quite well . . . we've been really blessed with a fair bit of 

moisture.  And a number of people in my constituency at this 

time would just as soon see the sun shine for a least a dozen 

days or more to allow them to get along with their haying 

process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the motion before us and the amendment, 

the amendment endeavouring to send the motion back to the 

committee, is asking the government to come to grips with the 

fact that we must work on consensus.  We must work out our 

differences. And it would be a lot more favourable for 

everyone in this Assembly, government and opposition 

members, everyone here, to find that we were able to sit down, 

put aside our differences, and negotiate a favourable agreement 

that any party down the road, regardless of whether they're in 

government or opposition, would be able to work with. 

 

(1630) 

 

But I find today, Mr. Speaker, the same process taking place as 

we saw in 1989.  The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain went on say: 

 

 The members opposite will try to justify this heavy-handed 

unilateral change of the rules of the House by claiming that 

the opposition would use the tactic of the bells on any issue 

in the future and could, in fact, paralyse the government. 

 

 Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to you that this government that 

condemns our walking out, our use of legitimate means of 

this Assembly, this government fails to understand why this 

situation occurred in the first place.  It did not happen 

because the opposition was prepared to take that sort of 

unwarranted action.  It obviously . . . as the Leader of the 

Opposition said on Friday, this was a very, very serious step 

-- a very serious and a very necessary step -- so it is not 

something that we did lightly. 

 

I would have to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the same scenario is 

present here this year in this Assembly, that your loyal 

opposition, Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition of 10 members, 

take their position very seriously.  They didn't walk out and 

ring the bells on a whim.  They felt very strongly, and we 

continue to feel, Mr. Speaker, that this government must act 

responsibly; that it cannot turn around and after it has signed a 

contract with individuals, whether they be farmers, whether 

they would be contractors, whether they be Saskatchewan 

bonds holders, whoever they may be, this government cannot 

use its majority to change the rules in the middle of the game. 

We've heard so many arguments over the past number of days 

from members of the government, catcalls across the floor, 

about getting in the game.  I believe the Premier of the 

province talked about getting in the game in question period 

the other day. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is time the government got in 

the game.  I believe it is time they sat down and addressed the 

very major concerns that the Bill that was presented before this 

House that precipitated the motion, the bell 

_ringing motion that we're addressing in the amendment to this 

motion . . . Mr. Speaker, I believe it's appropriate that we 

indeed give the Rules Committee the mandate that this 

Assembly has given them, and that is to work out a unilateral 

agreement regarding rules and regulations. 

 

If it was a problem, if it was a mistake for the government not 

to consult with the public before moving to privatizing 

SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, I believe that same mistake has been 

made here.  In light of the fact of the process of consultation 

that was continually brought forward and continually is 

brought forward by government members, by cabinet ministers, 

by MLAs about the fact that they are going to be more 

consultative, wouldn't it be appropriate for this House to allow 

that consultative process to continue to work? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have indeed . . . And I believe my colleague, 

the member from Rosthern, the Opposition House Leader, I 

believe the Government House Leader, and certainly the 

Leader of the Government, the Premier, and the Opposition 

Leader, have been conferring back and forth.  I believe they 

have been very diligent in putting forward their arguments.  

And they have been in the process of continually consulting 

each other to come out with . . . presenting their arguments, 

trying to reach a consensus.  And as I indicated, the member 

from P.A. Carlton indicated the other day, reaching consensus 

is not always easy. 

 

I go back to the member from Saskatoon Eastview: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the action taken by the government in 

proposing this unilateral change, because -- let's remember 

they've now reneged on their proposal to us to sit down and 

discuss this in an all-party committee -- the action taken by 

this government to propose and attempt to enact this 

unilateral rule of change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is totally -- 

and, I repeat, it is totally unprecedented in this legislature, as 

the Leader of the Opposition said the other day. 

 

I would suggest if it was inappropriate at that time, if it is 

totally unprecedented in 1989, then what is it today?  And I ask 

all members, why are we facing the situation we are facing 

today?  An election was held in October, 1991.  We have had a 

fair bit of time for members to sit down, and as I indicated 

earlier, to sit down and come up with rule changes.  And we 

have a test, a trial period right now, regarding a number of rule 

changes that were brought before this House. 

 

And certainly it's by no means the end to all the rule changes, 

to some of the suggestions that have been made. 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

But it was a process that allowed the Rules Committee to at 

least offer some changes that this House could work with over 

the next 50 days.  And I believe most members would indicate 

that the rule changes that were proposed have been working 

and have been working fairly efficiently.  But yes, there are a 

number of changes that will take a period of time for the 

members to reach agreement on, such as the bell-ringing 

question. 

 

And I believe it is imperative that we all allow that process to 

continue.  I don't believe that the process of changing rules can 

work in harmony when we have a big bat over our heads, or a 

major change and a government feeling that they need a rule 

change in order to bring forward legislation. 

 

Talking about the discussion that took place back in 1989, the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain said: 

 

 A week ago yesterday, on Monday, when the opposition 

returned to this House, the Premier stated publicly that the 

government would talk to the New Democrats about possible 

changes in bell-ringing rules. 

 

He says: 

 

 Obviously the Premier's initial reaction was the correct one in 

terms of the parliamentary traditions of this House.  

However, (he goes on to say) shortly afterwards, on the same 

day, the government served notice it was going to introduce 

the rule change without consultation with the opposition. 

 

And if I remember correctly many members on the government 

side of the House today who were in opposition were very 

indignant that the government and that the minister of Justice 

would indeed do such a thing, would take that format.  As the 

member indicated: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, until now, as I indicated, this Assembly has not 

made these kinds of changes without all-party input and 

consent on any rule change.  As I say, this has been a strength 

of our system.  It has protected the majority from ramming 

through procedures without minority input and approval.  

And this is an important . . . the importance of this tradition 

cannot be underestimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This has got 

to be preserved as an important tradition. 

 

I argue that is the same process applied today.  We must 

preserve the tradition of this Assembly. 

 

 Throughout the history of the Assembly, substantial 

consultation on rule changes has taken place through the 

mechanism of all-party committees which are given a 

mandate by this Assembly. 

 

This Assembly gives a mandate to the Rules Committee, not 

the government of the day.  And maybe the government of the 

day in '89 abused its position as government in suggesting the 

Rules Committee come up 

with an agreement, and if not an agreement, a unilateral change 

and took their position just a little too firm and superseded the 

responsibility placed on the committee by this Assembly.  

Maybe the same . . . I would suggest the same scenario is 

evident here today. 

 

Rule changes have, for the most part, been accomplished 

through consensus and without division.  And there are many 

examples.  And we can go back to 1985 and 1981 and 1986.  

These all-party committees have undertaken in the past, 

comprehensive review of rules -- not just one change at a time, 

but comprehensive reviews of the rules and have brought 

forward legitimate changes, legitimate proposal changes for 

reform. 

 

And as I indicated at the onset of my remarks, there are many 

current important changes that need to be considered along 

with the bell-ringing proposal. 

 

And if I remember correctly, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview at that time would have been a very young 

member in this Assembly.  He had been elected to the 

Assembly in a by-election just shortly before the debate on the 

SaskEnergy question took place.  And at that time, even though 

he was very new in the Assembly, he had some strong feelings 

and viewpoints on changes to legislation. 

 

And I continue to quote from the member: 

 

 Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to place on the record and 

emphasize that in the past consensus has always been sought 

for rules changes -- consensus has always been sought for 

rules changes.  We thought that the Minister of Justice was 

sincere in his attempt to reach consensus on this matter as 

well.  That appears not to be the case. 

 

We are trusting that as my colleagues and members of 

government sit down, that we eventually will come to a 

consensus. 

 

 In the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, (the member continues) 

one would hope that consensus would always be sought . . . 

 

And I repeat that: 

 

 In the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one would hope that 

consensus would always be sought. 

 

 . . . but this government is setting a precedent . . . For the first 

time in the history of Saskatchewan, this . . . government is 

setting a precedent, a precedent that we are not unmindful of, 

that says that if the rules are not in accordance with the 

wishes and the desires of the government, you go ahead and 

change them for your own purpose. 

 

 And we don't believe on this side of the House that this is 

healthy, nor do we believe that it is democratic, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I go over the comments that were made in 

1989, I would have to say that we would all agree that we 

believe a consensus should be sought, that this 



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

government should not now take the . . . use their iron hand, 

their iron fist, and change the rules without coming to a 

consensus, without sitting down with opposition members. 

 

And maybe, Mr. Speaker, sitting down with the public in 

general and getting some opinion . . . because we have all 

heard.  Members from all parties, we have heard over a period 

of years, and certainly in the last few days, the public have 

offered their opinions on bell-ringing.  And the public believe 

very firmly, and they have some very strong views that they 

believe that bell-ringing should be addressed, that yes it has a 

place. 

 

And as we have suggested and I believe as has been suggested 

in the Rules Committee and as it was in 1989 -- and I'm certain 

that it's been over the period of the last few years -- that no one 

disagrees with the fact that there should be a limited time of 

bell-ringing.  No one wants to eliminate the bell-ringing totally 

because, Mr. Speaker, we must have a means by which we can 

notify members of a vote, as we are all aware of the fact that 

work in this Assembly doesn't just involve itself in this 

Chamber.  As MLAs we all have responsibilities, and we have 

responsibilities to get back to our constituents regarding 

requests they have asked us of, regarding questions that they 

have placed forward. 

 

And on many occasions it's not always possible for every 

member to be right in the Assembly, right in the Chamber at a 

time when a vote is called.  And therefore the bell-ringing 

allows for a calling of the members to the Assembly -- calling 

of the members, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure many ministers 

and premiers over the years would agree that bell-ringing is 

appropriate. 

 

And as was discussed in 1989 and as has been brought forward 

at this time, Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that maybe 

bell-ringing be addressed and a limited time period be given to 

call members.  And if it is impossible to get enough members 

physically to the Assembly to address a motion or to vote on a 

motion, that the bell-ringing or the vote be placed maybe 48 

hours hence, and allow the House to continue with its work.  

And many people across this province believe that that would 

be fair, that that would be appropriate. 

 

But as we have been arguing over the past number of days and 

will continue to bring to the attention of the electorate and to 

this Assembly, the opposition -- as was indicated by the then 

opposition -- needs a process in which they can bring to the 

attention of the electorate the fact that we cannot . . . If we're 

going to limit bell-ringing, there must be a process that allows 

for an opposition to speak out very strongly, and if indeed it 

has to, ask a government to put a Bill on the back burner for a 

period of time, whether it be 60 days . . . And when I say 60 

days, Mr. Speaker, I don't necessarily mean 60 sitting days of 

this Assembly.  As we all know, the argument will be, well 60 

sitting days.  When we first meet in the Assembly, it takes 15 

to 20 days just to go through the Speech from the Throne and 

the budget debate, and the normal House would sit in the 

neighbourhood of 70 days, maybe 60 to 90 days, whatever that 

period is. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, we could allow that 60-day period 

to be a process of 60 actual days from the time a motion is 

introduced, which would still give time for a Bill to be brought 

before the Assembly.  And if there are further questions raised, 

Mr. Speaker, the public in general will speak out very strongly, 

and they will take the action that is needed for the government 

to listen.  And I would suggest that any government that doesn't 

listen to the electorate will pay the price. 

 

(1645) 

 

I find it interesting as I go over other comments and other 

speeches being made in the debate in 1989, and I would 

suggest that the bell-ringing debate is not the most pressing and 

urgent problem facing the people of Saskatchewan today as it 

was in 1989.  And I quote from a speech made by the member 

from Saskatoon South and now Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

 . . . Mr. Speaker, this is not the most pressing and urgent 

problem facing the people of Saskatchewan.  We should be . . 

. we should not be addressing this issue today. 

 

 If the Minister of Finance . . . would take into consideration 

the most . . . problems of the people of Saskatchewan today, 

he would be addressing problems facing agriculture, he 

would be addressing problems facing our deficit, he would be 

addressing problems that are facing our young people 

because they're unemployed and have no jobs in this 

province.  That's what he would be doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we just have to look back a few moments 

ago to the question period in this Assembly.  And if 

unemployment was a problem in 1989, just take a look at the 

debate that took place in this Assembly earlier on today, and 

there's a very strong indication that unemployment has even 

become more serious.  It's even a greater concern in this 

province.  To many people across this province, to young 

people, to middle aged people, to older people, it becomes a 

problem.  And while we're addressing the bell-ringing question, 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Arm River indicated, why 

will the government not allow us the ability to get on with the 

business of the House, as the member from Saskatoon South 

indicated in 1989? 

 

The member went on to say: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

should know that it's not the opposition that calls the agenda 

for the day in the legislature, it is the government.  And we 

have asked the government time and time again to address 

those problems that are facing Saskatchewan (people). 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member, in 1989, felt it would be appropriate 

to allow . . . And I would almost think the member was 

thinking, maybe for a cooling off period, and was suggesting 

the same . . . making the same suggestions that we are making 

here today, that this House allow this motion, allow the debate 

on the rules, allow the debate on bell-ringing to be sent back to 

the 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard July 13, 1992 

committee for further discussion, for further consultation, and 

even to go a step further, to go to the public of Saskatchewan to 

ask for their input.  For we realize that we can address a 

number of issues that are concerning us. 

 

As I look through the Hansard for 1989, I see, and the member 

from Saskatoon South saying . . . talking about the bell-ringing, 

and talking about an article in the Star-Phoenix, May 11, 1989.  

And he says: 

 

 And they're referring of course to the bell-ringing, that the 

NDP would have refused any change. 

 

 "But (it says) both sides may well have come to a 

compromise, if change indeed is necessary." 

 

But the member at that time said: "There does not appear to be 

any pressing need for a rule change." 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I believe the same thing.  

There isn't a pressing need for rule changes on bell-ringing 

today, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Saskatoon South said: 

 

 Have they (the government) lost their objectivity to govern in 

Saskatchewan?  (He says) I say yes, they have. I say yes, they 

have. 

 

That was in 1989 following two years after an election.  Mr. 

Speaker, we're only nine months following the last provincial 

election.  And one would have to ask the same question. 

 

And many people feel the same way, are feeling very strongly 

that within nine months we have had such radical changes 

regarding government, regarding promises that were made to 

the people of Saskatchewan prior to an election, that people 

find it offensive to believe that the government would talk and 

would decide to change the rules and would anticipate that they 

would not even be willing to listen, listen to the arguments put 

forward by the opposition. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, here was a rule, here was a rule that was not a 

detriment to democracy, but it furthered the process of 

democracy. 

 

And he's talking about the bell-ringing: 

 

 It gave the people an opportunity to become involved and to 

tell the government, no, we don't want what you are putting 

forth, and asking the government, in fact pleading with the 

government . . . I know they are receiving letters; (he says 

this of the government of the day) I know they are receiving 

phone calls where people are asking them to withdraw the 

legislation . . . But are they listening?  No, they're not 

listening any more. 

 

 As my colleagues say . . . and you're right.  We have an 

obligation to protect the public out there. 

 

Well if it was true in 1989, it is certainly true in 1992, and 

especially in light of the fact that the legislation that we took a 

stand on, Mr. Speaker, has such a detrimental effect on many 

people across this province. 

. . . why, why is this government so set on ramming this 

one little thing through, the changing of the bells (instead 

of allowing it to go to committee)?  And it can only be 

because they intend to bring back the SaskEnergy 

legislation and then ram it through this House against the 

wishes of the people. 

 

 That will not happen. 

 

That was the commitment made by the member from 

Saskatoon South, Mr. Speaker.  He says: 

 

 That will not happen.  And I'll tell the members opposite, this 

Legislative Assembly cannot work unless we establish trust 

between this side of the House and that side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must continually work to establish trust, and 

that is going to take a long, consultative process such as the 

process that took place in the constitutional debate, the process 

that our Premier was involved in.  And I'm sure as the Premier 

was involved in the debate in 1992 on the constitution, the 

same process took place in 1981, and the premier at that time 

and the deputy House leader of the day, the present Premier, 

found that the consultative process was necessary.  Certainly it 

is necessary in this House. 

 

As the member from Saskatoon South said: 

 

 You are not going to do that (change the rules) by ramming 

through this kind of a rule change.  You are not going to get 

this through, and you're going to be sitting here a long, long, 

long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're only 10 members, but it would appear to me 

that I believe we could be sitting here a long, long time.  In fact 

when we get to the end of the day we may be here till -- God 

forbid if I can't get out and harvest -- we might be here till late 

in the fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I have given the members opposite the 

assurance that we will stop at nothing legally that we can in 

this House to prevent that from happening.  What we are 

asking of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and asking the member 

from Saskatoon South, is to allow the process to follow through 

as it did in 1989, to allow the motion to go back to the 

committee for that consensus.  And the member from 

Saskatoon South continued: 

 

 And I will give you my word and the word of all the 

colleagues on this side of the House that that is exactly what 

is going to happen. 

 

And the member also brought out the fact that many of his 

colleagues had brought out -- brought out the same concern: 

 

 . . . nowhere in the history of Saskatchewan had this taken 

place in this legislature where a government unilaterally 

brought in a motion to change the rules of this House.  (We 

must continue to reiterate that point.)  It has always been the 

custom of this House that when there have been  



July 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

rule changes, that we send it off to committee. 

 

That's why the committees are appointed by this House, 

committees in agriculture, committees in finance, a 

constitutional committee.  And, Mr. Speaker, no doubt any 

time a committee has met they have found that it has been very 

difficult as you go and talk to people across the province, that 

it's not always easy. 

 

In fact it isn't easy at all to reach a consensus.  It is not easy to 

find all parties agreeing at the same time on the same question.  

As the member from Saskatoon South said: it has always been 

the custom of this House that when there have been rule 

changes, that they have been sent to committee.  They have 

been sent to committee to reach consensus and then brought 

before the legislature, then discussed by the legislature and 

passed. 

 

And I again just point out the fact that we are presently in a 

time period regarding some rule changes that I believe all 

members of this Assembly would agree have been working 

well.  And it would be very unfortunate, the rule changes 

would now . . . we would have a unilateral change on one piece 

of rule . . . one period of rule changes which would take away 

from all the work done by the Rules Committee regarding 

changes to the rules in this Assembly. 

 

And if it wasn't a right in 1989, it isn't the right of the 

government . . . simply does not have the right to try and bring 

these rule changes through unilaterally or bring this about 

unilaterally.  And as I indicated before, it's going to get a rough 

ride. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are just asking for this Assembly to allow this 

motion to go back to committee.  And I would urge my 

colleague and the House Leader to sit down and do some 

serious negotiations.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, we would find 

that our colleagues are honourable, as the Premier has 

indicated, and that through a series . . . but I would  also 

indicate that it's . . . even though we believe they're honourable 

and even though we believe a consensus can be reached, I do 

not believe we will find a consensus reached in a matter of a 

few moments, a few hours, or even a few days.  I think it would 

be appropriate for the Rules Committee to be able to sit down 

and negotiate without that hammer over their head. 

 

Back in 1989, the member from Saskatoon South said: 

 

 About 70 per cent of the people are agreeing with us, saying 

no to the government opposite, and . . . (saying) yes to the 

bell-ringing . . . and saying to the government, please get off 

that bell-ringing motion . . . and deal with the pressing and 

urgent problems facing the people of Saskatchewan.  But will 

they listen?  No they won't. 

 

My colleagues and I over the past weekend have found that 

yes, people were coming up and talking to us about the 

bell-ringing.  It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, individuals that 

would come up to me on the weekend and say, have you guys 

got the bells still ringing?  And I indicated to them that due to a 

motion in this Assembly and due to a process of consultation, 

no the bells weren't ringing, that indeed we were in the process 

of dealing with a motion regarding 

the bells.  But we'd also spent a number of days in this 

Assembly dealing with government business. 

 

And if it was appropriate in 1989 to deal with government 

business, the opposition felt that it very important and I believe 

the government of the day, if they believed as opposition 

members we should get on with government business, then 

why are we as . . . they as government now, not getting on with 

the business of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may or may not remember the poll that was 

conducted by our caucus.  Mr. Speaker, I believe it was in the 

neighbourhood of some 76 to 80 per cent of the people 

believed that the government wasn't acting properly and that 

they should not have been pushing forward legislation 

unilaterally.  People also spoke out in about the same numbers 

that they didn't like bell-ringing but they felt bell-ringing was a 

tool the opposition needed to address serious points of serious 

concerns that they may have regarding a motion regarding a 

Bill. 

 

Let me go back to 1989 and further comments made by the 

member from Saskatoon South: 

 

 "I may point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the 

rules."  Exactly the same thing that we did here . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, it's obstructive . . . Oh, (and he's 

referring to the Minister of Rural Affairs) . . . says, come on, 

Herman. (I'm quoting.)  Well, Mr. Speaker, what would we 

do?  What could we do? 

 

 (And) The minister of rural affairs wouldn't listen to his 

people; he wouldn't listen.  I suppose he didn't even speak up 

in cabinet; no, he didn't even speak up in cabinet.  He wasn't 

listening to his people, because we got thousands of people 

signing petitions out of his constituency.  But did he listen to 

those?  No, he didn't.  No, . . . (he) didn't listen. 

 

That's what the member from Saskatoon South was indicating 

at the time.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that people really feel 

strongly about government using their position, usurping their 

authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that this Assembly be allowed to 

operate in a uniform and appropriate way, that the committees 

of this Assembly be allowed to work and operate appropriately. 

 

I believe when we look back to 1989, as the olive branches 

were laid out to the members of the Assembly, both 

government and opposition members, it is appropriate that we 

continue to put out olive branches at this time.  And if it takes . 

. . It would be appropriate as well for people across this 

province, and certainly the chairman of the committee, to lay 

out some olive branches to all members and asking them to sit 

down and address the concerns that are raised . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed till 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


