




















































Hansard: August 04, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1969 

 August 4, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending March 31, 1993 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before the break for 

dinner this evening we were discussing the interim supply Bill, 

and the lack of opportunity for the opposition members to ask 

questions.  The Minister of Finance is asking the people of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, for 400 

approximately million dollars to finance the operations of 

government for the next month. 

 

Normally the procedure is that the government puts forward 

this interim supply Bill and the opposition is given this 

opportunity to ask a number of questions on it.  That's how it 

would work under normal circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is not normal circumstances.  They have imposed closure 

on it and we are not able to ask questions on it even though we 

have a number of questions that we would like to ask.  We 

have questions with respect to all the economic development 

type of projects in this province that we think should be 

moving forward -- Saska Pasta, the AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) agreement, the upgrader, the Piper deal, Promavia 

-- things of that nature, Mr. Speaker.  And we're not able to ask 

a single question about them. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the government made . . . first 

of all outright cancelled the plan and then brought it back in a 

fashion, I guess we would say.  And we feel that it's relevant 

that the opposition has the opportunity to ask the minister 

questions with respect to the pension plan, and the costs 

associated with making the changes in the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  We think we should have the right to be able to 

ask this government what they need the money to operate . . . 

what their plans are for this amount of money.  Is it to ram 

through unpopular pieces of legislation?  Is that what they're 

going to use the money for, Mr. Speaker?  Are they planning 

on ramming through Bills in other areas like they're planning 

on doing with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

legislation?  Is that part of where the money is going to go to?  

Will it also, the money, be directed at legal proceedings against 

farmers? 

 

They've got a court case pending right now, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to the GRIP legislation and the GRIP changes.  Is that 

what they need the money for, so that they can fight the 

farmers in court?  The Minister of Justice, is that what he's 

using his allocation -- one-twelfth -- for, to fight the farmers of 

Saskatchewan in court?  I think that's exactly what his plans 

are.  And the Minister of Rural Development, he knows very 

well that that's what they're going to be using the money for, to 

fight farmers in court -- fight the farmers of Saskatchewan in 

court. 

 

Will they be using some of the money for ripping up 

highways, Mr. Speaker?  Is that what they're planning on using 

the money for?  Well apparently they've changed that policy 

now.  They've finally come into the 20th century.  They were 

dragged by the bootstraps into the 20th century by the folks of 

Saskatchewan and told them, they said to them, we don't want 

to go back to the '40s or '50s.  They didn't want to go back to 

the '40s or '50s.  We want to live in the '90s, and at least have 

the opportunity to travel on a highway and not on a gravel road.  

Is there a cost associated with making that change, Mr. 

Speaker?  I think that's a relevant question that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to know.  Is there a cost to deciding to 

make that change and not rip up the highways?  That's 

something that I think the folks of Saskatchewan would like to 

know. 

 

Is there a cost associated with closing the rural hospitals -- the 

wellness plan?  Sixty-six hospitals have been identified in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, as hospitals that could be slated for 

possible closure or conversion.  Is there a cost associated with 

that?  And in the ministry of Health's department, we would 

like to be able to ask some questions with respect to that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Are they planning on closing rural schools?  Is that the next 

step in this evolution of turning Saskatchewan into a 

hinterland?  Is that the next step, Mr. Speaker? 

 

One of their pieces of legislation we think they need money for 

will be the amalgamation of rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker.  

The Minister of Rural Development, he said at the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention that he would go ahead with the amalgamation of 

RMs (rural municipality) whether they liked it or not.  Is there 

a cost associated with that, Mr. Speaker?  And we want to 

know that.  We think we should have the opportunity to ask 

that question to the Minister of Finance.  Is there a cost 

associated with that? 

 

And the minister says ask away.  Well we can't.  You've put 

closure on us, sir.  We can't ask you questions.  We can't ask 

the Minister of Energy questions.  We'd get one opportunity in 

this interim supply.  You want to spend $400 million of the 

taxpayers' money, and you don't want one single question 

asked about it. 

 

The member from Swift Current and the Minister of Energy 

says, let's get the Estimates.  Don't you think the people of 

Saskatchewan have the right to know what you're going to 

spend $400 million on, sir?  Don't you think they should have 

that right? 

 

Well, I do.  I think they should have that right, Mr. Member 

from Swift Current, whether you think so or not.  I think the 

people should have the opportunity to know. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the legislature, seated in the 

government gallery, Mr. Miles Kroll, a constituent of mine.  

He's a farmer out in the constituency.  He's in Regina on 

business.  I'd ask all the members to give him a warm greeting.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 86 (continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was saying I think 

that the people of Saskatchewan should have the right to know 

what this government plans to spend its money on in its 

Appropriation Bill, interim supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it'd be interesting to know about the cost 

of travel of ministers these days.  I think it'd be an interesting 

question.  How much did it cost the Minister of Rural 

Development to fly over the drought zone?  How much did it 

cost?  I think that's a relevant question that should be asked of 

this minister and the Minister of Finance . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . He says again, ask it in Estimates.  Every 

single time we get the same answer, ask it in Estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, but when we get to Estimates they say ask it in the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

We don't get an opportunity to ask the questions, Mr. Speaker.  

We don't get an opportunity to ask questions of these people.  

They don't want answers.  They don't want to give answers to 

our questions, Mr. Speaker, because they're incriminating, the 

type of answers that they'll have to give.  That's the kind of 

thing that we're concerned about with respect to closure in this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is the cost of the constitutional negotiations that's going 

on in the province of Saskatchewan?  I think it's a relevant 

question.  The Minister of Finance isn't prepared to give us 

answers on that as well as a number of other topics.  Is there 

any kind of an industrial development strategy that you people 

have? And there must be a cost associated with that, Mr. 

Speaker.  I am sure there is no industrial development strategy.  

They simply don't have one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We've seen this government, Mr. Speaker, go through several 

series of special warrants.  We've seen them . . . This, I believe, 

is the third interim supply Bill -- all of the types of things they 

would never do.  They campaigned during election on it, said 

they'd never do it.  Here we are, third time around, and they're 

on it again.  And yet this time, a little different this time 

though, Mr. Speaker.  They put closure on.  We don't get an 

opportunity to ask them any questions.  Interesting 

developments in Saskatchewan these days -- two closure 

motions in one day, yesterday. 

 

That's the type of thing that we've come to expect from this 

government, Mr. Speaker.  We aren't going to be given the 

opportunity to ask questions in the future, it's obvious.  When 

we finally get to the legislation dealing 

with other things that are of importance to Saskatchewan farm 

families, we aren't going to be given the opportunity then 

either, I suspect.  They will close off debate when we get to 

those as well, the same as what they're doing on this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think it's important that we were able to ask these types of 

questions.  Are they going to be . . . What is the 

revenue-sharing grants for urban municipalities?  We haven't 

been able to ask a question about that, Mr. Speaker.  Not a 

single member has been able to ask any questions.  And when 

we do ask them -- the member from Arm River asked a number 

of questions the other day -- the Finance minister, what did he 

do?  He sat in his place and wouldn't get up and answer the 

questions, had all his officials around him.  They were all there, 

all of the smart guys that could have give the answer to him.  

He didn't ask them for it, though.  He just sat in his place and 

watched the clock.  That's what happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it's incumbent upon this government to open this closure 

motion up, and give us the opportunity to ask questions with 

respect to this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  It's always been grievance 

before supply.  They want to turn that around  

_- supply before grievance.  Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's the 

way a democracy is supposed to work. 

 

We haven't heard a word from this government, with respect to 

this interim supply, about the federal offer of farm help -- not a 

single word, Mr. Speaker.  We don't have the opportunity to 

ask them whether they're going to accept it or not in this.  They 

have no plans with respect to drought.  They have told us that 

time and time again. 

 

They have no plans with respect to the court case with the farm 

families of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  What happens if you 

lose it, Mr. Rural Development Minister?  What happens if you 

lose it?  The judge has identified the cost at $27.20 per acre in 

this province as the identifiable hurt.  That's on 31 million 

acres, roughly $900 million.  Is there any provision in this 

interim supply for losing that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

They arrogantly sit there and say, Mr. Speaker, we have no 

intention of losing it.  We're going to ram the Bill through this 

legislature at all costs and take the court case away from the 

farmers, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that 

those farmers can afford to take these folks to the Supreme 

Court.  I sincerely hope that they drag these people into the 

Supreme Court and squeeze out that money for Saskatchewan 

farm families, the money that's most desperately needed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think a large part of the motivation for what's going on here in 

the last several months, Mr. Speaker, is they've got a minister 

that's on the ropes.  He's punch-drunk, Mr. Speaker.  He's had 

time after time after time . . . he's been hit in the head with 

what's happening on the GRIP legislation.  And they realize 

and they're rallying around him to try and hold him up, Mr. 

Speaker.  And he's wobbling, literally wobbling.  The farmers 

of Saskatchewan see him every day standing in the legislature 

wobbling and waffling on his answers to the farm families.  

But, Mr. Speaker, that's why we're faced with this type of 

thing, of closure after closure after closure, because they're 

trying to protect the 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

punch-drunk Minister of Agriculture. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the farm families of this 

province want to see him go down for the technical knock-out.  

I think that's what they want to see.  They want to see him set 

aside and hopefully they can bring in a Minister of Agriculture 

with some sense that realizes that you must uphold the law in 

this province, Mr. Speaker.  Must uphold the law, Mr. Speaker.  

Must uphold the laws with respect to the GRIP contracts, must 

uphold the laws, particularly the laws of democracy which 

relate to this interim supply Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite here are chirping about the 

law.  Well the law was broken.  They have no respect for farm 

family contracts, Mr. Speaker.  That law was broke.  And you 

people know it as well as I know it.  And that's why people are 

asking us to be able to have the opportunity to ask questions 

with respect to interim supply.  They want to know where this 

government plans on spending its money.  They want to know 

what their plans are for the future.  They want to know whether 

there's any plans for drought.  They want to know whether 

there's any plans if the possibility of frost exists in this 

province.  In a large part of the province right now the crop is 

very underdeveloped, two weeks behind approximately, Mr. 

Speaker.  Is there any provisions in it, in the interim supply 

Bill, for those eventualities?  I don't think so, Mr. Speaker, 

none whatsoever.  Not one thing are they planning on doing 

with this. 

 

(1915) 

 

They're looking towards the federal government.  Every 

opportunity they get, Mr. Speaker, it's the federal government.  

I'm surprised they aren't looking to the federal government for 

350 or $400 million for this interim supply.  That seems to be 

their answer for everything else in this legislature, Mr. Speaker.  

Call on the federal government.  Call on the federal 

government.  It's not our responsibility.  Call on the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a number of questions with respect to 

health care that we wanted to ask.  We had a number of 

questions with respect to Education, Rural Development, 

Agriculture -- all questions that I think were relevant to this 

interim supply, where they're planning on spending their 

money. 

 

Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, pardon me, I think the 

fundamental question is grievance before supply.  And that's 

been violated, deliberately violated by this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we can only conclude from that is, what are they trying to 

hide in all of this?  There's $400 million approximately that 

they want to spend in this next 30-day period.  What is it about 

that 30-day period does the Finance minister not want us to 

know?  What is he planning on doing that he has to be so 

secretive that he doesn't want to answer say 50, 60 questions, or 

something in that order.  That's about all that ever is asked in 

an interim supply motion. 

 

What is so much of a concern to him that he's concerned to the 

level that he has to impose closure, Mr. Speaker? 

What is it that is holding him back from offering us the 

opportunity to ask questions?  Mr. Speaker, we would have 

only, under the rules that we're currently operating under, 

would only be able to ask the minister one question a piece.  

Ten questions to cover every single department of government.  

And he wouldn't answer them even if we did give them to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's absurd what has gone on here in the last few 

weeks.  The government's simply unwilling and Finance 

minister's simply unwilling to answer questions.  And he 

realizes it's absurd.  In fact he just finished saying he's going to 

answer that.  And we'll be happy to hear his answer to that, Mr. 

Speaker.  Because we agreed what you have done here in the 

last couple of weeks is absolutely and totally absurd, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Finance minister sat on his hands while we asked 

questions -- a few of our members asked questions -- and 

wouldn't answer them. 

 

Why wouldn't he?  He's getting a little bit pinched here the last 

week or so.  They want to get out of here, Mr. Speaker.  

They've got a couple of weeks left.  They feel that they want to 

try and wrap this sitting of the legislature up.  Two more weeks 

approximately is all they can take.  They've got a few members 

that want to go home and do some harvesting probably.  

They've got a few members that are looking for some holidays.  

Half of them haven't been here anyway, Mr. Speaker.  Most of 

the time they've only got approximately 50 per cent of their 

members here.  We don't think that's right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon, he should be 

interested in asking some questions with respect to interim 

supply.  Is there any problem with drought down in your area, 

Mr. Member? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Oh, that's right.  You get down to the southern 

part of Val Marie, there's no problem with drought down there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the farmers down in that area would be 

interested to know what this government's plans are, if there is 

any provision in this interim supply for drought aid.  I'm sure 

they'd be interested in knowing.  Health care, I'm sure, is a 

pretty big concern down there.  I'm absolutely astounded, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'm . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure that when the member 

from Kindersley is finished, I hear two or three other people 

who will be standing up at that time I'm sure who will be 

participating in this debate.  But I would hope that at the same 

time that they would let the member from Kindersley have his 

say.  He has the floor. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's interesting 

the member from Shaunavon again pipes up about the concerns 

down in his area.  Interim supply has no provision for drought 

in it.  Interim supply has no provision in it for the concerns of 

health care in Eastend.  And that member should be well aware 

of those concerns.  There was a public meeting down there and 

500 people turned out and they were concerned about what this 

government's plans are for the future with 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

respect to health care. 

 

And what did he do while he was there?  What did he do, Mr. 

Speaker, while he was there, that member?  He stood up and 

said, you people should get behind your board and help close 

this hospital.  That's what he did, Mr. Speaker.  That's what he 

did, Mr. Speaker.  And the people of that area down there, 

they're pretty concerned about their member, pretty concerned 

about him. 

 

There's been two of the largest rallies in the last year have been 

in the member from Shaunavon's . . . and he still stands up . . . 

well not very often, but he occasionally makes remarks at least 

across the floor to us from his seat.  Never stands and voices 

his concerns, never asks any questions of the Minister of 

Finance.  I think if I was him I'd be standing up and asking 

him, have you made any provision for closing of the hospital in 

Eastend?  Have you made any provisions for drought in my 

area?  Have you made any provisions for the critical wildlife 

habitat down in my area?  Is there any provisions with respect 

to that?  Farmers down there and ranchers are closing their 

property off.  They're closing their property off to hunters, Mr. 

Speaker.  There's no provision in the budget for none of that 

though -- absolutely not a nickel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're concerned about the environmental Bill 

down in that area as well, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker.  No provision 

in that in this interim supply for it -- not a nickel.  Not 5 cents, 

Mr. Speaker, of money available in this interim supply Bill for 

anything that is a critical problem right now in this province, 

Mr. Speaker -- not 5 cents. 

 

And even if there was 5 cents dedicated towards anything, we 

couldn't ask about it.  We can't ask about the kinds of concerns 

that are of interest to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

Where's the industrial development strategy?  Where's the 

economic development strategy in this?  What are they going 

to . . . how much money have they been spending on economic 

development?  Have they spent anything?  Have they dedicated 

5 cents in this Bill towards economic development in this 

province, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Is there 1 cent allocated towards looking into an AECL 

agreement?  Is there?  I don't think there is.  Not 5 cents 

dedicated towards any of that type of thing.  Could have 

brought hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars of investment 

into this province and they don't want to look at it.  They don't 

want to look at it.  They don't want to look at it. 

 

They're more interested, Mr. Speaker, as we've seen in recent 

days, in regulating spandex.  That's why they seem to be 

interested in these days.  They went out to the exhibition and 

told the exhibition people that that's what they were interested 

in.  And the minister's had to retract a lot of his comments; the 

minister's had to retract a lot of his comments with respect to 

that. 

 

But the critical issues that are facing this province right now 

aren't being addressed, Mr. Speaker.  It isn't being addressed in 

their budget; it isn't being addressed in this interim supply Bill; 

and it isn't being addressed by the pieces of legislation that 

they're putting forward.  They're 

stripping the rights of individuals one after another.  One only 

has to wonder where they're going to stop.  One only has to 

wonder where they're going to stop. 

 

We've gone through environmental legislation; critical wildlife 

legislation; all of the farm Bill legislation -- different types of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker.  They've stripped the rights of public 

servants.  They've taken the rights away from Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan holders, Mr. Speaker.  And all they can chirp 

about is stripping spandex.  That's what they're saying over 

there right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But where is there any allocation towards the critical issues that 

are facing the province?  Where is it?  They haven't put 

anything towards it.  If you would consider for a moment 

putting your collective thoughts into the development of this 

province and not into trying to strip rights away from 

individuals in this province, Mr. Speaker, I think we'd be a lot 

better off, and I think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would be 

a lot better off. 

 

They're intent on ramming through legislation, absolutely 

intent on it, Mr. Speaker.  We've seen that in every area.  We've 

seen that in every area, Mr. Speaker.  Legal proceedings 

against farmers -- again another infringement on personal 

rights in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, they're taking the . . . they're 

literally taking the rights of pension holders in this province 

away, Mr. Speaker.  We had a number of questions that we 

wanted to ask about that, but we haven't been given the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it's . . . In closing, Mr. Speaker, grievance before supply.  

Why will you not give us that opportunity to ask the questions, 

Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, why won't the Minister of Finance 

offer up the opportunity to ask questions of him? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it would be an important step forward in 

this province to show some co-operation, if that Minister of 

Finance would stand in his place and say, I've decided that I'm 

wrong.  I've decided that I'm wrong, and we'll give you people 

in opposition the opportunity to ask questions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why would he do that? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Why would he do that, Mr. Speaker?  I think 

because before people in this province want to give him a blank 

cheque of $400 million to spend on whatever he wants, they 

want to ask a couple of questions about it, Mr. Speaker.  We 

had questions with respect to what they are planning doing 

with the one-twelfth of the budget, the allocations that were 

over one-twelfth in each department.  Weren't offered the 

opportunity, weren't given the opportunity.  The only thing we 

were given was closure -- closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fundamental principle of democracy is 

grievance before supply.  That has been denied the opposition.  

And I don't think the people of Saskatchewan will be soon to 

forget it.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to bring some 

reality and sensibility into this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I'm pleased to stand and support this 

Appropriation Bill.  The interim supply is needed to run 

government and the members opposite should understand this.  

The PCs (Progressive Conservative) were not responsible in 

government, so I guess it shouldn't be a surprise that they aren't 

responsible in opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- It has been increasingly clear that their only 

motivation in this legislature, in this legislative session, is 

revenge for losing the election in October.  I remind them of 

the words of Sir Francis Bacon: a man that studies revenge 

keeps his own wounds green.  I've listened to these folks 

ranting and railing about democracy, taking part in personal 

attacks and obstructing this legislature from doing its work. 

 

But we are doing first things first.  We are trying to get our 

finances in order so that we can have choices in the years to 

come.  The people of Saskatchewan want the Minister of 

Finance to put our finances in order, and they want him to get 

on with the business of governing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The former government has followed a policy 

in recent years of supporting commercial ventures by offering 

government guarantees of their debt.  From March 30, 1990 to 

March 31, 1991, the government's guaranteed debt was 

increased by 75 per cent and is currently at $1.693 billion.  

This level of debt guarantees exposes the province to 

significant financial risk. 

 

And we sit here day after day listening to the opposition railing 

about responsibility.  We want to run a responsible 

government.  Several large projects have been undertaken 

without documenting full and clearly understood business and 

public policy objectives.  This lack of documentation has made 

it difficult to evaluate the success or failure of these 

investments, and the impact on the overall economic 

well-being of this province. 

 

Government spending has been at levels which cannot be 

maintained based on the province's revenue-generating 

potential.  To re-establish a more secure financial position the 

government must bring its spending back into order. 

 

And the Minister of Finance is trying to do this, and he's trying 

to get an interim supply through, and you're only interest is in 

obstructing this legislature.  And I respect the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I know that they will be able to see clearly 

through this. 
 

My friend sitting next to me . . . both of us were looking 

through Hansard today, and it is clear, if you take the patience 

to read through Hansard, you can see the obstruction going on.  

And I know that the people of my 

constituency have the patience to read through Hansard and 

they will see it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The Consolidated Fund will be restored as the 

primary means through which the legislature can maintain its 

control of the province's finances.  Legislature and procedural 

changes should be made to curtail the government's ability to 

use alternate, corporate structures, just like you boys did over 

there, and like the Crown Management Board, and special 

funds to bypass the legislature and to avoid disclosing certain 

activities and transitions. 

 

You have the nerve to stand there and talk to us about 

responsible government?  Where were you for nine and a half 

years?  The reporting requirements of Crown corporations will 

be changed in order to ensure that their financial statements as 

well as those of their subsidiaries are available to the 

legislature.  Timing of financial reporting and disclosure to the 

public will be improved in order that it can be effectively 

utilized to evaluate the performance of the government.  Those 

are the things that this Finance minister is trying to do. 

 

And for people using quotes: I was very interested in this quote 

made by Bob Andrew in the budget speech of March 21, 1984. 

 

 We believe that all governments must work in concert to 

reduce budget deficits.  Failure to accomplish this will force 

harsh financial penalties on our children.  It is inevitable that 

mounting deficits will result in unwanted reductions in 

government services and tax increases. 

 

I will repeat that.  Mr. Andrew said: 

 

 . . . mounting deficits will result in unwanted reductions in 

government services and tax increases. 

 

And the people opposite stand there and rant and rail about our 

inability to govern the way we would like to because of the 

mess that they have left us in. 

 

How about Eric Berntson, that famous fellow: we don't have to 

show just cause and we didn't.  This is in 1982 when he fired 

hordes of public servants.  He said, we don't have to show just 

cause and we didn't.  I mean if people are going to stand up and 

put themselves up as the epiphany of moral standards, they had 

better remember some of the things that happened in the past. 

 

How about Mr. Devine: I can't go to every small town . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I believe the 

member should be aware that you don't refer to members, 

current members in the legislature, by their proper names.  You 

refer to them by their constituency.  Order.  The member from 

Regina Churchill Downs should know when the Speaker is on 

his feet you don't interrupt.  He's been here long enough. 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just as soon as it 

was out of my mouth I remembered.  Thank you for bringing it 

to my attention. 

 

I can't go to every small town . . . this is from the Leader of the 

Opposition.  This is his accountability to people.  Remember 

these are the folks that are saying, we go to every small town, 

we consult with everybody.  Let's hear what the Leader of the 

Opposition said: I can't go to every small town to defend our 

health policy and Graham Taylor can't go to every small town 

just because everybody says we have to do that to justify our 

health policies.  By the way when he was talking he was 

referring to the town of Estevan which is 9,500 people.  I 

wouldn't call that exactly a small town. 

 

So when you get all these facts together, a person sees that 

really the members of the opposition really don't have a leg to 

stand on when they talk about accountable and responsible 

government.  I wouldn't want to bore the members of the 

legislature with too many statistics, but I just can't help but 

refer to the accountability for the spending of tax dollars which 

has been seriously undermined over the last 10 years.  We have 

acted to restore public accountability by ensuring that 

legislative committees work as they were intended to, to 

publicly reveal the expenditure of tax dollars and to force 

governments to account for questionable expenditures. 

 

For example, here's some examples, $900,000 spent by the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation on an option 

to purchase the Regina YMCA (Young Men's Christian 

Association) in 1988, written off the books only two years later 

when the former government decided it had no intention of 

purchasing the building. 

 

How about $135,250 spent by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) in 1989 and '90 for advertising it did 

not receive.  I mean it's bad enough they spent hundreds of 

thousands of dollars for the advertising to brainwash people 

that they tried to do, but when they didn't even receive any of 

it; $10,250 a month for six months to Dome Advertising; 

$10,250 a month for seven months to Roberts & Poole 

advertising; 60,000 spent by SPMC in 1989-1990 to conduct 

technical sweeps of government meeting rooms -- I don't know.  

Who do they think was under the tables in the meeting rooms?  

I don't know.  Currently under RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) investigations.  How about the $15,035 worth 

of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  To remind the member, we are 

on interim supply before the House today, and I want her to be 

able to relate what she's saying back to interim supply that is 

before the House.  I've not heard it.  I fail to see the connection 

of expenditures three, four years ago to interim supply here 

today. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your counsel.  I 

guess what I was trying to show is that we, in our interim 

supply, are trying to be more accountable than the former 

government was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- But I know that there are other colleagues 

that have just as much to say as I have.  So these were just a 

few examples of the actions of the former government that 

showed that they weren't accountable. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I support the second and third reading of 

this Bill, and I congratulate the Finance minister on his 

courage.  Because, before I close, I want to say that some of the 

things that we have had to do in the last eight months has taken 

political courage.  I didn't realize that till a friend said to me, 

the things that you are doing takes a lot of courage, Violet.  It 

would've been much easier in a way to put this province deeper 

in debt and not stand up for the things that we feel are morally 

right. 

 

It is much harder to stand up and say that we have to make 

these cuts, that we have to adjust until we can be financially 

free to do the things that we want to.  That is hard for me.  And 

it's hard for me to see the people of Saskatchewan suffering in 

many ways.  But the point is, we just don't have the money.  

And I say congratulations to the Minister of Finance for the 

work he has done, and thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak in support of the second 

and third reading of the interim supply motion.  To listen to the 

opposition earlier today, one might expect the Minister of 

Finance to have horns.  But, Mr. Speaker, this isn't the Minister 

of Finance that I know. 

 

The Minister of Finance that I know has answered questions at 

length and has a prior history of integrity and accountability in 

his financial management. 

 

To have the opposition question the moral authority of the 

government and the Minister of Finance has to be the most 

dramatic turnaround in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former premier and the opposition questions 

the government's commitment to democracy.  This is the same 

member who as leader prorogued the House so he wouldn't 

have to pass a budget, ran the House on special warrants for 

months on end.  He denied democracy by refusing to call 

by-elections.  And he stands unchallenged as the only premier 

in history of the province to wait five years and one day into 

his mandate to call an election. 

 

In fact, prior to the election, I heard he was planning to change 

over to daylight-saving time so he could stay in power for one 

more hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the members opposite that 

process is important.  But not if it takes the place of substance.  

And the substance of this issue is the attempt to avoid at all 

costs needed changes to the GRIP Bill.  Instead of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Again I want to remind 

the member from Regina Lake Centre we are on interim 

supply, and her words must relate to interim supply and not go 

back into the past which may have nothing to do with interim 

supply. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'll 

attempt quickly to make a direct link.  My constituents are 

concerned about interim supply and they're concerned about 

the careful allocation and management of farm protection 

plans.  Instead of haggling over a letter of notice, let's get on 

with the substance of the changes and the impact on farmers 

and on the province's finances.  Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite know what's in the budget.  This is the second interim 

supply Bill.  They had five days of questioning on . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Third, third. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- . . . oh, second and third reading.  They had 

five days of questioning on the first interim supply Bill on 

one-twelfth of the province's budget.  This is merely another 

one-twelfth. 

 

So during the first questioning period, the government 

responded to a full week of in-depth and probing questions 

from both the opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party.  

The place to continue this questioning, I believe, is in 

Estimates.  And it's the responsible thing to do. 

 

But why would we expect responsibility from the members 

opposite?  Mr. Speaker, I'm a member of Crown Corporations, 

and I was shocked when I realized that some members of the 

opposition did not understand the difference between an 

investment and a give-away.  How I wish they had applied the 

same scrutiny to their financial practices that they show so 

much interest in now, and we wouldn't be in this mess. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- I know that my constituents want the 

government that they elected to proceed with governing and 

expect the opposition to assume a more responsible role as 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I support the interim supply 

motion, and I urge the members opposite to join us and get on 

with solving the very real problems in Saskatchewan.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been 

listening with interest to some of the debate that has taken 

place, especially this evening since the supper hour.  I find it 

interesting to hear the bouquets that have been presented and 

offered to the Minister of Finance regarding his interim supply 

Bill that we're discussing here tonight. 

 

Certainly the budget that the government has brought forward . 

. . Of course, Mr. Speaker, we must always remind the 

government to remind their members of the fact that if the 

government had been a little more forthright and 

straightforward with the workings of this House and a lot more 

fairer with the people of the province of Saskatchewan, we may 

not be sitting here 

today.  We may have indeed have been able to work our way 

through the heavy agenda that has been facing us.  And 

certainly one knows that there is a fair bit of the agenda that is 

still before us, or to come before us. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we've been debating the interim supply Bill, 

I've been sitting here and been thinking about the fact that if the 

Government House Leader would have sat back and gave a 

little more consideration before he brought his closure motion 

in, I believe it was last Thursday evening, or gave notice last 

Thursday evening and introduced it and just allowed the 

normal process to evolve, chances are, I believe, that we would 

have had the interim supply passed and we wouldn't be sitting 

here continuing to debate the interim supply Bill. 

 

However, we must bring some points up regarding the motion 

and the Bills that have been presented by the Minister of 

Finance.  One of the reasons we continue to debate the interim 

supply Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that over the period of the 

last two, three days -- and certainly we reflect back to a month 

ago when the last interim supply motion and Bill was brought 

forward -- that on many occasions the opposition attempted to 

derive some information from the Minister of Finance as to his 

reasons for certain allotments of funding that he was asking for 

in his interim supply Bill and in his motions. 

 

And on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, we were continually told 

that, oh that question, we can't deal with it today; I'd ask you to 

go to the minister responsible for that department.  Mr. 

Speaker, I think we all realize when anyone is asking for funds, 

specifically the Minister of Finance in this case, that we are 

going to have questions.  The people of Saskatchewan are 

going to have questions. Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition 

should have some questions to ask of the minister. 

 

I believe the minister should be able to give an account as to 

his reasons for his one-twelfth request that he is making -- 

where it is going to be spent; how it is going to be spent; why 

are the departments asking for more money than the allocated 

one-twelfth.  Certainly we will acknowledge the fact that in 

certain cases there are seasonal differences that come into play 

and certain departments spend more money in the summer-time 

than they do in the winter-time and on that basis we 

acknowledge that and we don't discredit that fact. 

 

But what we have seen over the past few weeks, Mr. Speaker, 

is the fact that the minister, on a number of occasions, has 

refused to answer, but it appears when it was appropriate -- or 

he felt led, or he felt the answer he could get into a political 

speech and felt led to -- he would attempt to give us an answer, 

how be it in most cases basically just worked around and never 

really gave us a direct answer.  Therefore we face the situation 

tonight where we continue to debate a motion which in normal 

circumstances would have probably been through the House 

after one or two sittings and the minister and the government 

would have been granted their interim supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that has been raised and 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

one of the issues that the minister is always or has been 

continually raising before us, is that he has claimed on occasion 

that our questions have been too specific.  Well as an 

opposition MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I've 

been grappling with the question of what type of questions to 

ask.  My feeling is, when you're discussing a money Bill, when 

you're asking for allocation of funding, you must inquire of the 

minister as to the reasons of the funding.  And I realize that the 

Minister of Finance is asking for an allocation of funds on a 

global basis for all departments.  But I think the minister 

should also, as a responsible individual, be asking some 

questions of the departments. Why are you asking for certain 

funding for your department?  Why would the department of 

Parks and Renewable Resources be asking for X number 

thousands of dollars?  Mr. Speaker, we all realize that it's 

summer-time.  And in fact, probably very few people are even 

interested in listening to me speak.  They'd just as soon be 

spending their time on the beach, or on the golf course, or at 

the lake.  And I really don't blame them.  I would too. 

 

But the fact is, no doubt the minister responsible for Parks and 

Renewable Resources, and his department, have come to the 

Minister of Finance looking for extra funds because this is their 

peak season as far as requirements.  I don't think that's a hard 

question, it's a difficult question to pose, nor is it a difficult 

question to get an answer from, because I believe department 

officials, or Finance officials, would have a lot of the answers 

regarding the funding -- the requests that come from the 

different departments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have been asking through these 

interim supply motions, and through the Bill, is we've been 

asking for questions.  And we trust that, whether it's later on 

this evening or tomorrow, that the Minister of Finance will 

indeed answer some of the questions we've been posing over 

the last two, three, or four days, and that he will give us some 

of the real reasons that he needs so many millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate also has centred around a closure 

motion which limited the time of the opposition members or 

members in the House to speak to the motion on interim 

supply. 

 

One of the arguments presented by the Government House 

Leader the other day was that there was more than ample time, 

and that the opposition had had plenty of time to ask questions, 

when in fact we had only just nicely got into the debate. 

 

As well, the Government House Leader indicated that the 

House hadn't progressed very well, and so he was going to try 

and help it along a little bit.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that was 

the wrong thing for him to do.  For he contradicted himself in 

the fact that, as we found out last Friday in question period just 

prior to government motions, the House Leader stood up in this 

Assembly and indicated that very little work had been done.  

And then lo and behold, about five minutes later, the 

Lieutenant Governor comes into the Legislative Assembly and 

gives approval -- gives her nod -- to another 27 Bills that had 

been passed through the House.  And I just want to indicate to 

this Assembly, and indicate to anyone who 

may be watching, that over 44 Bills have already been passed 

through this Assembly.  They've been given Royal Assent, not 

just passed by the Assembly, but been given Royal Assent by 

Her Honour.  As well, we have three or four Estimates that 

have already been passed. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the government was 

more forthright, and more open, and more honest, as they 

continually remind us that they have endeavoured to be, or as 

they plan on being, we would have advanced even further than 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the record can speak for itself.  And in 

fact, I think we just have to go back to the debate that took 

place around the GRIP motion, and just referring to how the 

House could operate and allow interim supply motions to 

proceed. 

 

The fact that when this House was called back into order after 

the 18 days of bell-ringing and a ruling was made that put aside 

the GRIP motion, Mr. Speaker, we all saw how the House was 

able to proceed until that motion was allowed to come back to 

the floor.  And then, of course, the debate took place again.  

And it would appear to me that as long as the Government 

House Leader is going to indicate that he has really an interest 

in sitting down with the Opposition House Leader, the debate 

in this House is going to take place for another number of days. 

 

But I believe, Mr. Speaker, and we all believe . . . and this is 

my second term that I've been here in this Legislative 

Assembly.  But I believe the process of this Legislative 

Assembly has always revolved around the fact of all parties 

within the Assembly working and trying to co-operate and 

trying to overlook their political differences, even though it 

may be difficult, but realizing that we're all human and working 

together to come to some solution so that this House can move 

along orderly.  And I believe we will see over the next few 

days, if there is co-operation on both sides, that we can move 

along in this House. 

 

However, regarding the interim supply, when we talk about 

interim supply, we talk about the difficulty.  And what I 

noticed again when I was visiting in my constituency over the 

weekend, what I'm hearing from more and more people is the 

concern over the agricultural question, the concern over GRIP.  

It's even affecting our area. 

 

And when we ask the minister if there's any extra funding in 

his interim supply motion for agriculture, the minister says no.  

And we ask him, why not?  Why not, Mr. Minister?  Mr. 

Speaker, we were asking the minister just to . . . The people 

across Saskatchewan are looking for the government to make 

their commitment to follow up with the commitment made by 

the federal government and show Saskatchewan people that 

they are interested in agriculture because agriculture plays a 

very vital role in this province. 

 

The minister has also been asking for substantial sums in the 

area of health.  He's been asking for -- I just don't have the 

numbers right in front of me -- but many millions of dollars in 

the health field.  And yet people across Saskatchewan, no 

matter where you go when you run 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

into people, people are concerned about the fact that services 

are being . . . optometric services are being cut or discontinued 

or chiropractic services. 

 

And as we've seen over the last period of number of days, Mr. 

Speaker, the number of petitions that we've been presenting 

into this Assembly . . . and again a flood of petitions again 

appeared in our office, Mr. Speaker.  And I must indicate to the 

House that it wasn't something that we had to run around and 

generate -- a few phone calls and just talking to the 

professionals.  The professionals themselves decided to start 

doing something.  People in my constituency ask what can they 

do to address the concern they have regarding level 1 and 2 

care funding in our area. 

 

And it's not just in my constituency.  And when a person asks 

of the minister, where is the health spending going and funding 

going through your interim supply motion for the month of 

August . . . where's it going to be spent?  People are saying, 

well how come the government is talking of cutting back 

services in level 1 and 2 care?  And they're asking what can we 

do. 

 

And all . . . I indicated to them they can start writing me letters, 

or if they want they can take the moment and put petitions 

together.  And it's surprising to see the number of petitions and 

the number of people that are willing to go out now, start 

taking their own petitions and getting people to sign petitions -- 

not just in health care but in agriculture.  And I find that 

amazing, Mr. Speaker.  It hasn't taken a lot to generate this type 

of activity; people are willing to get out and do it themselves. 

 

But what I find, Mr. Speaker, even though it's . . . The fact that 

it's August 1, the middle of summer, there are a lot of people 

yet who haven't had the reality of the government's budget hit 

them.  They haven't . . . as more people run into the fact of the 

increased costs they are facing in drug costs, Mr. Speaker, the 

more my phone begins to ring, the more people call.  There's so 

many areas that people are beginning to call on as the realities 

of the government's proposed budgets start to hit home. 

 

What about the home care boards?  What kind of funding is the 

minister making available through his interim supply? 

 

One of the local boards that my father happens to be a part of 

and sits on that board drew up a budget based on the promise 

made in the financial statement indicating that there was going 

to be an increase of 19.5 per cent funding to home care boards.  

And this local board drew up their budget based on that 

scenario, only to find when the actual dollars came through, 

when the letter came through indicating the type of funding 

increases they could receive and could expect, that it was 5 per 

cent. 

 

Therefore they were over-budgeted by 14 per cent.  And in this 

case it was some $50,000 that now the board has to go back to 

and find out where are we going to pare the services that we 

were kind of expecting we could offer people in light of the 

fact that the government, the Minister of Health, the Minister 

of Finance, have been cutting and are indicating that they're 

even going to cut more of the services that our seniors have 

been expecting 

and our seniors who have worked so hard to offer and give to 

our province, to their communities, and to our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at interim supply, one must ask . . . 

And certainly it's August 1, but it's half-way through the 

summer season, and our students, many parents and many 

students, are all very well aware of the fact that the educational 

season is going to be upon us very shortly.  And I look at the 

government's commitment to students and to student program 

this year.  And one wonders why the Minister of Finance 

wouldn't have taken . . . or the, I'm not exactly sure which 

department it falls under . . . I believe the Minister of Justice 

was handling it, but the Partnerships '92 program. 

 

Last year there was some $6 million available to businesses 

and individuals across this province to hire students who would 

be going to university, furthering their education.  It was a 

process whereby the government put out, I believe, $2.50 an 

hour as long as a business would put up the first five.  So you 

could hire a student for $7.50.  And, Mr. Speaker, many 

students across this province, that's how they derived the 

revenue they needed to go back to university.  And I know 

there are many students this year who are struggling, 

wondering where they're going to get the finances and the 

revenue to get back to university this coming fall.  Not only 

that, they've got the student loans that are now starting to pile 

up. 

 

And I don't know of anyone who really wants to build a student 

loan because as soon as you get out of university whenever you 

finish and graduate from university, Mr. Speaker, you face the 

challenge of not only looking for work, but within six months 

having to start to pay back your student loan. 

 

So it would appear to me that if the minister would have . . . 

and cabinet would have made a decision through their interim 

supply motion, they could have allocated some extra funding.  

Because I have had questions come across my desk: how come 

I was turned down? I had everything in order; in fact I talked to 

the department.  The department indicated they just about sent 

my approval application out, only to have a note coming across 

the desk saying:  don't send it; we've already spent our funds.  

Why couldn't the minister and the cabinet have made a decision 

to allocate more funding through this interim supply motion to 

help young people and students across this province? 

 

(2000) 

 

I believe when you look at the commitments the government is 

making as well, they've given us a lot of token commitments 

through speeches about how they are going to strengthen our 

educational services.  And yet people right across this province 

are wondering where we're really heading in education. 

 

I think the individuals who are worried the most are certainly 

the small communities and people in rural Saskatchewan.  

What I find, Mr. Speaker, is that many people are really 

wondering: does this government really care about the rural 

community? 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And the rural community certainly, Mr. Speaker, when a 

school or when even three grades leave a school such as 

happened in the Wapella area . . . and I realize that the fact of 

schools or grades being moved from one community to the 

other lie with the local school boards.  But, Mr. Speaker, if we 

could create the initiative that would create more jobs and more 

job opportunities through development in our rural 

communities, rather than just tying it all into our large urban 

centres, we could strengthen our smaller communities.  We 

may not save them all, but, Mr. Speaker, certainly there are 

many communities out there that with some support from 

government, with government showing that they were really 

interested in them, that they could receive the strength they 

need to continue to operate as a community and to serve each 

other and to serve the surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the areas that really disturbs me and 

disturbs people across this province, regardless of politics, is 

the fact that again as we discussed and debated the interim 

supply motion this time, we talked about the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many women in Saskatchewan were really 

counting on that pension plan as an added bonus for their 

retirement years; albeit in some cases many of the women who 

entered the plan entered with the fact that they'd only be 

contributing a few years.  But the fact was, whether it was 15 

or 20 or 150 or $200 more a month, Mr. Speaker, that would 

mean a lot to a lot of people across our province.  In light of the 

fact that even though inflation right now is in that 1 or 2 per 

cent, we're not always guaranteed that it's going to stay there.  

And many people are put in difficult situations where they may 

not have a large nest-egg to invest when they retire.  So I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, we all must plan for our retirement years. 

 

I realize, Mr. Speaker, that people are asking for fiscal 

responsibility.  But people don't want fiscal responsibility and 

have it all put on the feet of those who can least afford it.  And 

it appears that the requests that have come from the Finance 

department, that have come from this government, are certainly 

doing that. 

 

As one elderly couple indicated, that they thought that with 

their pension plan, with the Canada Pension and the pensions 

they had set aside, that they would be able to live quite 

comfortably without becoming a burden to their family and a 

burden to the taxpayers.  However as the bills started coming 

due for their drugs, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden they find 

themselves some $300 less a year than what they had before 

and even higher once they reached the maximum . . . your 

pay-out, Mr. Speaker, your premium due.  And then they're 

paying 35 per cent instead of 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes many people want to see fiscal responsibility.  

They want to see the government setting a precedent and 

holding the line.  But also, Mr. Speaker, I believe one thing we 

must remind taxpayers of is the fact that this government since 

October or since November 1, I think also must indicate that 

even the auditor, the Provincial Auditor, has a number of 

questions he'd like to raise with the government and has raised 

in Crown 

Corporations Committee -- questions asking why did the 

government transfer so many millions of dollars from a Crown 

corporation to the Consolidated Fund and then write that off, 

just write it completely off.  In fact I believe the Department of 

Finance, their figures are some place in the neighbourhood of 

$1.5 million.  And then the Minister of Finance keeps coming 

and telling us, well he had to make the decisions that he's 

making because of the difficulties that his government found 

itself in. 

 

Difficulties I must indicate, Mr. Speaker, are totally based on 

some of the decisions they made themselves, of taking debt, 

amortized debt, and writing all off, consolidating it into one 

year, writing it off, putting it at the feet of the former 

government and now telling Saskatchewan people we've got to 

hold the line and draw the reins in tighter. 

 

And as the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd indicated tonight, 

there's no doubt in my mind that three years down the road as 

we get close to another election, who knows?  Maybe the 

Heritage Fund that we did away with, voted a motion to do 

away with it because as the government indicated, it wasn't 

necessary any more . . . We may find that all of a sudden there's 

a big balloon comes out of the sky with so many million dollars 

more that the government's able to go to the people with and 

say, look what we did for you. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what's the government doing today?  

What's the Minister of Finance doing today?  In his interim 

supply motion, what is he doing for people today?  How is he 

helping people today?  That's what people are interested in. 

 

They're interested in knowing how . . . not specifically whether 

the government's just going to put a dollar in their hand, but the 

fact that the government isn't going to take two out of their 

hand, two out of their hip pocket while they're putting one into 

their hand.  And that's what we find so disturbing in what 

seems to be happening in our province today. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as I've been reviewing Hansard over 

the past number of years, we find that the interim supply 

motion has varied and the debate has varied from everything 

from agriculture to health to education, and one begins to 

wonder whether or not we are really specifically . . . what's the 

specific debate on interim supply is. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when a person looks at the motion 

before us and looks at how government spends money, it seems 

to me that, as I indicated earlier, we must continue to raise the 

questions of how government is spending money, where they're 

spending money; why are they spending so many million of 

dollars in this field? 

 

Why is the minister asking for funding right now?  I'm not 

exactly sure why the minister didn't come to this Assembly two 

months ago asking for two months of interim supply if 

necessary.  Certainly we realize that the interim supply motions 

come forward because the government hasn't had their budget 

passed yet. 

 

But I must indicate, Mr. Speaker, that very few of the 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

Estimates have been raised or even brought forward to the 

Assembly.  And if we haven't got the ability to discuss 

Estimates, how are we going to ever reach the end of the day 

whereby the budget is eventually passed so that the government 

has their allocation of funding to carry them through their fiscal 

year? 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, when we discuss interim supply we find that 

it has been, as my colleagues have indicated, has been 

traditional to have grievance before supply, and it has been 

traditional over the years to be somewhat wide-ranging in the 

debate on the interim supply motion -- not just on the interim 

supply motion but on any motion bringing forward, whether it's 

talking about a government's record, or whether it's talking 

about an opposition's record.  But we must, we must know how 

the government is spending its money. 

 

I must indicate, Mr. Speaker, that when we are talking about 

Estimates . . . And certainly many members in this Assembly 

will be aware of the fact that as we were discussing Estimates 

with the member from Regina Churchill Downs, the fact the 

member made a commitment to the opposition to respond to a 

number of questions.  And he's responded directly and we 

appreciated that.  On other questions, Mr. Speaker, the member 

referred us to another part or another minister and his 

department, and then when we got to that minister, we found 

out that we had to go back to him.  It's been a circle, a broad 

circle we've been going in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk about interim supply, one 

must wonder what effect the 1 per cent sales tax increase has 

on the allocation of funding.  Is the revenue going to come in, 

that the minister expects to spend?  Certainly he's asking for 

one-twelfth through his interim supply motion, but how much 

of the . . . how much revenue is the minister expecting from the 

1 per cent increase in sales tax?  Certainly many people across 

this province would feel that there has been a substantial 

increase in the taxes they are paying and the cost for them to 

live in this province. 

 

We've seen . . . Additional revenue must be being generated 

because we've seen increases in fuel taxes; certainly, as I've 

indicated, in prescription drug changes, chiropractic services, 

power bills, and our SaskTel bills. It doesn't matter where you 

look.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can't help but think that the 

minister is definitely going to have a little balloon in his budget 

because the last cheque that came into my possession, I 

automatically filled in my bank book only to find out when the 

notice came out that it was $30 over, $30 extra disappeared in 

taxes.  So I think that's an indication that we're all facing the 

fact that if we're going to expect the services, we're going to 

have to pay for them. 

 

And we need to know; we must know; people across 

Saskatchewan want to know how their tax dollars are being 

spent.  They want to know if their tax dollars are being spent 

wisely or not.  And we can debate whether tax dollars are being 

spent wisely or foolishly. People have different ideas of what is 

wise and responsible spending on taxes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that and I believe very sincerely, 

that one of the areas that . . . and I'll come back to it for a 

minute.  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, by helping people 

plan for their future, would be a benefit to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to the Minister of Finance in the fact that he 

wouldn't have people coming and people needing the services 

of government, because they would be able to build for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go through all kinds of scenarios as to the 

extra costs that people are facing.  But I believe in the end the 

Minister of Finance will have to answer to the people of 

Saskatchewan as to how he is spending his money, whether it's 

through the interim supply motions, the interim supply Bill that 

we're presently discussing right now . . . And as I indicated 

earlier, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if the government would 

give the opposition even a bit of a chance and come and sit 

down with the opposition and we could start to work together, 

with the government, asking the government to help us out by 

bringing forward Estimates on the basis of the availability of 

our members -- as we have worked with the government when 

we've asked them for certain Estimates if they'd like to bring 

them forward, only to find that ministers weren't available; and 

we said fine, let's move on to another estimate -- Mr. Speaker, I 

think there is room for this House to work. There is room for 

this House to operate. 

 

But we must have to, we must ask the minister, we must ask 

the House Leader, we must ask the government members, to 

certainly work along with us.  And we, I believe, can work 

along with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, I just want to . . . I think, Mr. 

Speaker, I have brought forward all the points that I feel that 

should be addressed through the interim supply and that I'd like 

to raise in the House.  And at this time I will allow other 

members to speak in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

be able to rise tonight to speak on this motion, this Bill by the 

Minister of Finance.  But I would much rather have spoken 

before it reached this stage when we had time to ask questions 

and receive some answers, if we can, from the minister.  

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that's no longer the case. 

 

What has happened in this House and why we feel that this Bill 

should not be read a second and third time is that because we 

did not get the opportunity to ask the questions that we 

rightfully should have had the opportunity to ask and that we 

should rightfully have received some answers to. 

 

Through the use of closure twice in the same day, we have 

reached the point where we cannot ask those questions.  Some 

of the questions that should have been asked dealt with the 

interim supply of Education. I looked over what has been done 

in the past during this session, and just prior to it, for the 

Education Estimates or the spending for the Education 

department. 

 

We had a special warrant for April, Mr. Speaker, for $69.646 

million.  In May we had a special warrant for $106.358 million.  

In both of those cases, because they were special warrants, Mr. 

Speaker, we did not even have 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

an opportunity to ask a single question on that because the 

money was spent, in the case of April, before the House was 

called, and in the May special warrant, because the Minister of 

Finance didn't come forward and give us that opportunity.  We 

had the opportunity to debate the larger budget after it was 

presented but not the specific items for each department. 

 

Interim supply was first presented to this House for June.  The 

member from Cut Knife-Lloyd mentioned that we debated the 

interim supply for the June supply for five days.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we debated it for three days: May 28, May 29, and 

June 1.  Three days only did we get a chance to question the 

Minister of Finance on that. 

 

(2015) 

 

And it's very interesting, when I looked at the Education 

Estimates that was presented in that Appropriations Bill, 

$156,566,700; more than double what was asked for in the 

April special warrant; $50 million more than was asked for in 

the May special warrant.  In the July special warrant, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Finance asked for in his 

Appropriations Bill, $76,685,300 for the Department of 

Education.  This August, the Bill we're debating today, asks for 

$76,685,200; $100 less than was asked for last month. 

 

If you total up all those numbers for the five-month period, you 

come up with $485,940,500.  Mr. Speaker, that works out to 52 

per cent of the budget to be allocated for the entire year.  We've 

gone through five months, Mr. Speaker, two months of which 

is the summer-time and when the schools are not in session.  

Universities are in session to a limited amount with summer 

classes.  But we already spent over half of the budget, and I 

would like to have had the opportunity to ask the minister to 

explain that a little bit. 

 

Why has he allowed the Department of Education to spend 52 

per cent of their budget in five months?  What's going to 

happen in February or March next year?  Are we going to run 

out of money for the Department of Education?  Or is he going 

to have to go back and ask . . . is the Minister for Education 

going to have to go back and ask the Minister of Finance for 

some more money?  If you take the supply that's left, it works 

out to an average of $62 million a month, a little bit more than 

that, Mr. Speaker, but not a lot. 

 

Now the spending that has gone on in the first five months of 

this fiscal year has been very large.  If that carries on the 

Minister of Finance is going to be very short of money to 

supply Education at the end of the year.  And I think we needed 

that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be able to ask some questions 

as to where that money has gone to, what has it been spent on, 

and what is going to happen in the future.  What is he going to 

ask for next month? 

 

This possible shortfall is going to have some serious 

ramifications on what happens to the education facilities in the 

coming school year.  It's going to have some very serious 

ramifications on the number of students that are eligible for 

student loans.  They may be eligible, but they may not receive 

them. 

In Estimates, the Minister of Education the other night, I was 

asking her about a program dealing with disabled people who 

would like to have the opportunity to attend secondary 

education.  I mentioned a constituent of mine who was in a 

wheelchair, was looking forward to the opportunity to 

attending university.  But because of funding restraints, she 

could not do so. 

 

I asked the minister to review that situation, and she agreed that 

she would.  Then I get looking through the newspaper, Mr. 

Speaker, and I find another young lady that's in the same 

position, a Jennie Link, from Prince Albert.  Her back was 

broken in a car accident two years ago.  She's paralysed from 

the neck down.  And she would like to take advantage of this 

program, the vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons 

program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would liked to have been able to ask the Minister of 

Finance whether or not he was going to supplement the 

Department of Education's budget to be able to provide my 

constituent and Jennie Link with the opportunities to attend an 

educational institution to further their education and to provide 

for their future. 

 

We have seen a number of changes in the government's 

program.  And because we have seen these changes in the 

government's program, we should not be passing this 

Appropriation Bill tonight, Mr. Speaker.  We should have the 

opportunity to go back and question the Minister of Finance on 

the policy that is . . . where the government is spending their 

money. 

 

Because the government has changed their ideas on highways, 

that's going to cause some more money to be spent, because if 

they're not turning highways into gravel roads -- if you're 

putting pavement on them instead, doing repairs -- that costs 

money.  So the Minister of Finance is going to have to have 

that in the Highways department budget some place.  Because 

it's going to be happening this summer -- you can't do that in 

the fall or in the winter -- we needed the opportunity to ask the 

Minister of Finance questions as to whether or not . . . what he 

was spending. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, as my colleague mentioned 

earlier, the policy on that was changed.  It's going to make it 

necessary that the government have new funds available to 

spend on this program.  If the government is prepared to 

change their policies on highways and on Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they are already changing 

their policies on some of the items in education.  Perhaps they 

are already changing their policy on the vocation and 

rehabilitation of disabled persons program.  And perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, if we could have asked the questions, we could have 

found out whether or not that was the case and whether or not 

people like Jennie Link are going to have the opportunity to 

attend for further education, to attend a university or a technical 

school. 
 

When we look at the portion of the Education budget which 

will be spent this August -- 76 million-plus dollars -- I would 

like to have had the opportunity to ask the Minister of Finance 

whether any of that money was being spent on additional 

repairs and renovations to schools.  The Minister of Education 

stated that she was still looking 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

at further renovations to schools, that she had 64 schools that 

were initially on the list and that she was looking at additional 

schools.  Well it would have been nice to have been able to ask 

the Minister of Finance whether or not he was budgeting for 

any additional funds to do exactly that.  But unfortunately 

because of the use of closure, Mr. Speaker, I will not get that 

opportunity.  And the people of Saskatchewan will not be given 

the opportunity to find out whether or not it will be in this 

appropriation until such time as we get the opportunity to talk 

to the Minister of Education.  But by that time, Mr. Speaker, 

the money will be spent.  What the government is actually 

asking for is that, let them spend the money and then at some 

point they will tell us what and why and where they needed it. 

 

The same questions, Mr. Speaker, come up when dealing with 

the education.  That's why we should not . . . No, excuse me, 

not with education but with the environment.  Because we 

haven't had the opportunity to ask questions from the Minister 

of Finance with his appropriations for the Department of the 

Environment, I believe that we should not be passing the 

second and third readings of this Bill, that somehow some 

mechanism should be in place to allow us to have that 

opportunity to ask those questions. 

 

We have seen Bill 3, the environment Bill from the Minister of 

the Environment, come forward in the House, been debated in 

Committee of the Whole.  She has in there a provision in the 

explanation notes, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to read to you 

because it deals with financing.  And I quote: firstly, the ability 

of the minister to prescribe fees and charges for a number of 

activities will allow the department to become more 

self-supporting. 

 

Well once this Bill becomes law and receives Royal Assent, 

Mr. Speaker, reading from this and from what's in the Bill, it 

would seem that the Department of Environment will be able to 

generate some of its own income through its fees and charges.  

If that is indeed the case, has the Minister of Finance taken that 

into account in his appropriations for this interim supply for 

August?  We should have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be 

able to find out whether or not that is indeed the case. 

 

The Minister of Finance is supplying $897,000 to Environment 

and for Public Safety.  If the department can generate some of 

its own income, perhaps they don't need that much.  If they do, 

then what additional things are they spending that money on?  

And those are the kind of questions we need to be able to ask 

when the Minister of Finance comes to the House and asks for 

interim supply. 

 

Most of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, did not have the 

opportunity to stand up in this House and ask any questions 

dealing with their areas that they are critic for.  I didn't have the 

opportunity, and I would have liked to have had that 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, but it was taken away from me. 

 

There is quite a concern dealing with some of the Bills that are 

before the House that are being funded by the Minister of 

Finance, and the Environment department is one of them.  

There are things happening out around Saskatchewan where 

the Bills are having an effect on the 

people.  The Minister of Finance is supplying the funds to carry 

out those procedures, and yet we can't find out exactly what's 

going on.  I'm hearing one story from the public as to what the 

Department of Environment is doing.  I ask the minister, and 

she has a different story dealing with funds coming into the 

department. 

 

So if we could have asked the Minister of Finance whether or 

not he was actually collecting any income from the public 

dealing with the Department of Environment and how he was 

spending it, then everyone would have had an opportunity to 

know what is actually happening out there.  As it was, we don't 

know yet.  Hopefully at some point in time, Mr. Speaker, we 

will find out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when closure was used on this Appropriation Bill, 

the House Leader stated that because of the obstruction of the 

opposition it was necessary to do so.  He stated again today that 

we have held up this House for some 57 days in dealing with 

GRIP legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure everyone in this House knows and 

everyone in the general public knows that that cannot be the 

case.  I would like to be able to take credit for having held up a 

Bill for 57 days in the House when we have been sitting for, I 

believe, 58 . . . this is our 58th day.  But we could not start 

filibustering on the GRIP legislation before the Speech from 

the Throne came down, and that was the first day of this 

session. 

 

In actual fact, when you look at the length of time that we have 

held up the GRIP legislation -- we rang the bells for 18 days; 

the member from Morse spoke on the motion to return the 

GRIP Bill to the legislation for one day -- if you take the days 

out of that 18 days that were holidays or that were a weekend 

when we would not have been sitting, it works out to 11 days.  

So a total of 12 days, Mr. Speaker, that we have held up a piece 

of legislation. 

 

Now that may seem excessive to the government, but I don't 

believe that's where the fault lies, Mr. Speaker.  If the 

government wished to get their appropriation Bills through, 

their other Bills through this House in a timely manner, perhaps 

the place to have started this process would have been the 

middle of February rather than coming into the House at the 

end of April.  An extra month and a half would still put us into 

the middle of June today, and then perhaps the members of the 

House would not feel this urgent need to get back out, to have 

their summer holidays, to visit their families.  We all would 

like to have that opportunity, Mr. Speaker.  We would like to 

have had the opportunity to discuss the interim supply Bill, but 

as it turns out, that is not to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talked of open and 

honest government, of co-operation.  All those are very fine 

words, and they should be part of the operations of this House.  

But, Mr. Speaker, when an appropriations Bill is rammed 

through the House with one day . . . less than one day's debate, 

it makes it very difficult to be co-operative. 

 

And you have to wonder, when a government does this, what 

are they trying to hide?  Where is their open and honest 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

government?  Where is their open and honest debate?  The 

members, over the last few days, have demanded debate.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we have been up on our feet today providing 

some debate.  Some of the members opposite have had some of 

their first opportunities to stand up and provide some debate.  

And that's all well and good, but we needed the opportunity; 

the people of Saskatchewan needed the opportunity; and if the 

government back-benchers wanted, they would have had the 

opportunity to ask questions on the interim supply, had closure 

not been used. 

 

(2030) 

 

How do the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, find out 

exactly what the government is spending the money on?  By 

the time the final reports come out of this House from each 

department, the money will be gone.  Nobody will have had an 

opportunity at that point to have a say on where the money is to 

be spent and how it is to be spent.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that we have the debate on interim supply so that the 

public, through the opposition, through the answers from the 

Minister of Finance, actually find out what is going to be 

taking place in the province for the next month, what is the 

government going to be spending their money on and how are 

they going to be spending it and what programs they're going to 

be putting it into. 

 

Now Estimates are a good opportunity to find out what's 

happening in each individual department, but that doesn't tell 

you necessarily what's going to be spent at a certain time and 

when.  An estimate from a department is a global picture of 

each department, rather than letting somebody know that next 

month there is going to be so many dollars allocated to 

construction of schools or repairs to highways or whatever it 

may be; perhaps even what kind of money is going to be 

supplied to farmers in cases of drought, in cases of frost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when will the people of Saskatchewan have the 

opportunity to find out how much the Minister of Health is 

spending?  We can find out what her global budget is because 

it's in the budget that came down on May 7, but we don't find 

out what is going to be spent for the next month, in this case for 

this month.  We don't find out whether or not each individual 

hospital around the province is going to be funded properly, 

whether some hospitals are not going to be funded, whether 

some hospitals are going to be forced to close because they 

have not received that funding.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why 

we oppose this second reading on the Appropriation Bill, 

second and third readings on this Bill.  We need to have the 

opportunity for the Minister of Finance to stand up and give us 

his answers to the questions that we do have. 

 

My colleagues have all asked a number of questions, and yet 

yesterday, when the Minister of Finance had the opportunity to 

stand up, he did not do so.  My colleague from Arm River 

spoke and asked a number of questions, but the Minister of 

Finance did not respond to those questions because the closure 

Bill that was placed on this appropriations didn't prevent him 

from asking the questions but it limited his time to respond, 

and the minister did not desire to take that time. 

Mr. Speaker, it's my hope that if we go through another interim 

supply in another month or less than another month that the 

Minister of Finance, when he brings it forward, will bring it 

forward in such a manner at such a time that will give the 

opposition and the government back-benchers the opportunity 

to ask the questions that we deem appropriate.  The Minister of 

Finance, if he wants to get his Appropriation Bill through in a 

proper time, should bring it forward on the 15th of the month 

rather than the second-last day of the month.  He knows how 

much he's going to have to have.  His ministers should be 

providing him with the information of how much each of their 

departments need, and what they need to spend it on.  He 

should be able to bring that forward to the House, and present 

that here, and ask for interim supply. 

 

That way, Mr. Speaker, the whole idea of grievance before 

supply will be enforced and have an effect.  The public can find 

out what the minister wants the money for, he can answer the 

questions, supply the information, and then we can pass the 

Bill.  If there's any particular items in there that we have some 

serious concerns about, we can question the minister and get an 

explanation on it.  But as the case is today, where the Bill 

comes forward at the very last moment in the month, it makes 

it very difficult for everyone involved. 

 

By doing so, Mr. Speaker, I believe the government is trying to 

put pressure on the opposition to pass the Appropriation Bill in 

a hurry without asking the proper questions.  If the minister 

would bring the Bill forward at an earlier date, give everyone 

the opportunity -- the opposition as well as the government 

back-benchers -- the opportunity to ask questions necessary, I 

believe we would have a much smoother functioning House, 

Mr. Speaker.  We wouldn't have to be using closure on an 

Appropriation Bill. 

 

And that's what the problem is here, Mr. Speaker, and that's 

why I feel that we should not yet be passing this Bill.  We need 

the opportunity to speak on it.  We need the opportunity to ask 

questions.  The government back-benchers also need that 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't believe I have anything else to say on this 

issue but I'm afraid I just cannot support the idea of allowing 

this Appropriation Bill to pass at this time.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed with a 

great deal of sadness that I rise to speak on this particular 

subject, Mr. Speaker.  Often we rise in this Assembly over the 

past few months and find ourselves discussing matters that we 

take rather great pleasure in discussing and working on, but 

passing this interim supply into second reading tonight makes 

me feel as though the people of this province have been 

betrayed because their questions about where the public purse 

is being spent, these questions are not answered and the people 

feel betrayed, Mr. Speaker, because they want to know where 

their money is being spent.  The tax dollars are the dollars that 

we're talking about here. 

 

And in all fairness, I think the people of Saskatchewan have 

learned that they have some rights to know, in a 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

democracy, where their money is going and what it's being 

spent for.  And in all fairness, I think that they should have the 

right to know where, at least in a rather general way from the 

minister, where these dollars are going to. 

 

And that process has been stopped here.  And not having been 

in this Assembly for a long time back, I have no personal 

experience as to whether or not these types of conditions are 

normal.  But the people that we work with assure us that this is 

quite unusual, that in fact it has never happened before that 

interim supply has been granted without the opposition having 

a more lengthy time to discuss those things that are pertinent to 

the spending of the tax dollars. 

 

We have, for example, a quite a long list of things, Mr. 

Speaker, that are not really accounted for.  And I believe in all 

seriousness that the Minister of Finance should take a step back 

and look at what he's doing and perhaps change his mind about 

going on to second reading with the forced situation. 

 

He ought, at this point, Mr. Speaker, to reconsider and go back 

into a discussion and allow the opposition to ask the questions 

that the people of our province want to have asked on their 

behalf. 

 

I have become somewhat amazed at the number of people that 

follow the workings of this Assembly.  And that's good.  

Because like so many other things, the more the people are 

interested the better chance you have of preserving something 

that is good and proper and necessary. 

 

There are an awful lot of people who watch the proceedings in 

our House now through the cable networks throughout our 

province.  We have a lot of people that read the newspapers 

and get the commentaries there.  And, of course, we have the 

coffee shops where folks who have watched and listened pass 

on the information. 

 

And right now they're passing on the information that the 

government has become a dictatorship of secrecy -- the very 

thing that they themselves said in the election last fall, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would never do.  They were going to be an 

open and honest government.  They were going to be totally 

above board.  They were going to give access of information to 

people in all areas, in all fronts. 

 

And here we have a simple matter of interim supply, the money 

that is to be spent for one-twelfth of the year, one month of the 

year, and the government refuses to answer the questions of the 

opposition as to where that money is going to go. 

 

And I suppose in fairness to the minister, he thought that he 

would simply not answer any longer because he felt our 

questions were unimportant or perhaps he thought they were 

frivolous.  But that is a determination that he shouldn't make 

because what is frivolous in his educated mind, having been a 

minister of Finance in a past government as well as this one, 

those things might be commonplace to him but they are not 

commonplace to the ordinary person who votes in the election.  

The ordinary person who might be watching this on television 

might, for example, want to know why there are overruns in 

some of the departments in interim supply, why is there more 

money being spent over the one-twelfth allocation in the 

Department of Highways at this particular time of year.  And as 

the critic for the Department of Highways, I would like to have 

had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to ask the minister about the 

generalities of where that money is going to be spent. 

 

Certainly it would seem frivolous to him that we would ask 

this.  In his opinion it would look frivolous because we have a 

knowledge that most highway work has to be done in the 

summer-time, but at the same time there are many jobs that 

maybe are done by choice rather than by necessity. 

 

For example, when the interim supply Bill is not provided to us 

in such a way that we can ask where the money is going to be 

spent, we don't now know whether or not there is a change in 

policy.  And I heard one of my colleagues discuss this 

yesterday to some extent.  But it's important as the critic that I 

find out whether or not the change of policy to not tear up the 

gravel roads . . . or the paved roads rather, and turn them into 

gravel roads, if a change in policy now affects the interim 

supply.  And then if that change in policy does change the 

interim supply and part of the overrun accounts for that, then, 

Mr. Speaker, there's a good possibility that that is a matter of 

choice of what kind of work is going to be done or how 

extensive that work is going to be done.  And I believe that we 

have the right to ask the questions of the minister in charge just 

exactly, you know, where these monies are being allocated and 

for what reason. 

 

We heard, for example, in the area of highways, again, 

yesterday in the news, it was reported that the Premier has now 

decided that we're going to have a long-term plan to 

double-lane the Yellowhead highway.  And that's fair ball; 

that's well and good.  He says, of course, that the government's 

broke and they won't be doing it right away, but at least they 

have a plan for the future.  And that is good.  We should plan 

for the future.  We've been trying to tell this government for a 

long time that it should set up long-term plans. 

 

But the question of bringing up this particular issue on the 

Yellowhead begs of us to question the minister about other 

roads that are equally important to just as many people.  For 

example the Highway No. 1, past Maple Creek going to 

Alberta, Highway No. 1 needs to be rebuilt too and 

double-laned.  There are just as many people that use that road 

I'm sure as the Yellowhead.  Although I don't have the 

traffic-count numbers, I would be willing to venture a guess 

that it would probably even be more. 

 

The number of accidents of course are again something that are 

statistically recorded, but certainly there are more accidents on 

No. 1 Highway than anyone would care to see.  And we wanted 

to ask the minister in interim supply, if he were carrying that 

long-term plan into those areas and if in fact that long-term 

plan might be shortened up a bit in order so that we could get 

some of this construction going. 

 

We also have a large stretch of the No. 1 Highway east of 

Regina to Manitoba that's very, very important to those 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

folks that travel through that part of our province.  And I'm sure 

that those folks that have accidents on that road would certainly 

be happy to no longer have to endure those kind of accidents if 

they could be prevented by having a double-laned highway. 

 

And then you will say, well the Premier said that we couldn't 

afford it right now, and therefore you would conclude that it 

shouldn't maybe be involved in this particular interim supply.  

But then you see there are ways that you can alleviate accident 

problems with lesser amounts of money being spent. 

 

(2045) 

 

For example, you could build passing lanes along the No. 1 

Highway and the Yellowhead highway, and you could put 

them in in such a way so as to complement the construction of 

a new road when it is built and the passing lane would become 

a part of it.  And you wouldn't in fact be wasting any money at 

all.  You would temporarily though, be alleviating the problem 

in some degree. 

 

And we had hoped that this interim supply would carry in it 

some expenditures in that over above the one-twelfth amount 

of money that's being spent.  We were hoping in all sincerity 

that there would be some commitment to those kinds of 

projects because they do help especially in the heavy traffic 

seasons of the summer when campers are out on the road and 

trailers run a little slower than the normal traffic.  Those 

passing lanes do help to alleviate the problem of accidents. 

 

And it's not a bad idea, and I hope that the Minister of 

Highways is listening, and I hope that the Premier is taking 

note of these things because we haven't been able to ask the 

Minister of Finance the questions as to whether or not this 

overexpenditure over the one-twelfth might possibly include 

some of those measures. 

 

And we seriously hope that maybe he will consider doing some 

of these things and getting them done.  It not only would help 

to alleviate, Mr. Speaker, the problems of the accidents that are 

happening out on our roads and the need to facilitate the traffic 

so that it can speed up in certain areas . . . And just to dwell on 

that for a minute, we could even suggest some of the locations 

for him that would help him a lot in picking out the spots that 

need to have these kinds of improvements.  I'm sure that the 

construction industry would have been quite happy if we 

could've asked the question and found out the answer that in 

fact there was some plan for some of these projects to go 

ahead.  We have an awful lot of our road-building equipment in 

the province that is standing idle right at this moment.  It's a 

sad situation that it's happening that way, especially out in our 

area.  Much of the equipment has already been parked for this 

year.  There are no more tenders being let out and no more 

work is being planned for the rest of this year, and we're really 

only about half way through a construction part of the year for 

highway building and for contractors who normally don't work 

in the coldest winter months. 

 

And we had seriously hoped that some of these plans to build 

some of these passing lanes that don't cost a whole bunch of 

money but would provide so much safety and 

provide some of these contractors with some work so that they 

could finish out the season at least, paying for their fuel bills 

and perhaps the mortgages on their machines . . . But we 

haven't been allowed to ask those questions, so we still don't 

know the answers.  We don't know if there's any money in this 

interim supply for that. 

 

And what I fear, Mr. Speaker, is that when the members 

opposite say to us, well wait around, you can found out in 

Estimates; or wait around, you can talk to the minister about it 

later; or wait around, we'll get around to it -- by the time we get 

around to it, the year might be too far gone to be able to 

actually get any of this stuff implemented.  And there is a need, 

a very serious need, not only for the construction contractors to 

solve their problems, but also for them to supply jobs for the 

young people who work with them in the summer months and 

earn enough money to go back to high school or university. 

 

And so the whole system is having a tendency to back up in our 

province, and we can blame the recession for that, and that's 

fair ball.  But we had hoped that the government might be 

looking at the possibility of expending a few dollars in those 

areas to try to keep this summer flowing through so that those 

people involved would at least have a chance to get some 

dollars to keep on their lives with.  And right now, we just don't 

know if that's going happen or not.  And that's serious, serious 

stuff for the people that are involved. 

 

And we hope in all sincerity that they will look at things like 

explaining to us, Mr. Speaker, where the money went to that 

they've saved in projects like cutting back in Rural 

Development in the grant structure.  I think I've mentioned in 

this Assembly before that the folks out there didn't mind so 

much the fact that they're being cut back, as they wanted an 

explanation to know why they were being cut back.  They want 

a fair, honest assessment of how much it really is, and they 

want to know where that money's going to and where it's going 

to be spent. 

 

If in all sincerity the government showed rural people that by 

cutting back Rural Development they might in fact be using 

some of this money to build passing lanes on the heavy traffic 

highways, I think the rural people would say, well we don't like 

being cut back but we'll accept it because it's for the right 

reason and it's for a good reason, so we'll learn to live with it 

and we'll go along with it. 

 

That's the way country folks are.  I've said that before and I can 

say it again.  In all sincerity, they are willing to pull more than 

their fair weight always. 

 

And I know that the folks in Regina and Saskatoon, the big 

cities, are exactly the same way, Mr. Speaker.  I know for sure 

that when the urban people find that they're being cut back on 

some of their grants, even in spite of the fact that we can make 

political hay out of saying that they've increased your taxes 

enough to earn 200 million more dollars and still they're going 

to have a $517 million deficit, even though we can say that and 

be accurate, according to the budget report originally, I'm sure 

that when we cut back the people in the urban centres through 

their grant structures, to the urban municipalities, that the 

people in those cities would say, we don't like that either, but if 

it's spent in the right place for the right 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

reason, we can live with it.  We'll tolerate it too.  We can do as 

much as rural folks, and we'll go along with it.  And we'll do it 

for the good of the province and the good of our young people 

and the good of keeping the system working. 

 

I know they're that kind of fine people.  And they would work 

hard.  But how can we expect them to be comfortable in 

accepting that role if the government isn't open and honest, as 

they said they were going to be, and allow them to know where 

these dollars are in fact going to be spent?  And right at the 

moment, we don't. 

 

We just simply don't know where the 500 billion . . . or the $5 

billion, rather, is going to be spent.  We don't know where the 

$517 million deficit really is caused from.  We don't know if 

this money's going to create any jobs or if it's going to help any 

people because we haven't been allowed, as an opposition, to 

delve into this. 

 

We could have, in interim supply, we could have gotten to the 

roots of some of it if the minister would have seriously 

answered some of the questions.  But he refused.  He wouldn't 

answer.  He said, you can go to supply . . . or to other areas of 

government business.  You can find out not from supply, but 

you could find out from the Estimates. 

 

And the reality is that we keep getting put off and put off.  And 

I suppose that's good strategy for a government, and maybe 

every government does it that way.  But having been here just 

for a short while, it certainly is a frustration never to be able to 

finally get to the point where you ask a straight question and 

get a straight answer. 

 

For example, we find Rural Development was brought in here 

with the Rural Development minister and his experts and aides 

with him to help him with the answers, and we were into a 

discussion about how the allocations to rural municipalities 

were made.  And I questioned the minister as to how he had 

come up with the figure of 7.4 per cent average reduction in 

grants to rural municipalities.  And you will recall, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister was good enough to send me across 

some papers that gave all of the figures from all of the 

municipalities on that day. 

 

The result was that when you totalled up all 298 municipalities 

and their cut-backs, the average cut-back was 18.3 per cent, not 

7.4.  And when I asked for the formula and wanted to get some 

more answers on how this thing works, we found ourselves at 

the end of that particular day and the next day, lo and behold 

this subject is no longer on the order paper, and lo and behold 

we've never ever been able to find this minister in this 

Assembly in a position where we could ask him the question in 

a manner that he would be required to give us an answer.  And 

we've never gotten the answer, and municipalities don't still to 

this day know why they are being cut back 18.3 per cent 

instead of the 7.4 per cent that the government said all through 

last winter and all through the spring and all through the 

summer that, in fact, it was supposed to add up to. 

 

And then you find the government saying, like a used-car 

salesman, trust me; don't ask any more questions; trust me; the 

old car was driven by the little old lady from 

Pasadena.  And I suppose the budget may fall apart about the 

same way. 

 

In reality, Mr. Speaker, in reality the people of this province 

don't know where the money is being spent.  They don't know 

where the money has been saved in certain areas is going to be 

spent, and I can't blame them for not knowing because I'm in 

this Assembly, where I'm supposed to be able to find those 

things out, and I can't tell you where it went.  I don't know 

where the money's being spent.  I've spent weeks and weeks 

studying this thing through and I find many, many questions 

and no answers because there are never any details in any of 

this budgetary stuff -- none whatsoever.  You have to ask 

questions and get answers to find out where these dollars are 

going to go or where they have gone.  And if nobody answers, 

then you simply can't find out. 

 

And that's not what the government campaigned on.  They said 

they were going to be open and honest with the people, and yet 

the people know less about what's going on in our province 

today than they have ever known.  There's mass confusion in 

the country as to where the dollars are going or why their taxes 

are so high.  And certainly it must concern everyone involved, 

Mr. Speaker, that we would have a decision to go into the 

second reading of an interim supply without at least some of 

these questions being answered in somewhat of a even general 

or broad way. 

 

It would be nice if we could get into some detail. Certainly it 

would be a lot better.  But even if we couldn't get the absolute 

detail, we might be able to get some kind of a general feeling 

for what's going on and where the money in fact is going. 

 

We've got all kinds of concerns.  The other day my colleague 

was talking to the Minister of Education about the expenditures 

that go on in the Department of Education.  And that of course 

is part of the interim supply, and I guess education takes up one 

of the bigger amounts of money that we spend in this province.  

My colleague just noted that it's the second largest part of our 

budget. 

 

And certainly when we have situations like my constituency 

where there was some threat this past winter that some of the 

schools might in fact be closed and a very controversial report 

came out that suggested that in fact might happen, the people 

wanted to know then -- as they want to know now -- are these 

plans totally on hold?  Or are there dollars involved in this 

interim supply that might be going towards that kind of a 

project?  Would there perhaps be money saved and show up in 

interim supply as a result of a program or a plan to close some 

particular schools? 

 

I've had people phone me up and ask me, is there any 

possibility that our school will be closing up?  And I've said, 

well none that I know of, but I'll try to find out from the 

ministers in charge.  And one of the places we could do that of 

course would be in a discussion about the finances and where 

they're going to be spent.  We haven't been able to tie anybody 

down in any other area of the workings of this Assembly to get 

answers that can be depended on. 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And I guess while honour is not the only thing that binds 

people in this Assembly, probably that is the most important 

part, the reality being that if you say something in our 

Assembly and later on explain to the people that you made a 

mistake, we accept that as being an honourable thing to have 

happen.  But most members, I think, take a serious look at 

wanting to be as close as they can to being right when they set 

up an explanation of whatever is going on.  So when we ask 

questions and they answer them and they say we're going to 

spend so many dollars on education, we're not planning on 

saving any by closing such and such a number of schools, we 

pretty well think that we should be able to, on the face of it at 

least, take that as an honourable commitment -- somebody's 

word that can be counted on. 

 

I guess it's a little bit like the old days, Mr. Speaker, when we 

didn't know about fancy things like written contracts, when 

people went around and made their deals and they shook hands.  

And that was your oath and your bond in a contract that was 

even more binding than anything that you'll ever see written on 

paper today because these days when contracts are written 

people find loopholes in the law.  They use the system to break 

contracts.  But in reality in the old days when folks shook 

hands they stuck to it because they had a code of ethics and a 

code of honour that would never let them sleep at night again if 

they ever backed out of a deal that they had made with a 

handshake. 

 

That's the kind of honourable ethics that this Assembly has 

stood for, in my mind, in the past, and that's what it should get 

back to, Mr. Speaker: a code of ethics, a code of honour, 

something that the people can depend on. 

 

When the government runs in an election and says, we will not 

increase your taxes, there ought to be an honourable reason for 

them to stick to that.  And there must be a very compelling 

reason to break that kind of trust.  And there may be some good 

excuses for the government to break that trust that they made 

during that election.  But let them stand up in this Assembly 

and say what those are.  Let them explain themselves so that 

the people can understand it. 

 

(2100) 

 

I wanted very, very much, Mr. Speaker, to discuss with the 

minister where the costs of the Constitutional Committee and 

those kinds of things were going to be coming from.  We have, 

as you know, Mr. Speaker, set up a Constitutional Committee 

in the province that has a mandate, as I understand it, to go out 

to all of the various areas of the province.  My understanding is 

that they will be flying to some of the outer regions of the 

province and that they might in fact then be taking buses to 

some of the closer locations. 

 

No matter how you do it, no matter how much it can be 

justified to do it, it will cost a lot of money.  I'm wondering if 

this interim supply had included any costs for that to happen.  

Is the money allocated or will this cause a deficit in our 

budget?  We haven't been able to ask those questions even in a 

very general way.  And without being able to do that in a very 

general way or any specific way, it just simply is not something 

that we can find out. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will note that when the Constitutional 

Committee was struck, it was struck with a particular mandate.  

And by the striking of a particular mandate, it determined 

which branch of the government's monies that would come out 

of.  For example, the committee that goes out from the 

Legislative Assembly to discuss the constitution on the basis of 

asking questions from the constituents would be paid for, I 

understand, through the legislative monies, the monies allotted 

to the legislature. 

 

On the other hand, if the government were going to take the 

already-arrived-at constitutional package that they have arrived 

at through the negotiations at the Ottawa level, and bringing 

that package back to the province, and then if that committee's 

mandate were to take that package out and to show it to the 

people, my understanding is then that it becomes a different 

area for the money to be taken from. 

 

In other words, the government should pay for it from some 

other location other than out of the legislative monies.  I'm not 

sure where that would be, but it's just my understanding that it 

has to be out of some place else. 

 

And I wanted to ask the questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

we were in this interim supply, before we started going into 

this second reading, I wanted to ask how the Minister of 

Finance was going to handle that, where in fact those monies 

were going to be taken from, if it would be still considered to 

be a Constitutional Committee that was consulting with the 

people, or if it was a Constitutional Committee that would be 

going out and showing a package to the people so that they 

could make a decision on it, perhaps in a referendum. 

 

I also had the concern whether or not there was in fact any 

monies laid aside for a referendum.  I expect that such a 

manoeuvre in the province would be expensive.  I'm not sure 

how expensive, but I know it's got to cost some dollars.  And I 

did want to ask the minister, in all sincerity, how many of those 

dollars were allocated or are being allocated, or if there is a 

provision . . . if it would be coming from the legislative account 

or if it would be coming from the government's account, some 

other branch of government.  And we just don't know.  And the 

people of our province are asking those questions, and now, 

because we don't know, they obviously can't know either. 

 

So we'll speculate.  And that's unfortunate, because we should 

not be speculating, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the dollars that 

we spend out of the public purse.  We should have a pretty 

accurate knowledge of what's going on. 

 

It has been my experience that when you don't know what's 

going on, that's when you run into deficits.  If you've got a 

pretty fixed focus on where dollars are and how they're being 

used, you usually can determine where to spend the next ones 

in order to stay within a budgetary system.  But if you haven't 

got the foggiest notion how much the last project cost you, and 

you don't have your books kept up to date, and you haven't got 

any idea how many dollars are already gone and how many 

dollars are going to be spent, pretty soon you find yourself 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

in trouble because you end up having this notion that, maybe I 

should just have that one more thing, or maybe I could just fix 

some other little thing up or . . . You know, I suppose at the 

government level you could be more specific and say, well 

maybe we could build a school over there or a hospital over 

there.  It seems like it'll be all right.  The money seems to be 

flowing along, and then all of a sudden, bang, it hits you -- 

we've overexpended and we got a big deficit. 

 

That's probably the fundamental reason why you get big 

deficits, is because we don't keep close enough track of the way 

that we spend our dollars in the province.  I think that's been a 

kind of a chronic problem all through the years.  As I grew up 

as a kid, I think I had that perception that government was 

always about two years behind with their books. 

 

For example, we find committees sitting, from this very 

Assembly, at this very time, that are discussing expenditures of 

two and three years back.  Well if you don't have your books 

caught up to within at least one year, how can you possibly 

know what direction your spending is taking you, how much 

it's going to cost you to run this fiscal year?  It's just impossible 

for anybody to balance a budget.  I don't think it matters which 

political stripe the government was. If the books aren't up to 

date, how could they possibly know where they're going with 

the spending of their money? 

 

If a farmer or a business man or a person on a job didn't keep 

his records up so that he could do his income tax at the end of 

the year, and he went on without ever figuring it all out, how 

long would it be before he probably would think things are 

rolling along pretty good, I'll just use that plastic card, buy one 

more thing over here, another thing over there, and the next 

thing the roof caves in.  And you see examples of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, all the time, of people that don't keep track of 

their expenditures properly, and the next thing you know, 

they're having to declare bankruptcy because they spent so 

much that they can't possibly ever repay it. 

 

And that's what happens with governments that aren't keeping 

up with where the money's going and how it's being spent.  

That's why it becomes so ever, ever important for us to be able 

to get this government, not so much through discussions of 

interim supply as to finding out all the answers for us, but also 

for them to find out the answers for themselves.  Because when 

they're looking up the answers for us, they're educating 

themselves and finding out where that money's been going and 

how it's going to be spent and where it's going to be used.  And 

then they have that idea, that perception of the dollars and 

where it's going to be used and spent so that they can keep 

within a budgetary frame. 

 

I think that this is the essence of how budgets can be balanced 

at the provincial level, even though the numbers are big, even 

though it takes a few more zeros behind everything in order to 

get the kind of mammoth amounts of dollars that we talk about. 

Even though it's big, it can be done if we keep current and keep 

up to date. 

 

And that, it seems to me, is why we ordinarily should be doing 

this on the basis of the whole budget.  It would be to 

bring the government itself into a position of educating 

themselves as to how many dollars they have spent already, 

where they're going in direction of planning.  It would keep 

them on their toes so they'd know and understand what's going 

on.  They could therefore have a really good chance to balance 

the budget.  The intentions, I think, are good.  I really believe 

this Minister of Finance is determined to balance the budget. 

 

There are some who would disagree that that's the best thing to 

do.  They would say -- in fact some of my constituents 

approached me not long ago -- that perhaps it would be better 

to run a little deficit and have in a recessionary time some 

dollars spent to keep people working.  And you can debate that 

back and forth, but the reality is that, with all the good 

intentions in the world, he will not be able to balance his 

budget if he's not on top of the figures and knowing where that 

money's going.  Now he may have a pretty good perception 

himself.  But at this level, when you have ministers in charge 

of different departments and money being spent under other 

people's authority, it becomes extremely difficult, I'm sure, for 

one individual to keep a total handle on what every other 

minister is spending. 

 

And that's why it's so important that we be able to sit here and 

get his concentration for a little while while we ask questions 

because it also brings his ministers into line of thinking about 

what they're doing.  I don't think that anybody in a three- or 

four-hour debate is going to get very serious about looking at 

very many problems.  But once somebody has asked a question 

and gotten an answer and repeated another question and got 

another answer for three or four days, those ministers are going 

to start taking note of the fact that there's something going on 

here we'd better pay attention to. 

 

They might even take time off of a fishing trip or a golfing trip 

and go down to one of their departments and say, hey fellows, 

what's happening with your expenditures in your department?  

In your lesser departments, are things up to par?  Are we on 

target, or has something happened that maybe we should know 

about? 

 

And it's that kind of vigilance and only that kind of vigilance 

that can create an atmosphere where you can get a balanced 

budget.  Each time you move up the steps of the ladder of 

levels of government, it has to become more difficult to 

balance a budget because you have so many factors involved.  

And I never said it was going to be easy.  But I did say that it is 

obtainable and attainable if the Finance minister is determined 

enough, is up to date enough, is on top of his figures enough to 

be able to realistically keep a handle on what's going on.  But 

even he, with all of his good intentions, won't be able to 

accomplish that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if he does not have to be 

accountable to those folks in the opposition who will ask the 

questions that can jog his mind and keep his memory working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wanted to know how much this interim supply 

Bill was going to be allowing for a lot of different things.  And 

I want to just go through a few with the hopes . . . And I want 

to tie this together for you.  I want to do this with the hope that 

the ministers in charge of various departments will take note of 

these concerns and they 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

might in good conscience answer these questions.  If they in 

good conscience answer these questions, Mr. Speaker, to 

themselves, even if they don't answer them to us, it may help to 

save the province from going into a serious deficit. 

 

We wondered how much it would cost the government in 

interim supply if things like changing the GRIP Bill go through 

in the next few weeks.  How many dollars would be available 

there if interim supply has covered that area?  We wanted the 

government, as much as ourselves, to know whether or not they 

are on top of this situation, on top of the number of dollars that 

it might cost them, so that they in effect . . . or in fact can 

balance the budget at the end of this year. 

 

I seriously doubt that this budget is going to be balanced even 

with the predicted $517 million.  Because I perceive that even 

with all of the good intentions that the members have opposite, 

that the thing is going to get away on them.  The costs are 

going to sky-rocket in areas that you never anticipated. 

 

We've talked about things like the challenges that we have 

these days to democracy.  And that's important.  Because it's 

necessary in the democratic process to take some time.  It's 

really frustrating, I'm sure, for the members opposite to have to 

take that time to listen to a lot of the debate.  But democracy 

works on the basis of time. 

 

That's how democracy has always worked the best, is by 

having people take the time to talk to one another.  Even 

sometimes if it gets a little foolish.  And it's bound to.  There's 

no question in my mind that occasionally we will say things 

and talk about things that won't be relevant in the total scheme 

of how the budget will balance or how many dollars will be 

spent. 

 

But that is too, I think, part of the democratic process.  

Listening to all of the angles, all of the perceptions, and taking 

the good and sifting it out from all of the straw.  Sifting the 

wheat from the chaff has been an expression used by a lot of 

folks over all of the years. 

 

(2115) 

 

We wondered, Mr. Speaker, if legislation that is retroactive in 

other areas -- for example, the energy and mining Bill that we 

talked about earlier in this session -- we don't know if there are 

any financial implications to the retroactive clauses that are in 

that Bill.  In fact we haven't even heard whether or not the 

negotiations have been going on and that Bill might in fact be 

changed. 

 

We thought we might be able to determine out of this 

document an analysis of the departments requesting more than 

one-twelfth.  And questioning the minister in charge, we 

thought we might be able to determine whether or not there 

were any expenditures going to result from that. 

 

But of course we won't know that and we don't know that, and 

we won't be able to find out until we get into probably 

committee now.  And in all fairness I guess if committee is 

treated anything like the interim supply Bill is treated, we won't 

find out there either. 

And now we have another problem developing, and that is a 

lack of trust by the people that this government will be honest 

and fair and forthcoming with answers later on as they have 

said that we should be able to get.  We just don't know if that's 

ever going to happen.  And the peoples are starting to wonder if 

there's any commitment to them to be open and honest as was 

promised in the past election. 

 

The perception out in the province, as much in the cities now as 

in the country, is a perception that maybe these questions will 

never be answered.  Maybe no one will ever be allowed to 

know where the taxpayer dollars have been spent or will be 

spent. 

 

I've talked to people who are workers on work crews, who have 

told me things like, my isn't it nice that we're going into the end 

of July.  We have now been working two weeks for ourselves, 

because the rest of the year we were working to pay 

somebody's taxes. 

 

Apparently somebody did some kind of an analysis and 

discovered that it takes until the middle of July for people to 

pay their taxes in this country.  And they're worried.  They're 

extremely worried out there that when the end of the year 

comes there won't be enough dollars left to pay for the things 

that they need to survive in this province.  And they worry out 

loud about whether or not they should stay in our province.  

And we haven't given them any comfort.  We haven't given 

them any reason to be optimistic. 

 

It is time for the government to start answering the questions 

that are asked, in order to give that perception of some kind of 

a future for people who might stay in this province. 

 

I've talked to contractors who are extremely worried.  They 

don't know if the direction of this government is going to 

eliminate them, cause them to go bankrupt, if they are going to 

be allowed to continue to work in the province and prosper or 

if they will simply wear out their machinery and go broke. 

 

Farmers have already had a lot of attention from this Assembly.  

And their concerns are still not alleviated.  They continue to be 

concerned and to worry about trying to recover enough dollars 

to pay for all of the increased costs that have resulted from this 

administration to date -- taxes being charged, increases in 

power rates and telephone rates.  All of those things that we've 

listed off -- and I think there was four pages full of small print, 

of increased costs to people in this province as a result of this 

administration. 

 

And people are genuinely worried that at the end of their year, 

at the end of their fiscal year, that their budget won't be able to 

be balanced any more, with the kind of wages that they are 

earning. 

 

Take a person living in Regina who happens to be on minimum 

wage, or maybe something even in the $10 an hour category.  

Can you imagine how much money you'd have left?  Think 

about this.  Forty hours a week you're limited to, because the 

unions won't allow you to infringe on somebody else's work.  

And that's fair ball, because you need to protect jobs for other 

people.  But think about 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

working in that wage range and having to rent an apartment for 

750 or $800.  Isn't that going to be tough at the end of the year 

to balance your budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people are as worried about their budget at 

the end of the year as they are about the government's budget.  

And if the government's budget can't be balanced unless taxes 

go up, then they're going to have a real, serious concern to 

figure out whether or not they're going to survive in our 

province. 

 

We should not proceed to the second reading of the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time.  We should reconsider what we're doing 

so that we can get a perception of some kind of optimism out to 

the people in our province. 

 

We should go back to discussing where the monies are going 

and try to alleviate the fears that the working folks have got; try 

to alleviate those fears that at the end of the year, taxes won't 

again be going up, eliminating totally the possibility of them 

being able to get their budgets balanced. 

 

I suspect that if you were working on $10 an hour in the city of 

Regina, paying maybe $700 a month rent, buying groceries -- 

I'm not just sure how much it would cost, depends I guess on 

whether you have a wife and children -- but it must be really 

difficult for a lot of people in this city to make ends meet.  And 

their power bill went up the same as the farmers did.  Their 

telephone went up just the same as the telephone costs to the 

rural people did. 

 

And I'll admit that we are, in our opposition, somewhat at fault 

for spending a lot of time talking about rural problems.  We are 

a little at fault there, because when you think about it, and drive 

around the city, there's a lot of people in this city that have got 

real, serious problems just the same as the people in rural 

Saskatchewan have.  The increased taxation has hit them, and 

hit them hard. 

 

And we have to take a serious look at whether or not, when we 

destroy people's optimism, when we destroy their ability to 

balance their budgets, if we are hurting not only the people but 

the whole province, and the perception as to whether or not this 

is a good place to live or a place to leave. 

 

I think we've got to get some serious consideration from our 

government about the moral position that they are taking and 

the lack of confidence that the people have in the moral 

direction that the government has been moving in the last few 

days. 

 

Serious supporters of this government might say: well use 

closure; get it over with; we trust you.  But most of the people 

in the province don't support one political party to such a great 

extent that they're quite willing to accept anything they do, no 

matter what it is, no matter how bad it would hurt anybody.  It's 

just a reality that most people aren't tied to a political party at a 

partisan level to that extent, that they would support them no 

matter what they do -- not even ours.  They want the 

government to be up front, honest, give them a reason to live, 

provide them with answers, and let them know what's going on. 

 

And as I mentioned before, when the going gets tough, 

the tough get going. And people in urban Saskatchewan are just 

as willing to pay their fair share of the load as anybody else if 

the government is open with them and lets them know that this 

money is genuinely going to be spent for some good reason.  I 

think we should seriously consider tonight backing away from 

passing the second and third readings of this Bill and go back 

to interim supply and answer some of the questions so that the 

people will know where these tax dollars are being spent, so 

that they will know that there is something useful going to 

happen out of them, so that they can get their confidence back 

that there is a rational reason for what's going on, especially in 

this Assembly and the happenings that come out of this 

Assembly. 

 

We've had so much talk about catchwords and phrases, Mr. 

Speaker, like deeming legislation and retroactive legislation.  

The whole thing gets you just feeling kind of pessimistic after a 

while.  And at this point in time, I think the government could 

do a lot of good for people -- people like nurses and doctors 

and health care workers -- if they'd answer a few of the 

questions and let the folks know that they're not getting the 

wool pulled over their eyes.  If this government is truly 

spending this money in a helpful way so that it can improve our 

life here in Saskatchewan, why would they be afraid to come 

out in the open and say so?  They wouldn't at all, I don't think.  

And I think the people are saying that too.  They're saying the 

perception now is that this government no longer wants to 

answer questions about where the money's going so maybe 

there's something wrong with where it is going. 

 

In all fairness the government might have all the best intentions 

in the world, but this is automatically the kind of perception 

that people are going to have.  You've got business men, 

administrators, teachers -- all kinds of professional people that 

don't know whether, in the end of all of this talk about 

balancing budgets, if when we finish this year, we won't need a 

huge tax increase to pay off yet another huge deficit. 

 

We're getting close to half-way through the fiscal year of the 

province, and we have no idea whatever, Mr. Speaker, of 

whether the books are balanced in this province or not.  No 

department of government has come out and shown us any 

figures whatsoever that gives us any indication that they are on 

target.  They may be only taking so many dollars from interim 

supply to pay off things, but they might be running up debts in 

the bank.  How do we know?  Maybe they're borrowing 

thousands and thousands of dollars to pay for things that they're 

spending money on.  And at the end of the year they'll come in 

to the government and say, well oops, we spent too much; 

you'll have to run a bigger deficit; you'll have to truck 

somebody down to New York to get us another half a billion 

dollars so that we can pay off the mistakes we made. 

 

You can only stop those mistakes from happening if you stay 

on top of things, currently, day by day -- especially in big 

government.  And the province is not a real big government, 

but it's a lot bigger than a municipality, so it's going to take a 

lot more, a lot more attention than you would give to your own 

personal budget or to my personal budget or to a municipal or 

to a town budget. 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And I'm just worried that going into this many months with 

interim supply, where the minister only answers very vague, 

broad answers of questions with no detail whatever on 

anything, that we may be heading for a financial wreck in this 

province.  And we've got some serious financial problems 

already, but to have them get any worse would be terrible. 

 

And there's ways that we can get on top of this -- vigilance.  

That's the number one key, having people alerted in time to 

head off high spenders or fiascos that can go on in 

administrations where hundreds of people are making decisions 

on where dollars are spent, where many, many people who sign 

their name commit the government to the payment.  It's so easy 

for things to become a wreck if you are not vigilant.  And that's 

what's wrong with things like running special warrants for a 

long time, followed by interim supply for a long time, and the 

budget not being passed for such a long time.  We've got to get 

to the point where we start the year in January, and by the end 

of February we know exactly where we're going financially so 

that there can be some genuine planning. 

 

I mentioned to these folks a few minutes ago about how many 

contractors are sitting idle in our province, and they think it's a 

great joke over there.  They always think things are very funny 

when people are hurting.  I fail to see the humour in this.  But 

anyway, it's that way.  We've got all these contractors without 

work.  And why has that happened?  Ask yourself the question.  

How is that this happened?  We're spending $200 million more 

that we're taking in with taxes, plus the 400-and-some-million 

dollars that we collected the same as last year, plus we're going 

to run a $517 million more deficit.  We're going to spend over 

five billions of dollars in this province and yet contractors are 

sitting idle.  How did that happen?  I'll tell you how it 

happened.  Municipalities and people who hire these 

contractors went into the spring into their budgetary process 

and said, we don't dare commit ourselves to building or 

constructing roads because we don't know for sure how our 

budget will turn out as long as the provincial government 

doesn't give us some absolute assurance of where it's going or 

what it's doing. 

 

We therefore got to get back to a system where we have our 

budgets provincially in place at least by the first part of March 

so that those kinds of planning for the year . . . In our province, 

where winter pretty well slows everything that is productive 

down, that's a reality of life, Mr. Speaker, that nobody can 

deny, that a lot of our work has to be done in a certain few 

months in the summer-time. 

 

(2130) 

 

And it just can't be done if people haven't got the time or the 

confidence to make those plans ahead of time.  How many 

people were confident this spring that they could go out and 

hire a contractor to build ten miles of road?  That's not very 

much.  That's about say 14 kilometres.  How many people in 

our province, in municipalities, had the confidence to hire 

contractors to do those kind of projects?  Very, very few.  

Many years that happens. 

 

And even though the Minister of Highways is sure that we 

don't have to build so many roads any more, and is sure in 

fact that lots of the ones we have can even be tore up and we 

wouldn't miss them, the reality is that roads that are used wear 

out and they do have to be replaced.  And you have to plan 

ahead.  That's why I was so happy when the Premier 

announced the other day that he was looking at a long-term 

program of rebuilding and double-laning the Yellowhead 

highway, and it's why I'm so happy to have been able to stand 

in this Assembly and point out to him that there are other roads 

that he should be planning about in the same way, especially 

No. 1 Highway, which I am very familiar with, and where I 

know that there's been so many people ask for that to be done. 

 

Now if we were to back up and start straightening things out 

right from this point now, if were to back up and say, second 

and third reading won't go ahead now, we'll actually get down 

to business here and we'll answer some of these questions, then 

I believe we could start building that confidence.  Even though 

we can't save a whole bunch of this year yet, we could start 

building that confidence in the province that people need in 

order to start planning ahead. 

 

If we don't get that confidence rebuilt, we will sit here in 

stagnation.  Our population will continue to go down.  Our tax 

base will continue to be eroded and we will continue to slide 

into a recession even though the rest of the country may come 

out of the recession.  There's an old saying that Saskatchewan 

is the first into a recession and the last out.  Why do we accept 

that?  Why should it be that way?  Why shouldn't we change 

that?  Why can't we be the first out of a recession?  It's because 

we don't give our people the confidence to plan ahead. 

 

And now is the time to start the process.  Even if you couldn't 

solve the problems today, even if you couldn't make it all right 

for this summer, you could start giving that confidence so that 

next year on January 2, we'd be in this Assembly working on 

next year's budget -- next year's budget drawn up in time to 

give people a fired-off start with a new hope and a new vision 

to create and build and go ahead and get this province back on 

track. 

 

Why couldn't we show Ontario that we could be out of the 

recession ahead of them?  All it would take is some confidence 

and some building. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have by not going back 

on this decision of second and third readings being done 

tonight, the problem that we have is that people are starting to 

fear that we genuinely do have a dictatorship forming in our 

province.  We can say that quite flippantly and quickly, and it 

may not have much importance if you say it that way, but this 

is a very serious, serious charge that's being made out in our 

country that our government in a province would suddenly be 

classified as a dictatorship. 

 

If in fact you have a dictatorship, then you'd better hope we 

have a benevolent one because the people will no longer have 

access to determining from the government what they are 

doing.  Access to information, access to answers about the 

interim supply, access to anything that you can think of from 

government, will no longer be there. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

In fact, in a period of time, this very Assembly would have to 

close its doors.  There wouldn't be any sense to having it here.  

The biggest saving of money we'd have . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I had hoped that the member would 

get back to the motion.  I've been listening for the last 10 or 15 

minutes, and I want to remind him that we do have a motion 

before the Table in interim supply. And I'd just ask him to get 

back to interim supply again.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was hoping that 

you would get me back on the topic, because I didn't know how 

to quite get around to stopping where I was and getting back 

there.  Now I can start with a new direction. 

 

I want to know quite seriously, though, how do the people of 

Saskatchewan find out what this government is spending 

before the money is spent?  How do we have grievance before 

supply when the members opposite stop us from asking 

questions?  I know that some of the members, Mr. Speaker, 

want to get into the debate and I'm hoping that they will.  I 

talked earlier to some of them out in the hallway, and they said 

they were going to, and they did.  And I was really happy that 

they got into the debate because it made it more of a two-way 

flow rather than just the one-sided approach.  And I think that 

two-way flow is important. 

 

When those members stand up and talk about this issue, they 

will be convincing themselves in their own minds how 

important it is to go back on this decision and rethink their 

position and not do the second and third readings just now, but 

to return to answering the questions that the opposition has 

legitimately put forth to you. 

 

I was pointing out, Mr. Speaker, before I got so far away from 

my topic here, that the ministers opposite we were hoping 

would take note of our discussions, that we would formulate 

into this discussion a lot of the questions that we wanted 

answered and that may be, in all honesty, they might feel a 

moral obligation to answer those questions, not just to us here 

in this Assembly, but perhaps put out a news release or some 

kind of an answer sheet so that the people of this province can 

find out, in fact, where the money is going to be spent.  Or 

perhaps we could jog their minds a little, Mr. Speaker, on 

where they might be considering to spend some money to help 

the province. 

 

We've had some astonishing things happening in our province 

in the last few days.  I heard on the news media that closure 

had been used only five times in this province's history, twice 

by a Conservative administration and now three times by this 

administration that isn't even past its first year of mandate. 

 

That's rather frightening for the democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker, especially when it's tied to the expenditure of dollars.  

I can see closure being used to get a piece of legislation 

through to save the government the embarrassment of losing a 

court battle. 

 

But the expenditure of dollars is extremely important.  We have 

always in our system put great emphasis on the accountability 

of the taxpayers' dollars -- the accountability of government 

and how they spend those 

dollars.  We in fact done it to the extent that in some 

jurisdictions only those people that pay tax dollars are allowed 

to vote on certain things.  That's how important our society has 

placed the value of being totally up front with the spending of 

public money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, by using closure in this matter so soon into 

their mandate, this government has shown clearly to the people 

of Saskatchewan that the normal processes of democratic 

system no longer work.  There's no ethics here.  There's no 

attempt to morally try to describe where the dollars are going.  

They could use news releases.  That would help.  They could 

print answers to hypothetical questions and deliver them to us, 

I suppose.  That would help.  Anything you could imagine that 

would give answers to the people's questions would certainly 

help. 

 

We know that we will always have different points of view.  

There is no question that when you have democratic 

government with different partisan parties involved, there's no 

question that you're going to have disagreements.  But we must 

have agreement on some of the fundamentals of rules in order 

for the system to be able to work.  And if we don't allow that to 

happen, then, Mr. Speaker, a dictatorship or a form thereof 

starts to develop. 

 

And if that develops, then we lose all the good things that we 

should have happening through the adversarial approach that 

we use in the democratic system of debate.  You do something, 

and I tell you what's wrong with it.  I do something, and you 

tell me what's wrong with my ideas.  And even though we don't 

agree, we might find common ground some place in the middle 

where more people can survive and be happy. 

 

But right now I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this 

province are not very happy.  They're just not very happy 

because they have the feeling that they're being left out, left out 

in the cold when it comes to knowing what their government is 

up to and what is being done. 

 

Now I've got tons and tons of material here, Mr. Speaker, and a 

hundred and maybe more questions that I'd like to include into 

this debate.  But I know that some of my colleagues are really 

anxious to get into this debate.  And I know that some of the 

opposition or some of the government people on the opposite 

side of this House want to get into this debate.  And so as to 

afford them some time to include themselves and to let their 

feelings be known, I'm going to sacrifice the rest of my time so 

that they can include themselves. 

 

And I want to thank the members opposite for their attention.  I 

want to thank you as well, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out a 

number of things in the time we have left this evening to bring 

to the attention of voters and the public some of the things that 

I think are important to discuss in relation to this. 

 

We have had some interesting occurrences in the past 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

two or three days that need to be brought to the attention of the 

public, I believe.  Yesterday, for the first time in our history, 

closure was used on interim supply, allowing only 20 minutes 

for each person to deal with questions to the minister.  The 

minister brought his officials in and he was not able, even as a 

part of the resolution presented by the House Leader . . . 

provided the freedom and the ability to answer questions on 

interim supply in Committee of Finance on the discussion of a 

motion, which is usually the process that takes place. 

 

One of the things that I suppose irritates the majority of us is 

that the process here is a matter of debate.  The process here is 

a matter of concern as it's raised by individuals on this side of 

the House to the kinds of things that are dealt with by the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

We had an opportunity to discuss some aspects of the interim 

supply with the Minister of Finance a day earlier.  And because 

of that, and because of the way that we presented with some 

force, I believe, the arguments that we made, the Minister of 

Finance through the House Leader, then got it so that he could 

impose closure, not on only one resolution, but on both of 

them. 

 

Now that was a tactic that I've not seen used in this House 

before.  However from my hockey playing experiences I never 

forget a person who butt-ends me.  And that is exactly what 

happened in this occasion on the other day when the House 

Leader introduced the motion.  So I just want to point out to the 

Assembly that I will not forget that tactic either. 

 

One of the things that we deal with on a day-to-day basis is 

asking questions of the minister of, whoever's in the Committee 

of Finance, and this time it was to the Minister of Finance. 

 

What we observed yesterday in reflecting on the process . . . 

Yesterday the House Leader moved the motion that we could 

not speak for more than 20 minutes; we could not ask a 

question.  If we sat down, we were not allowed to get up again.  

We were not allowed to get an answer.  The minister was not 

given the freedom to give us an answer.  Mr. Speaker, all of 

this flies in the face, I believe, of a democratic process -- a 

democratic process that was spoken about in this Assembly on 

two occasions that were the hallmark of what was supposed to 

be accomplished, I believe, by this government, and I expected 

it to be that. 

 

(2145) 

 

On the first occasion the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan were told, on the first occasion, that this 

government would set up a stringent and comprehensive code 

of ethics and conflict of interest guidelines -- a stringent one, 

where the conduct of the members of this Assembly would be . 

. . a code would be developed for the people of this Assembly.  

And what have we got?  We have unilateral, authoritarian 

control placed on this House by the House Leader of the 

province of Saskatchewan, of the government.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, was evidenced yesterday.  It's been evidenced 

throughout this session, the control that he placed on this 

Assembly without regard for democracy, without freedom of 

speech, without offering the opposition the opportunity to 

speak on many of the issues that are a forefront to the kinds of 

things that we believe in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why we are concerned about what's been 

happening.  The Premier of the province said that, my 

government is determined to restore the fundamental principles 

of democracy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a concern about that.  What are the 

fundamentals that we have seen as a part of the redefining of 

what this Assembly has done?  We have had significant rule 

changes to make this process that we are in today a part of the 

process that is supposed to be so much better for democracy.  

It's a large question we have to ask this Premier. 

 

Is his executive branch of government running this government 

to the detriment of the democratic process in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  In my view, Mr. Speaker, he is being negative 

to many, many aspects of the free speech and the capability of 

the opposition to speak.  We have been curtailed in debate on 

many occasions, Mr. Speaker, over and over again in this 

Assembly.  My colleague brought out -- and a number have -- 

how many times we have had closure in this session dealing 

with items that we have confronted the government with. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is, in my view, not a part of what this 

forum is about.  This forum is a part for debate.  This forum is 

a process of debate for the people and the public of 

Saskatchewan to recognize all of the aspects of the democratic 

process and to recognize what it is that the government is 

doing. 

 

It is our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to point that out to the 

public.  It is our responsibility to do that.  And if we make the 

decision, Mr. Speaker, to not point this out to the public, we are 

in fact hampering democracy in a very public way.  And it is 

our responsibility to do that.  We have placed before this 

minister questions in an obvious way to have him begin to 

answer.  We've placed them before him on GRIP; we've placed 

them before him on health care.  Oh we can't, we can't answer.  

We asked questions on a number of things. 

 

What about the economic condition of the province today?  Is it 

in a position that the revenues are going to be sufficient to 

provide for the expenditures of the House today on interim 

supply?  We asked the minister that question.  He said, oh no I 

can't answer that today.  His deputy who was going to sit with 

him . . . when he has Committee of Finance, his deputy is going 

to sit with him and tell him exactly the same thing.  Why didn't 

he tell us in this Committee of Finance, Mr. Speaker?  He 

always alluded to the fact that, oh wait till we have Committee 

of Finance, wait till we have the Minister of Health, then we'll 

talk about the health care process in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is how this open and democratic 

government is working.  It is not open; it's in fact very, very 

closed.  This throne speech that we had in the end of April in 

this House said, people want my government to be open, 

honest, and fully accountable.  That's what they said, Mr. 

Speaker. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

And what have we had?  We have had closure on a motion in 

GRIP, where one person has spoken on that motion to 

introduce that Bill -- one person and you immediately reduce it 

to closure.  That's what you did.  Is that an open and honest and 

forthright, fully accountable government? 

 

Who are you accountable to, Mr. Minister?  And, Mr. Speaker, 

to the Minister of Finance, who are you accountable to?  Are 

you accountable to this Assembly or only to yourself?  That, 

Mr. Minister, is the question you have to ask yourself.  Who 

are you accountable to?  In interim supply, who are you 

accountable to?  You are accountable to report to this 

Assembly.  That's what you're accountable for. 

 

And your Premier has indicated that you are going to do that.  

Have you been forthright?  My observation on that is no.  Have 

you been fully accountable by giving answers to the questions?  

No you haven't.  And I believe that it's time that you become 

that.  You've not been providing the information that we've 

been asking for.  And I think you should be forthright and do 

that.  It says: open, honest, and fully accountable.  Not halfway, 

not three-quarters, not 90 per cent, but all the way, fully. 

 

"People want my government to be fair and compassionate in 

all its actions."  Well that's a good motherhood statement.  And 

I believe in that.  Make it fair.  Make it open.  Make it honest 

and compassionate to all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we would like to ask some questions on 

what you're doing in health care and ripping apart the various 

level 1 and level 2 care homes in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  What are you doing with optometrists?  What 

are you doing with chiropractors? 

 

Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, I believe you have a 

responsibility to answer.  Are the funds that are coming in, in 

relation to the budget, equivalent to the demand of supplying 

funds for various departments?  Are they meeting what your 

budget expectations are and were?  That's the question we 

should have from you. 

 

You took the time out, sir, to ask the questions of the public of 

Saskatchewan before the budget.  And we have a document 

that we received through the Bill that we passed a year ago to 

require that the government provide some of these things.  You 

were asking the people of the province of Saskatchewan: how 

do you rate the overall state of the Saskatchewan economy 

today?  You asked the public this question.  Mr. Speaker, 60 

per cent of the people of the province of Saskatchewan said 

that they believe that the economy of Saskatchewan is poor.  If 

you add up those who think it's only fair you'd probably have 

very, very close to 95 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, we're concerned 

about that. 

 

As I watched the people on Friday last week when I drove 

home, Mr. Speaker, I drove behind a pick-up truck that had 

plywood on the sides and on the back and on the front stacked 

high with furniture.  On the back of that they had a trailer and 

that was boarded up with plywood as high as it could reach.  

And on the back of it, it had said . . . with black crayon had 

written: goodbye Saskatchewan, 

hello B.C. (British Columbia) 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is the kind of questions we need to ask . . . 

things that we need to talk about in finding out from the 

minister what his economic plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan is.  What is he doing to deliver that? 

 

Further in this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Finance outlined for us . . . He said in this House that the 

Crown corporations are going to deliver the fuel to the engine 

of the economy.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some very 

significant things that I think that he should be held 

accountable for. 

 

Number one, in SaskPower Corporation, we had 20 per cent of 

the people of the province who would be able to receive natural 

gas under the gas program.  That government and that minister 

said no, I'm not going to do it.  And yet he said the engine of 

the economy is going to be the Crown corporations and he 

takes and tears out the engine and doesn't replace it. 

 

SaskTel, what's he doing in SaskTel to replace the kinds of 

energy that should generate from economic development?  We 

should have the freedom to ask those questions and what this 

minister is going to provide in interim supply to deal with those 

items.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we want to have 

an opportunity to ask him questions.  And we will, Mr. 

Speaker, in the future.  We will direct those specific questions 

to that minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another one of the Crown corporations that is a 

potential for generating the engine of economy in the province 

of Saskatchewan is SaskEnergy.  Why don't you let the people 

of the province invest in SaskEnergy?  Why don't you allow the 

people to invest in SaskEnergy so that you would not have to 

go to the banks in Montreal or Toronto or New York, to go 

there.  Why don't you allow the people, why don't you allow 

the people of Saskatchewan to make an investment in shares in 

SaskEnergy?  Why don't you? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, would be an engine that would drive the 

economy in the province of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, 

is what drives the energy in the oil patch.  Why don't you allow 

SaskEnergy through the natural gas to develop the 

high-pressure lines in the province of Saskatchewan?  Why 

don't you? 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, these people don't trust ordinary people 

with their money.  That's why they don't.  Instead what do they 

do?  They say, we'll have a bond.  I'm not against the bond, Mr. 

Speaker, it was a good idea.  Put it in there. 

 

What I'm going to do is challenge you to this.  Why not now, 

when you've got money at 7 per cent and opportunities like the 

Bank of Montreal are presenting to their customers at 5.75 per 

cent, why don't you say instead of ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) saying prime plus 2, why don't 

you give the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan an 

opportunity to transfer their debt from a plus 9 per cent position 

down to a five and a half.  Why don't you do that and allow the 

economy to be driven by lower costs to 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

producers.  Why don't you do that? 

 

Never in the history of the time that we were in government, 

did we ever have the opportunity to deliver a low interest cost 

loans to farmers like we have today.  Never, at almost no cost, 

Mr. Speaker, to the province.  Those are the kinds of things that 

would drive the economy in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Those are the kinds of Crown corporation activities that I 

believe should be made available to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That's the kind of engine that should drive the 

economy. 

 

And what does this minister do?  He sits there, brings his 

assistant deputy along, knows he can't answer any questions 

because as soon as he gets up, he has lost his position.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why we have a problem in 

dealing with a process in relation to the things that were done 

in this Assembly.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we 

complained about it yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of other things that I 

think are necessary to be addressed in this context.  What is this 

government doing in interim supply and providing funds 

through this Minister of Finance for economic development, 

job creation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, 18,000 jobs have been lost in the province of 

Saskatchewan, year to date, over last year -- 18,000 jobs, Mr. 

Speaker; 6,000 to young people; 2,000 to direct farm jobs.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is this economic record of this government 

-- 18,000 less people working in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Where are they going?  They're not staying in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker.  They're leaving the province.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, if he would have followed the poll that he took before 

the budget, he would have found out that that was the most 

important part of the poll that the people wanted to have.  They 

asked the question: what is your priority in providing new 

economic opportunities and jobs?  And 93 per cent of the 

people said that was one of the most important points that 

needed to be addressed.  That ranked higher than health care, 

Mr. Speaker, in economic development.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  

Because 18,000 jobs have been lost in the province of 

Saskatchewan this year.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  

That's not my numbers.  That's StatsCanada numbers, year to 

date.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why we 

think we need to have this Minister of Finance address the 

problems.  That's why he needs to answer the questions that 

relate to the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

People are losing their jobs, day after day after day, and this 

minister does nothing to defend it.  That, Mr. Speaker, is why 

the problem is.  He had an interesting observation to make at 

the beginning of the year, Mr. Speaker.  He said that the 

fertilizer plant, the Millar Western in Meadow Lake, North 

Battleford, P.A. (Prince Albert) were going to be the engines 

that drove the economy . . . was not done by that group over 

there.  Eighteen thousand jobs have been lost in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that minister is responsible.  The Minister 

of Labour should be ashamed of himself.  He should come 

back home and do some job creation.  That's what he should be 

doing.  That's what he should be fighting for.  That is the 

biggest problem 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  It now being . . . Order.  Order 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you certainly may.  

There's nobody's going to chase you out of here. 

 

It now being 10 o'clock, however, this House stands adjourned 

until 2 p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


