




















































Hansard: May 22, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 555 

 May 22, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I have a petition 

again with respect to the gross revenue insurance program.  We 

have received this and I'd like to present it today.  I don't think 

we need to go through the complete petition.  I think the three 

conditions that they lay out in it are the important things. 

 

 (Whereas) your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to: 

 

 (1) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 (2) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "REVENUE 

INSURANCE" program by the end of this calendar 

year, and 

 (3) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set 

up on an individual cost-of-production to return 

ratio instead of risk area formula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present this petition.  It has a number of 

names on it from all over south-west Saskatchewan, and I 

expect we'll be seeing similar petitions coming in from all over 

the province. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to Rule 11(7) and they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to 

(1) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, (2) 

start working with the Federal Government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "Revenue Insurance" 

program . . . and (3) ensure that the new revenue insurance 

program be set up on an individual cost-of-production to 

return ratio instead of (the) risk area formula. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to the 

members of the legislature, 21 grade 11 students from the 

Muenster High School.  They're accompanied by their teacher, 

Paul Reist, and chaperons Audrey Maier and Debbie Bendel.  

I'll be meeting with the group following question period.  I 

want to ask the members to join with me to extend a warm 

welcome to the students from the good community of 

Muenster. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you, Mr. 

Speaker, and through you to all members of the Assembly, I 

would like to welcome 27 grade 12 students from Shellbrook.  

Shellbrook lies on the west side of my constituency.  The 

teacher is Colin Neudorf. 

 

I hope the students enjoy their tour today and they have a safe 

trip home.  I will be meeting with them for pictures and 

refreshments after question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

also like to introduce a group of guests in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  These folks are from the Plains Mennonite School in 

Warman, Saskatchewan -- 13 students from grades 1 to 9.  

They are accompanied by their teachers Alvin Zimmerman, 

Elizabeth Heatwole, and chaperons Wayne and Margaret 

Heatwole. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them after they have watched 

the proceedings during question period and look forward to 

having a short discussion with them afterwards.  And I'd ask all 

hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to help me welcome them to the 

Legislative Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through to the Assembly, some members 

of the bottling industry, employees of the bottling industry, that 

are sitting in the opposition gallery today.  I'd like to welcome 

them here.  They're here to observe the democratic process as it 

takes places in this Assembly.  I would ask you and all the 

members of the House to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

government, I too would like to welcome the members of the 

bottling industry to the Chamber this morning.  And we realize 

that they are here out of matters of concern as very important to 

their life, and we respect that, and we hope that we can meet 

with them later.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Soft Drink Container Handling Charges 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of the Environment.  Madam Minister, 

after zero consultation with experts of the soft drink industry, 

your department has made the brilliant decision to increase 

handling charges and deposits to a level that is unparalleled in 

the rest of Canada.  It will place Saskatchewan consumers' 

costs higher than any other province.  And I ask you to justify 

your decision to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm very 

pleased to speak on this issue today.  First of all, there 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

has been dialogue with the industry.  Three times we met with 

the people in both Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola.  We met with 

them on February 26 first, May 6 was the second meeting, and 

May 19 was the third meeting. 

 

At the first meeting they expressed concerns about wanting an 

even playing-field.  They also expressed concerns about the 

EPF (environmental protection fund) fund and the fact that they 

thought the EPF fund should be given back to the industry.  We 

said to them that the EPF fund was indeed public money, and it 

would be used through the Department of Environment to take 

action on the environment in many different ways including 

education. 

 

On May 6 we met with them to inform them that there will be 

an increase in the environmental handling charge and on the 

deposit side.  Again they expressed concerns about a level 

playing-field because the soft drink industry was being targeted 

and the other container industries were not.  They wanted a 

stepped-up implementation on the deposit handling fees on the 

other containers.  We went back, we thought about it, and we 

said they were right; the even playing-field is very important.  

And we stepped up the date to July 1 instead of phasing it in 

later. 

 

They also made mention . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The answer is getting fairly 

lengthy.  I ask the member to direct a new question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, the Peat Marwick study that you had done, and was 

released after sitting on it for eight solid months, has some very 

bizarre accounting in it -- administrative charges by SARCAN 

increasing by 80 per cent in one year so that these costs eat up 

44 per cent of SARCAN's revenues.  I ask you: how can you 

justify your actions given the Peat Marwick study that you 

ended up asking for? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, 

the last government commissioned Peat Marwick to do the 

study.  They commissioned Peat Marwick to do the study 

because SARCAN was at an operating deficit.  There was 

about a $3 million loss at SARCAN at this point in time. 

 

SARCAN was one of the best things the former government 

ever did and I commend them for it.  It's an agency that is noted 

across Canada, and we are hoping that other governments will 

take our lead and institute another . . . a similar agency for 

recycling and collection. 

 

The fact that when they set it up they did not anticipate the 

administrative costs was unfortunate, but it's one of the 

growing pains we're going through now, and we have to 

increase the environmental fee in order to keep SARCAN 

viable.  Part of the problem we have here is that the bottling 

companies, Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, want to take over the 

recycling industries.  They want to torpedo the SARCAN 

agency.  And that is what is at the root of this whole problem.  

It has nothing to do with interest in the consumer's rights or 

anything else.  It has to do with the Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola 

wanting to take over the recycling industry and wanting to have 

the EPF fund 

applied to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, I suggest that this report 

be examined carefully by your department.  Because upon 

examination you indeed are going to find that there's a $4 

million profit in SARCAN, not a deficit, if indeed you look at 

all of the numbers, as I have, in this report. 

 

This is a different question.  In Saskatchewan, the guide to 

regulatory fairness states, and I quote that: 

 

 The public will have advance information and notice of 

proposed regulations, and 

 

 Affected sectors will be able to provide input. 

 

Madam Minister, will you admit that telling the soft drink 

industry that you're changing the regulation whether they liked 

it or not on May 6, a mere 19 days before it comes into effect, 

represents a failure to uphold the Saskatchewan government's 

own guidelines? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, the Peat Marwick study is a 

very valuable tool and we don't see it in the same light 

obviously that the member opposite does.  We would be 

pleased to release that study to the public.  We're in phase 2 of 

it right now and the details have not been completed.  But that 

is a very important study and we take it very seriously. 

 

The fact that it mentions some problems that SARCAN is 

having are problems that are related to the expansion of 

SARCAN and we feel that the SARCAN agency is a very, very 

important tool as far as completing the total recycling and 

reusing system in Saskatchewan, and we don't want to take 

away from SARCAN any ability to do that.  It's one of the best 

environmental tools that exist right now in Canada. 

 

In The Globe and Mail this morning you can see a headline 

that says B.C. (British Columbia) is also planning an expansion 

into deposits and an environmental fee in all of their beverage 

containers.  We are leading Canada in what we're doing and 

we're not . . . We have many consultations, and we respect that 

the public has the right to know and we have done that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The Minister of Economic Development: 

you, sir, have the most important job in this government.  And 

I'm sure that all government departments are required to 

consult with your department on policy changes that would 

have an impact on jobs and economic development. 

 

Mr. Minister of Economic Development, was your department 

consulted on these changes to the soft drink industry, and what 

are the results of this impact analysis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member asks questions about 

the economic impact that will occur as a result of these 

changes.  I want to indicate very clearly that there 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

has been ongoing discussion in government to try to balance 

the needs of protecting the environment with the needs for 

economic development.  And what every government right 

across Canada is doing is struggling with the balance.  Where 

do you draw the line on the ever increasing mountains of 

garbage and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Garbage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the garbage that people might 

throw out or use and then discard and become a problem for 

society, along with economic development.  And it's a very, 

very important question. 

 

And what we have decided, along with a number of other 

jurisdictions, is that we have to clean up the environment.  

People, especially of a younger age than yourself, are very, 

very concerned about the environment.  And I want to say to 

you very clearly that as Minister of Economic Development we 

have been to a number of science shows and it's clear to me 

that the biggest growing problem in the world is in fact whether 

or not we're going to have a clean environment to live in.  And 

as Minister of Economic Development, as Minister of 

Economic Development I am concerned about having more 

jobs.  But I want to say clearly that our balance is the right 

balance and I would ask you to defend and support cleaning up 

the environment as opposed to getting on some quick and easy 

bandwagon which members opposite tend to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister for the Environment.  The changes you have 

proposed, Madam Minister, could be devastating to the soft 

drink industry.  And I met with the representatives from that 

industry this morning.  They were willing to meet with me, 

Madam Minister; they would have been willing to meet with 

you had your door been open to consultation and negotiation. 

 

You say that you met with them on three separate occasions.  

Mr. Speaker, I'll show you a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  First of all, before the member 

continues, could I ask the members please not to interrupt. 

 

And secondly, I think the member should be aware that he can't 

use exhibits in question period . . . or in the legislature.  May he 

continue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

the soft drink industry has said that when they were granted a 

meeting with the minister, they were informed that the minister 

was committed to a course of action. 

 

Madam Minister, jobs are threatened with these changes.  Will 

you not again meet with the bottling industry and their 

employees before the implementation date and not after, when 

things cannot be changed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's a lot of 

misinformation being touted about, and I would like to 

correct it. 

 

The net effect on the consumer is 3 cents per container.  That's 

what it is.  These changes that we're implementing has no 

effect on the cost of production of the bottling industry 

whatsoever.  And the net effect is 3 cents on a container -- this 

is a 3 cent environmental levy. 

 

I ask the members opposite to join with us in protecting the 

environment and protect SARCAN.  SARCAN was the best 

thing that they ever did.  It's one of the best legacies you have 

left and you want to put it in jeopardy and you want to listen to 

the Pepsi-Cola and the Coca-Cola company. 

 

The Coca-Cola company pays their president $3 million a year.  

They can't put 3 cents back into the environment.  Where is 

your sense of loyalty and where is your sense of respect for the 

environment?  If you choose in Pepsi-Cola . . .  We do not want 

to see jobs lost.  We are very, very concerned about the fact 

that these companies are using these employees as pawns right 

now.  There is no reason they . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, SARCAN was 

developed by this party.  In fact we have a very good depot in 

my constituency at Redvers, a very good depot. 

 

But, Madam Minister, we have some concerns with where any 

additional revenues you collect will go to.  Can you assure us 

today that your government will set forth provisions that any 

additional fees will go to SARCAN so that they can carry on 

their very important services, so that they can continue to 

employ the very special people that work at those work sites?  

Can you assure this Assembly that this is not just another tax 

for the Minister of Finance's deep pockets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you very much.  That's a great 

question and I'm very pleased to answer it. 

 

First of all, the 3 cent handling charge, the maximum 3 cent per 

container, will indeed go to SARCAN and they'll be expanding 

and then hiring, as I understand it, 26 more people in order to 

accommodate these changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- So SARCAN will be using all of that 

money, yes, and they'll be using it to pay off their deficit.  On 

the other hand the unrefunded deposits that are in the EPF fund 

now will gradually be diminished, because as you make the 

container more expensive the consumer will naturally bring it 

back and so there will be no money left in the EPF fund.  And 

so the government will have no extra funds to . . . Right now 

what is left in the EPF fund goes to waste minimization, it goes 

to help the landfill situations in Saskatchewan, it goes to fund 

educational programs for the consumer.  That is put back into a 

program to help reduce overall waste in Saskatchewan. It 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

is not used as a tax and it never is intended to be used as a tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. 

Madam Minister, people say they're willing to pay more to 

protect the environment.  But, Madam Minister, human nature 

being what it is, people also shop around for a bargain.  Along 

the southern border, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, people will 

be shopping for that bargain across the line.  They will be 

buying their pop and their juice and bringing it back into 

Saskatchewan.  We know that's going to happen. 

 

Madam Minister, what assurances can you give the employees 

in the bottling industry, those very important jobs, 417 jobs in 

Saskatchewan, that there will be no job losses because of these 

proposed changes.  What changes will these increases force on 

industries along the U.S. (United States) border?  What kind of 

losses of revenue are they going to have?  What kind of 

assurances can you give for the jobs and for those businesses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, the facts that the hon. 

members recite are quite wrong.  There is about a hundred jobs 

in the bottling industry.  There's two plants that employ 

between 80 and 100 people.  The other jobs are in the 

distribution network, and those jobs should not be in jeopardy. 

 

But if these corporations, if Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, decide 

that they're going to shut down these bottling plants, it will 

have nothing whatsoever to do with these charges that we're 

implementing today.  They have already decided to do it.  

They've closed down eight plants in the last three years already, 

and it wasn't because of these charges.  They're doing it 

because of economies of scale.  They're using this as an 

opportunity, as an excuse, to do what they were intending to do 

already anyway. 

 

When I had my meeting with them, I asked them if they would 

guarantee that they wouldn't close down those plants in 

Saskatoon and Regina if we did not.  And they said they could 

not guarantee it.  So from that I take that they already are 

talking about it.  And in their discussions with the employees 

they have already talked about it as well, far before we brought 

in these environmental and deposit levies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, seeing that you've shut out the bottling industry and 

their employees, seeing that there's been very little consultation 

with these proposed changes, Madam Minister, will you 

commit today to push back the implementation date until such 

consultation and negotiation can take place.  You could have 

had both the support for SARCAN and the jobs in the bottling 

industry if you would consult and negotiate with them. 

 

Madam Minister, you have stated that these fees are just 

the start.  Will you commit here today that you will not 

implement these fee increases or any other fee increases 

without the appropriate consultation and reviews, impact 

reviews, before they take place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, when I met with the 

industry, the presidents of the companies on Monday of this 

week, I asked them for a documentation to show me the effect 

on their company sales if these levies were placed, and they 

could not provide it to me.  They made all sorts of statements 

about a decrease in sales and a negative impact.  And I said, 

show me your documentation; and they said, it will take three 

weeks for us to get it to you. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if they have that documentation, 

they had at least a month to get it to us, and now they're going 

around telling me stories that they're going to have to shut 

down these Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola bottling plants. 

 

They were shut down . . . We had 11 of those bottling plants in 

Saskatchewan in 1988.  Now we have two left.  We have a 

hundred people working, and those hundred people are very 

important to us too.  And I'm going to be speaking with those 

people and talking about them. 

 

But Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Consultation on Government Policy 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Associate Minister of Finance.  Today, Mr. Speaker, we have 

people in the gallery fighting for their jobs -- fighting for their 

jobs as a result of your lack of consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have people in Kindersley who are also 

fighting for their jobs.  They share a common cause with the 

guests here today.  Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, who did 

you consult with before you took the jobs of the people of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The matter of the preparation of the 

budget is, as the member opposite will know -- or perhaps he 

doesn't -- as the member opposite will know, the subject of 

some strict rules with respect to budgetary secrecy.  It may be 

that at some point in time this House would want to consider 

that.  But the current rules with respect to preparation of a 

budget require us to respect the privilege of this legislature.  

And one of the privileges of the legislature is they see the 

budget first. 

 

If indeed the details of the budget with respect to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan would have been disclosed, you 

people would have been the first to take high umbrage. 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The fact is, Mr. 

Minister, that you people did not consult with anybody about 

the changes in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  You didn't 

consult with the bottlers.  You haven't consulted with anyone in 

this province about any of the plans you plan to implement.  

Mr. Minister, your government is on a wrecking spree that is 

throwing people out of work all over this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want you to give this Assembly a commitment 

that before you take anyone else's job in this province, that you 

will consult with the people affected and inform this Assembly 

before you outright throw more people out of jobs in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member opposite: to the 

extent that it is reasonably possible to do so, this government 

has consulted with people.  The Minister of the Environment 

made it clear that she had consulted with the industry. 

 

There is a difference between consultation and blind 

acceptance of every view that's forwarded.  We did consult 

with the industry.  We made a decision that the needs of the 

environment took primacy. 

 

With respect to the Pension Plan, we did indeed consult with 

people in so far as we could.  But again I say, we could not 

consult with the stakeholders without disclosing the budget and 

you people were in a state of high umbrage with respect to the 

budgetary leaks. 

 

Now you can't have it both ways.  Even from the Progressive 

Conservative Party some minimum of consistency is required if 

you're to have any credibility.  You can't be insulted with 

respect to every budget leak, and at the same, want us to 

discuss the budget with all and sundry before it's tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, there are people on the steps of 

the legislature today and those in the gallery who say that the 

government hasn't consulted with them about their loss of jobs.  

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan involves 44,000 women -- no 

consultation. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, 

you have and are very well aware of a large livestock industry 

in the province of Saskatchewan, the hog and the beef industry.  

Did you consult with Pound-maker feedlot, with the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, with Mohawk Oil before you pulled 

the pin on the feed grain assistance program?  And before you 

decided to gut the industry and take away its foundation and 

lose those jobs with over a million hogs produced in the 

province of Saskatchewan, almost that many cows in terms of a 

cow-calf industry and in the meat packing industry, who did 

you consult with before you decided to take all those jobs and 

put them at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite ought to know 

the rules that the Associate Minister of Finance has discussed 

with you in the last few minutes. 

 

But the member opposite also ought to know something about 

the industry in Saskatchewan.  We have a healthy agricultural 

industry in the livestock sector in Saskatchewan and you know 

very well that our hog industry is the lowest-cost producer 

group in Canada. 

 

I have confidence that the livestock sector in Saskatchewan 

will compete.  They will compete with other people who will 

play on a level playing-field.  Your compatriots in Alberta who 

insist on putting money artificially into an industry in order to 

attract business into that industry is not an exercise we can 

match.  Your Alberta friends are going into debt $2.3 billion 

this year. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- If the members don't want an answer to their 

questions, that's fine with me.  Then I'll call it the end of 

question period.  If you want your questions answered then 

please don't interrupt when the minister is trying to answer. 

 

You might not like the answer, but he'll give you the answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, all we're doing is asking the 

ministers here today is to please advise the Assembly and the 

public who they consulted with when they caused these policy 

changes to result in the loss of jobs. 

 

Did you consult, Mr. Minister, with the Saskatchewan hog 

marketing board in detail?  And if you did, would you tell us 

about that before you cancelled the feed grain assistance 

program?  Did you consult with them in detail? 

 

Did you consult with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and 

Pound-maker feedlot in some detail before you cancelled this 

program?  And what did they tell you about the loss of jobs and 

the loss in that industry? 

 

We've asked these ministers, Mr. Speaker, here this morning, 

did you consult with the people that are in the gallery and those 

that are on the steps?  Did you consult?  Were you open?  Did 

you consult with the people that I've just mentioned, before you 

changed this program that resulted in the loss of thousands of 

jobs in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the member 

opposite that I have consulted and my department has 

consulted broadly with the industry, with a wide range of 

organizations.  The question I'd like to ask the member 

opposite is: whom did you consult before you bankrupted this 

province over the last nine years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want you . . . I want the minister 

to go out and to say to the people in the province 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

of Saskatchewan, and to the industries like the hog board and 

the livestock association and the meat packing plants -- 

Intercontinental Packers, Moose Jaw, that you put $5 million 

into -- that you have consulted with them and they have said . . 

. Bring back their information here that they have said, you are 

doing the right thing, Mr. Minister, for the livestock industry in 

the province of Saskatchewan -- the right thing for the jobs in 

Moose Jaw, the right thing for the jobs in Saskatoon, and the 

right thing for Pound-maker; that your policies, through 

consultation, are the right thing for the industry.  I want you to 

be able to table that in the legislature, and if you can't, Mr. 

Minister, would you then admit you didn't consult at all when 

you caused this potential loss of jobs in the industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to, Mr. Speaker, assure the member 

opposite that we had a wide variety of discussions and 

obviously not in the kind of detail that you describe . . . as you 

would promote in terms of not being consistent with the rules 

of budget preparation.  I want to say, though, that the industry 

that I met both before the budget and after the budget are much 

more understanding of the financial needs of the province than 

you ever demonstrated being here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to tell you that when I met with the 

industry they understood that the government has to be 

cautious in expenditures and they are going to work with us in 

examining the needs of the industry and we will continue to 

consult and design the kinds of programs that create a healthy 

industry here and a balanced budget for the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Contributory 

Negligence Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Contributory Negligence Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Surface Rights 

Acquisition and Compensation Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and 

Compensation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Assembly . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the member have 

leave to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- To you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Assembly, I 

would like to introduce you to the guests that are just leaving, 

from Porcupine Plain.  There are 30 students, grade 8 students. 

 

Of course, Porcupine Plain is near Greenwater Provincial Park, 

a beautiful town.  It is also the home of the largest porcupine in 

the world, Quilly Willy.  And I ask the Assembly to please help 

me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the 

Assembly to introduce a motion: 

 

 That the television guidelines adopted on May 15, 1992, be 

amended by deleting the phrase "nor as light entertainment or 

political satire" in guideline 12(2). 

 

Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 

 

Amendment to Television Guidelines in Rules Committee 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, the Rules Committee 

report that was before the Assembly last week and which was 

agreed to by the members of the Assembly represented a 

consensus of all the members of that committee as to what 

should be put forward to the Assembly. And there was the 

result also, I might add, of consultation with other members of 

the House, and was also the result of 40 hours of meeting to 

which all of the media were invited to attend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it's been brought to my attention that some members of 

the committee, in particular the Leader of the Liberal Party and 

the member form Morse have indicated in the media that they 

no longer are in favour of their original decision to support this 

change in the rules, and as such this rule should be further 

changed to reflect their new position. 

 

The original intention of this motion was to prohibit the use of 

audio-visual material in advertising and to avoid purposeful 

distortion.  However, never was there an intent in this action to 

introduce any form of media censorship.  An unfortunate 

combination of injudicious wording and, I might say, an 

overactive imagination on the part of some members of the 

media community has resulted in a situation that is clearly 

unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we seek to change this situation with this 

amendment.  Having said that, therefore I move, seconded by 

the member from Rosetown-Elrose: 

 

 That the television guidelines adopted on May 15, 1992 be 

amended by deleting the phrase "nor is 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

light entertainment or political satire" in guideline 12(2). 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 

Assembly here today that the discussions that we had in 

relation to this whole book and the guidelines set out for the 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures was a book that 

we set out as a group to discuss, and the changes that we made 

were part of an all-party decision -- number one. 

 

Number two, Mr. Speaker, it would have been very, very 

enlightening for the opposition to have had an opportunity to 

see this kind of an amendment that was not an all-party 

discussion. 

 

When I received notice 15 minutes ago that the member from 

Regina Victoria was going to stand in his place and change the 

rules and the kind of conduct . . . Mr. Speaker, you told us all 

through the discussions on these 40 hours of meetings that 

when there was going to be a decision that was going to 

conflict with any member or party in that committee meeting, 

that you were going to say that would be set aside to have 

consensus built.  And, Mr. Speaker, what we have had here 

today is a demonstration of no consensus building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Victoria pointedly made 

these observations, I believe, entirely on his own.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I find that really repulsive.  I find it degrading to the 

Assembly, to that committee, and I find that not only repulsive, 

but irritating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I know the members like to 

show some levity this morning but I would ask them to give 

some respect to the member who is speaking.  Let him make 

his presentation.  Order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the committee was open to the 

public.  The committee was open to the media.  The media 

could have very well been informed of what the discussion was 

all about.  And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Victoria 

specifically wanted this as a part of it. 

 

We agreed that it would be a part of a decision making at the 

conclusion of 50 days.  And now we have an interruption in the 

centre, or not even in the centre. We haven't even begun to 

have these changes.  They're going to be implemented on 

Monday and the member from Regina Victoria incidentally 

puts it in as a flippant sort of thing to conduct the rules of this 

House. 

 

And I don't believe that that's the right thing to do.  Why didn't 

he ask the Speaker to call a meeting for us to discuss it?  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that would have been far better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members of the 

Assembly that there will be some glitches in the system 

because we're going to be trying a whole bunch of new 

things.  So why didn't he have the courage to ask you to call a 

meeting of the Rules and Procedures Committee?  It would 

have been the easiest thing to do. But five minutes . . . well two 

minutes before the final bell rang today we had notice that he 

was going to proceed with this kind of an amendment.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is not the way to conduct the business of this 

House. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Substitution of Name on Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for River Heights: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Johnson be substituted for that of Mr. 

Lautermilch on the list of members comprising the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

And I ask for this by leave. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Substitution of Name on Standing Committee on Privileges 

and Elections 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, along the same vein I 

move, seconded by the member from Hillsdale: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Harper be substituted for that of Mr. 

Cline in the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Substitution of Name on Standing Committee on 

Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosetown: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Murray be substituted for that of Mr. 

Kujawa on the list of members comprising the Standing 

Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move, 

seconded by the member for Melfort: 

 

 That the names of Mr. Lautermilch, Cline, and Kujawa be 

substituted for that of Mr. Johnson, Harper, and Ms. Murray 

on the list of members comprising the Standing Committee 

on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Shaunavon on his 

feet? 

 

(1045) 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Federal Opposition to Leaseback Program 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before orders of 

the day, Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 42 of this 

Assembly on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity.  The 

issue is the federal government's announcement of intent to 

collect $41 million overpayment from the western grain 

stabilization fund from Saskatchewan farmers, if necessary 

through the withholding of monies owing farmers under the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) programs. 

 

Given the crisis situation that Saskatchewan farmers are facing, 

this matter is both urgent and pressing.  I therefore seek leave 

of the Assembly to move a motion along the following lines: 

 

 That this Assembly demand that the federal government 

deduct any overpayment from the 500 million owed to 

western farmers; and further, that this Assembly demand the 

federal government pay the balance of that 500 million 

immediately to western farmers. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly 

on both sides of the House to join with me in supporting this 

motion today, and I seek leave to proceed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  After my 

comments I'll move a motion, seconded by my colleague, the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the year leading up to and including the election, 

the members opposite and their federal counterparts did a lot of 

promising.  And in that promise was a promise of third line of 

defence, promise of $500 million from the western grain 

stabilization.  They made this promise many times. 

 

And the member from Morse attended many meetings in which 

he spoke openly of the $500 million that was coming.  In fact 

many of the members opposite during the campaign were 

actually able to be phoning some of the members, I know, in 

my constituency, because they got back to me on this issue.  

And they were able to actually calculate out the amount of 

payment that these farmers would receive. 

 

They had all the facts and figures available and the members 

opposite, the members from Morse and Maple Creek all had 

these figures.  They had the ability to calculate out what we 

were going to be receiving.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that was 

just cruel, cruel politics. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the money never showed.  We 

waited.  We thought it was going to come in the fall.  We 

thought that they would use it just before or during the election.  

But it never showed. 

 

Now instead, Mr. Speaker, the farmers are receiving a bill.  

They're being asked to repay some $41 million back to the 

federal government.  And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, is the federal 

government, are they punishing the farmers? 

 

You know, I look at the last federal election where we had 14 

federal seats in the province, of which the New Democrats 

filled 10 of them.  And even as much political gamesmanship 

as the former premier of the province was playing at the time 

with these announcements, we still won 10 of the seats, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I wonder if the Prime Minister isn't doing some 

punishment because of that. 

 

But on this $41 million, Mr. Speaker, the government 

members, the members on this side of the House were saying 

no, scrap it.  But what are the members on the opposite side of 

the House saying?  What are they going to say about that $41 

million? 

 

A few weeks ago our provincial Agriculture minister moved 

some amendments in the House here, Mr. Speaker, to a motion 

put forward by the members opposite.  And one of those 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, I'll read that amendment: 

 

 to call on the federal government to meet its outstanding 

commitment to provide farmers with the $500 million 

deficiency payment for the 1990-91 crop year as soon as 

possible and to deliver on its commitment for the third line of 

defence program this year as agreed to at the recent first 

ministers' conference; 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, during the throne speech I talked on these 

amendments, and I found it disappointing to see that the 

members opposite, they voted against that third line of defence, 

that 500 million.  And at the time I was asking the members 

opposite, did they not realize the situation that we're in in this 

province? 

 

The cash flow problem that the farmers of Saskatchewan are in, 

they're going out there to put their crops in and they don't have 

money.  But yet the member from Morse at the same time at a 

rally in my constituency was saying, well why don't the farmers 

just go and hire some lawyers and start suing the government 

over program changes?  They weren't concerned about whether 

or not there was money for seeding, putting crop in the ground.  

And I find it disappointing. 

 

But the members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, they 

were in full support of that third line of defence, that $500 

million.  It's necessary. It's been necessary for a few years.  It's 

urgent.  We need that money.  We need it immediately.  And 

yet now we're receiving bills from the federal government. 

 

The cash flow problems of the farmers in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, are astounding.  And we know that many of the local 

businesses are carrying the farmers -- our local Pools and 

Co-ops -- for the fuel and fertilizer and spray, because these 

businesses are trying to keep rural 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

Saskatchewan alive.  They're going to bat for the farmers, but 

yet the federal Conservative government decides not to.  

They're not coming through with the third line of defence.  The 

members opposite are supporting those decisions. 

 

What we ask, what the farmers ask is that the federal 

government stop off-loading.  Stop off-loading onto the 

province, but also stop off-loading onto the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- They want the federal government and the 

members opposite to stop attacking the farmers, stop playing 

cruel politics, come up with the monies that you had promised 

up to and including the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to read from a news clipping that came 

out in the Leader-Post yesterday on the western grain 

stabilization fund: 

 

 . . . farmers will have to pay back to the federal government 

an accidental over payment of . . . $41 million from the 

Western Grain Stabilization Plan. 

 

 "I know this is a difficult time to be asking farmers to repay 

these funds, as many of them are under financial strain," (he 

does understand there is financial strain, I see) said Grains 

and Oilseeds Minister Charlie Mayer . . . 

 

 Mayer said because farmers have little available cash, they 

will be able to get overpayments deducted from various 

existing federal programs such as GRIP, Net Income 

Stabilization Account, the Farm Support and Adjustment 

Measures part two or crop insurance (FSAM2, Mr. Minister). 

 

So what that tells me is that they're fully prepared to not look at 

this in an open-minded way but they will unilaterally start 

deducting any monies that are going to come through our 

production shortfall payments, the crop insurance and such, but 

they're going to be deducting at a time possibly when farmers 

are getting a little cash in the fall and need to take that crop off 

and they will be deducting these payments at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our provincial Agriculture minister has taken 

steps to try to avoid these problems.  And I'm reading from a 

January 21, 1992, letter in which the Minister of Agriculture 

and Food here in the province of Saskatchewan went to bat for 

the farmers of this province once again. 

 

And he writes a letter here to the Hon. Charlie Mayer, Minister 

of State for Grains and Oilseeds, House of Commons, Ottawa. 

 

 Dear Mr. Mayer: I am writing in regard to the recent 

announcement that the Western Grain Stabilization Program 

made an overpayment for the 1990-91 crop year. 

 

 In previous years the Western Grain Stabilization 

Account made an initial payment in the spring and a final 

payment in the fall.  Farmers are asking how the situation 

could change so dramatically during 1991.  I ask you to 

provide a detailed explanation as to why this occurred. 

 

 The (federal) press release (he's referring to Mayer's press 

release) announcing the overpayments states 

 

  "no action will be taken . . . until all options have been 

explored. . ." 

 

 I would urge you to simply write-off the overpayment.  It is 

unreasonable of the federal government to try to collect these 

overpayments from producers during a period of reduced 

incomes and tight cash flows. 

 

 I look forward to a positive response from the federal 

government on this issue. 

 

Signed, the Minister of Agriculture and Food for the province. 

 

Well the federal government is accurate.  Farmers enrolled in 

the program would receive an overpayment of between 330 and 

$620 depending on the level of their coverage; 71 per cent of 

enrolled farmers would receive an overpayment of less than 

500.  That's from a press statement from Mr. Mayer.  The 

federal release stated that no action will be taken until all 

options have been explored. 

 

Now I'm asking, have all the options been explored?  I don't 

think they have.  It looks to me like they just know an easy way 

that they can unilaterally get $41 million.  In fact they're to 

come up with $500 million; they promised it, we need it, and 

we want it now. 

 

You take the 500 million, Mr. Speaker, and if they feel so 

strongly about the 41 million, I say deduct it from the 500 

million, but come up with the $460 million.  Come up with it 

immediately.  We need it this spring. 

 

And we need the members opposite in this provincial 

legislature to start supporting that.  They know full well that 

the farmers need that money.  They promised; they were part of 

the promise to get that money here in Saskatchewan -- 460 

minimum or the 500 that they promised. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will now read the motion: 

 

 Whereas the federal government has announced its intention 

to attempt to collect a $41 million overpayment from the 

western grain stabilization fund from Saskatchewan farmers, 

if necessary through the withholding of monies owing under 

the GRIP and NISA programs; 

 

 And whereas the federal government through its own actions 

is responsible for this overpayment; 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

 And whereas the federal government is now two years in 

arrears on 500 million third line of defence payment owed to 

western farmers; 

 

 And whereas Saskatchewan farmers cannot afford to 

continue subsidizing the federal government for its own 

inabilities; 

 

 Therefore be it resolved that this Assembly demand that the 

federal government deduct any overpayment from the 500 

million owed to western farmers; 

 

 And be it further resolved that this Assembly demand the 

federal government pay the balance of that 500 million 

immediately to western farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 

to rise in response to seconding the motion to deduct that 41 

million overpayment from the 500 million owed the farmers 

and to immediately pay the farmers that balance of that 500 

million.  I was shocked to hear that the feds were going to 

deduct this . . . or take this 41 million and make farmers repay 

up to $600 each.  I was just shocked to hear this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where does the $500 million come from?  Why are we talking 

about this?  We all remember in the past, Mr. Speaker, about 

the third line of defence promised by the feds.  We all 

remember when the safety nets were first implemented, Mr. 

Speaker, that the feds said under normal times when you're 

dry-land farming, if things are going along fine, you can afford 

to maybe take a hit once in a while -- the safety nets will kick 

in and help you out. 

 

But this is not normal times.  Therefore the feds had said you're 

going to have this safety net, 500 million safety net.  The 

members opposite were even promising that it would be 

delivered.  But it is not here yet.  We are calling on the feds to 

make good on their promise of the 500 million owed the 

farmers. 

 

In this House we voted on an emergency resolution.  And what 

that was saying, that we would extend the GRIP deadline, that 

we have a new GRIP committee and it would urge Ottawa to 

live up to its commitment of $500 million.  We voted in this 

House and the members opposite voted against it.  I was just 

appalled, Mr. Speaker, to see that.  Members opposite always 

saying that they are standing up for farmers.  They voted 

against this emergency resolution.  I just can't understand that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a farmer, before the election on October 21 last year, I 

personally phoned western grain stabilization in Winnipeg, and 

as I was talking to many of my farmers in the constituency, 

they as well said they had called the western grain stabilization 

and were told, they were told, there was going to be a huge 

pay-out, a huge pay-out, a final pay-out for the western grain 

stabilization plan. 

 

I personally asked them how much it would be.  They had said, 

figure it out for yourself, but it's going to be a huge 

pay-out.  They kept harping on that.  Just before the election, 

Mr. Speaker, they kept saying that. 

 

The day after the election I called the western grain 

stabilization in Winnipeg again.  You know what they told me?  

They said, oops, we made a mistake, we miscalculated, there's 

not going to be that huge payment any more.  Just after the 

election -- what had happened?  Playing politics again, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Farmers cannot afford to take this hit.  They're trying to seed 

right now.  They don't need another bill. 

 

We're urging the federal government and we're urging the 

members opposite to vote with us in this resolution, to take this 

overpayment out of the 500 million owed to farmers and we 

need it to pay the balance of that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Do it for the farmers. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- That's right.  One of my colleagues says, do it for 

the farmers.  Members opposite, please vote with us on this 

resolution. 

 

The last time I drove through Bankend, as I was approaching 

town, I thought it was a Saturday morning.  And the reason I 

say that, Mr. Speaker, is there was no stop signs on the railway 

track because in the past, Friday night they always had the 

habit of being pulled out by some teenagers as a prank, because 

the signs weren't there.  And then I realized again that the signs 

weren't there because we already lost our railway track back in 

1983. 

 

At that time I started thinking about how the community of 

Bankend used to be.  It was a bustling community.  You go 

there on a Saturday and you couldn't find a parking spot.  We 

had a school.  We had stockyards, and as a young lad I 

remember driving cattle through those stockyards.  We had a 

railroad station.  I remember picking up freight from the 

railroad station.  We had four elevators and 14 businesses, and 

one of those businesses was an equipment manufacturer. 

 

And today when you drive through that town of Bankend, 

everything is gone but three businesses.  There's hardly any 

homes left there, Mr. Speaker.  Those four elevators, of course, 

are gone because the rail line is gone, back in 1983.  Part of 

those four elevators were a number . . . in 1938 when the 

elevators reached their peak, there was some 3,550 elevators 

throughout this province.  That number today is less than 

1,500. 

 

Look what is happening to our rural communities.  When my 

grandfather first came here the rail line was just coming in.  I 

stressed before, it is gone.  Along with him there were many 

other settlers.  Alex J. McPhail was one of his neighbours, and 

he became the first president of Sask Wheat Pool.  I don't know 

if the members of the Assembly are aware of that, but he 

became the first member of Sask Wheat Pool and he's from 

Bankend and there is a memorial along Highway 35.  If you're 

going by, stop and read it. 

 

But back in those days it was neighbours helping neighbours.  

They had barn-building bees and they were 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

borrowing seed from one another.  They helped each other.  

And it was also a time of governments helping governments, 

federal governments co-operating with provincial governments, 

helping for the good of the farmers and for the good of the 

people of the province. 

 

When I was getting some of this information from the history 

book . . . we had a history book in Emerald's Past in Prose, 

Poetry and Pictures.  And I was reading some of the RM (rural 

municipality) of Emerald's inputs into this book.  And there 

was a resolution put in some place in the 1920s and the council 

said at that time that they sent the resolution to the provincial 

government to try to get some farmers on this vacant land, try 

to get some farmers on this vacant land.  That's when they . . . 

at that time, many of the farmers started moving in that vacant 

land around Bankend. 

 

From here I'm going to move a little bit off track and get into 

some of the rat eradication program and some of the promises 

that the members opposite when they were in government and 

the former premier, the member from Estevan, was stating at a 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention in 1988.  It was a mid-term convention, about 

October 1988.  And he said at that time, Mr. Speaker, he said at 

that time that we're going to bring in a plan and in three years 

we're going to get rid of all the rats.  You know, in three years 

time we'll get rid of all the rats. 

 

So they rewrote that program two or three times and then cost 

taxpayers a lot of money.  All of a sudden they couldn't get this 

program under way so they scrapped it.  But if you listen to 

some of the dates, when he first made this comment it was 

October of 1988 and he said three years later he was going to 

get rid of some of the rats, or all of the rats.  Mr. Speaker, three 

years after that he did get rid of some of the rats.  And I'm sure 

the members in this House know what I'm referring to.  It 

happens to do with something with an election. 

 

But why I'm talking about this rat control program is just how 

the past government said they would do things for us and they 

reneged on their promises.  And with that rat control program 

we did a survey in our municipality -- how many vacant yard 

sites there were in our municipality, and it's a standard 

nine-township municipality.  We found that there were 305 

vacant yard sites in that municipality -- 305.  Just think of the 

people that in 1920 they were getting them to move in and now 

all of a sudden they're gone -- 305 vacant yard sites.  And about 

in the 1940s there were over 3,400 people in that municipality, 

the RM of Emerald -- 3,400.  At last count, there was 848. 

 

And the point I'm trying to drive home is the federal 

government again.  Back in the '60s, about 1967, there was a 

paper released on agriculture.  And what it said, if you read that 

paper, it said that some of those farmers have got to go; we've 

got too many farmers out there.  The federal government put 

this paper out.  What happened?  Look at all the farmers that 

left that land. 

 

And if you really read the latest paper on agriculture that was 

put out some two, three years ago, again if you read that thing 

thoroughly, the feds are saying that another 20 

per cent of farmers have got to go. 

 

On one hand, the members opposite when they were in 

government and now, saying they're trying to help farmers, the 

feds say they're trying to help farmers, and they put out papers 

like this and they agree to it. Yet these farmers have to go, and 

that's what's happening. 

 

It must be awful tough for governments to function and say 

they are going to help the people, and the back of their mind 

what they want to do is get rid of those farmers.  Just think 

about it for a bit.  That's exactly what they want to do. 

 

And this 41 million overpayment, making the farmers pay for it 

right now, and if they don't pay for it they're going to take it off 

their GRIP and NISA cheques.  This is just another point to 

show that the feds and the members opposite don't really care 

about those farmers.  They want less farmers out there so that 

they have nobody to worry about.  They want corporate farms.  

We have to change that.  We have to change that, Mr. Speaker, 

and stand up for the people of this province. 

 

And this last news release, the federal Minister of Agriculture's 

news release, that if the government of Saskatchewan goes 

ahead with its new debt programs to try to help the farmers out, 

that he's going to order FCC not to comply -- FCC is Farm 

Credit Corporation -- not to comply with our legislation.  He's 

going to order them to do that.  Again the federal government 

is driving another nail into Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- With their approval. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Yes.  And one of my colleagues says with the 

members' opposite approval.  It seems like there's a phone hot 

line here in this legislature to the federal Minister of 

Agriculture's office in Ottawa.  It seems like they've been 

talking all the time; they're working together. 

 

I think it's time the government started working together for the 

good of the people of this province and good for the farmers.  

And this, this thing, this 400 million is only going to make 

matters worse again, right at seeding time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that's why I'm pleased to rise to second this motion which 

says to take this 41 million that they made this miscalculation, 

that was supposed to be a big payment -- this miscalculation -- 

take this 41 million, take it off . . . deduct it from that 500 

million that they owe the farmers in this province and 

immediately pay the balance of that. 

 

And we are asking, we are asking . . . That's $459 million.  We 

are asking the members opposite to vote on this because this is 

very important to the people of this province, not only to the 

farmers as well.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

for me to enter into the debate today.  Any time that agriculture 

is recognized in this Assembly I think it's incumbent upon 

those of us that represent rural ridings to take part in such 

debates. 

 

It is a little surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the government of the 

day, the New Democratic Party in this legislature, only talks 

about agriculture when they're laying the blame at the feet of 

some other jurisdiction in Canada.  It doesn't seem to matter, 

Mr. Speaker, if it today is the grain stabilization fund or the 

GRIP program, feeding industry, any agricultural program that 

this government has reneged upon, they don't want to talk 

about.  They don't want to tell the Assembly the consultation 

processes that they've gone through in discussing the wants and 

needs of agriculture in this province. 

 

I have no problem at all, Mr. Speaker, in supporting the 

member in his motion about this $41 million.  The last thing 

that Saskatchewan farmers need today, particularly after the 

budget that this provincial government brought down upon 

them, is to have an added cost in their operations.  The last 

thing that Saskatchewan farmers need today is cash out of hand 

when they're trying to perform that yearly megaproject called 

spring seeding in this province. 

 

When you tack this $41 million potential loss on top of 

increased GRIP premiums, on the loss of FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program), on the loss of an interest free tax cash 

advance, paying for your fuel up front at your dealer, the 

increases that have occurred to farmers throughout this 

province in electrical costs, natural gas costs, telephone and 

other utility costs, yes, Mr. Speaker, farmers in this province 

don't need to lose another $41 million.  There's absolutely no 

question that the cash situation in rural Saskatchewan today is 

as grim as it has ever been in our history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was only a short while ago in this province, last 

September and October, when I saw politicians from the New 

Democratic Party running around this province saying that 

you're not doing enough for agriculture, Mr. Member from 

Estevan.  You have not designed programs that are going to 

allow farm families to stay on the farm.  You have not designed 

programs that have cost of production built in them. 

 

You, Mr. Member from Estevan, by your policies, are going to 

depopulate rural Saskatchewan, and along with the farmers you 

are depopulating our towns and villages; that you're taking the 

ability of small business in those towns and villages who rely 

upon the agricultural sector to survive.  I heard that just a short 

time ago in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I heard the now Premier of Saskatchewan say, I am going to go 

to Ottawa and come back with $500 million of new cash.  I 

remember being down in the Agridome with 7,000 farmers 

shortly after the election, and I heard that commitment made by 

the member from Riversdale.  I heard that commitment made 

by the member from Rosetown-Elrose.  And many of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) members of this legislature were there 

that day and heard those commitments.  Those commitments, 

Mr. Speaker, go far beyond this $41 

million. 

 

So even though I commend the member for bringing it to the 

attention of the legislature today, bringing to the attention of 

the legislature that yes there is a crisis in rural Saskatchewan, I 

wonder at the hypocrisy of that member for not also talking 

about his campaign promises of a short seven months ago;  the 

hypocrisy of not taking on his own Minister of Agriculture who 

has reneged on absolutely every one of those promises.  For 

taking on his Minister of Agriculture, because that minister has 

said in a court of law in Melville, Saskatchewan, that he is 

going to ask each and every member of this legislature to stand 

in his place and help him break a legal contract with the 

farmers of Saskatchewan.  That he will ask every member of 

this legislature to stand on their feet and deem that he sent a 

letter to agriculture producers in this province that was never 

sent. 

 

And I say to the member who brought this very serious matter 

to the attention of this legislature: are you going to stand in 

your place, sir, and help your Minister of Agriculture try and 

override the courts of this province who said there was no letter 

sent?  You cannot deem something to have happened that 

didn't. 

 

And I say to the member, when we're going to go get $41 

million from the feds, which is a lot less than the 500 million 

that your leader promised a short seven months ago, that when 

you're standing up and defending your constituents in rural 

Saskatchewan and the men and women in the towns and 

villages and the small businesses, that you also stand in your 

place and say to the Minister of Agriculture: what have you 

done, sir, to the livestock industry in this province?  What have 

you done to the meat packing industry in this province?  What 

have you done for the potential of ethanol production in this 

province to help out our environment by your short-sighted 

measures that you announced in the budget of this 

Saskatchewan legislature? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is high time, as the member says, that 

politicians in this province start to come together on 

agricultural issues.  It is high time that farmers in this province 

and indeed western Canada start getting a fair return for their 

investment.  It is high time that the consumer in Canada, who 

has benefitted for decades by the fact that farmers in Canada 

are low-cost producers of foodstuffs for the benefit of the 

larger whole, that that endeavour be recognized by the 

consumers of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many things in the world of agriculture are 

beyond the control of the individual farmer on his farm.  We 

should be commending in this legislature today the efforts of 

provincial and federal politicians at the GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) process.  Because it looks 

like there is finally going to be some movement on the 

subsidies that the Europeans and the Americans place upon 

grain production. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those results will have long-term benefits to 

Saskatchewan farmers.  But in the short term, in the short term, 

Mr. Speaker, governments across Canada have to recognize 

their responsibilities.  They have to recognize the commitments 

that they have made to agriculture and to agricultural families 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

And that is why this motion today, Mr. Speaker, why I will be 

making an amendment at the conclusion of my remarks.  

Because as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, it simply isn't enough 

for members in this legislature to only seize upon agricultural 

issues when it has some short-term political benefit to their 

particular political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government of Saskatchewan was 

roundly criticized, roundly criticized by the former opposition, 

every time that a particular program was brought in to this 

legislature to help Saskatchewan farmers get beyond some of 

the crises that they faced in Saskatchewan. 

 

And yes, the former government did bring in a livestock cash 

advance that was interest free.  Because one only has to 

remember back a short time ago, Mr. Speaker, before the Free 

Trade Agreement, for instance, when the price of pork in the 

province of Saskatchewan was absolutely in the basement, 

when there was countervailing duties at the border on both live, 

frozen and processed pork going out of this province in an 

export position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pork producers in this province were going out of 

business.  That is why a cash advance system was developed in 

this province.  Grain farmers for generations had interest-free 

cash advances in this province.  Livestock producers in the 

early '80s in the beef industry were being devastated.  

Saskatchewan's cow herd went from 1.2 million down to 

700,000 because of depressed prices.  The costs of input, Mr. 

Speaker, in allowing producers to get through those humps and 

valleys in the international commodity markets necessitated a 

program such as interest-free cash advances. 

 

Now the members opposite of the day always criticized those 

moves because they said it wasn't enough.  It simply didn't give 

farmers enough.  That they had to have true cost-of-production 

formulas built in besides interest-free cash advances. 

 

So the former government came along with another program, 

Mr. Speaker, to try and mitigate some of those up-front costs.  

And that was the FeedGAP program.  Everyone in western 

Canada knew that Alberta was subsidizing the price of barley 

to their feeding industry.  Everyone knew in western Canada 

that there were still ongoing problems at the U.S. border.  

Everyone knew that feed grain had been moved out of western 

Canada into Quebec and Ontario at a subsidized rate for 

decades in this country. 

 

Obviously if Saskatchewan farmers didn't have the true cost of 

production built into a formula they needed help in other ways.  

They needed to have a change in the programs, the insurance 

programs that they govern their lives by.  They said that 

western grain wasn't enough.  They said that we had to be 

protected at a higher level. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, farmers from across Canada 

worked on building the gross revenue insurance program, 

something that would guarantee a farmer some level of income 

through the year -- something that was predictable, something 

that was bankable, and something that wasn't countervailable. 

And that is very important, Mr. Speaker, as we look at 

long-term solutions to the agricultural situation, that we 

designed programs that would not destroy Canada's credibility 

in the GATT negotiations.  All during that process, Mr. 

Speaker, I heard nothing, nothing, nothing but condemnation in 

this legislature from the members of the New Democratic Party 

because they said it wasn't enough.  It wasn't enough. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today we have the members of that same 

party stand up and say: Mr. Federal Government, our farmers 

can't afford to spend another $41 million.  Every farmer in 

Saskatchewan is faced with taking $300 out of their pocket, 

minimum, to pay this back.  This opposition agrees fully that 

Saskatchewan farmers shouldn't have to do that.  But they also 

say, Mr. Speaker, if we're going to discuss agriculture, we're 

going to discuss responsibility.  And that responsibility has to 

be shared on a fair basis. 

 

Now I've heard the members of the New Democratic Party in 

this legislature go on and on and on about other people 

abrogating their responsibility.  The Premier says we'd have a 

balanced budget in this province if it weren't for changes in 

federal programs.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the former government 

had to deal with changes in federal programs on a yearly basis.  

They had to make priorities; they had to change programs; they 

had to change plans.  But never once, never once, Mr. Speaker, 

through drought, low commodity prices -- all of the things that 

Mother Nature could throw at Saskatchewan farmers -- never 

once when the choices had to be made of whether agriculture 

would be sustained in this province, did those other reasons 

enter in and say you will not stand behind the men and women 

of rural Saskatchewan in their time of need.  Never once. 

 

(1130) 

 

Accommodations were made and, yes, even deficits were run 

to make sure that those people had money in their pocket to go 

out and do the things that they need to do to stay alive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is in very sharp contrast to what we've seen 

from this government.  We have seen a provincial budget 

brought in that absolutely guts agriculture support in this 

province.  We've seen a budget brought in that doesn't have 

ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) 

backing off and lands branch backing off.  We've seen 900 

notices out of lands branch alone.  We've seen the cancellation 

of the lease-to-own program.  Farmers might as well be making 

those lease payments and owning the land that they are using 

rather than paying lease payments to this government. 

 

We have seen the minister of Rural Affairs go out and 

arbitrarily say to farmers and ranchers in this province, I won't 

sit down and discuss with you when I move a million and a half 

acres into the habitat program.  I won't sit down and discuss 

with you your current lease situation and whether you 

ultimately will be an owner of land in this province.  He simply 

arbitrarily said, it's done, it's out, and I won't converse with 

you.  Mr. Speaker, all of those things impact on the ability of 

farmers and farm families  



568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

and the businesses related to them to survive. 

 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is presently running an ad campaign 

in this province that is in excess of a quarter of a million dollars 

to explain to the public of this province the importance that 

agriculture plays in their daily lives.  Saskatchewan's largest 

farm organization has deemed it necessary to take their 

members' money and buy radio and television time across this 

province to explain the importance of our agricultural industry 

to the men and women who aren't directly related to it.  And 

they're saying how fundamentally important it is for all 

members in our society to be part of that support system.  

Because once you take that $4.5 billion out of Saskatchewan's 

economy, you don't have a lot left. 

 

And yet this government that we have in this province today 

would have the audacity to lay the blame at everybody else's 

feet when for a few million dollars selectively used through 

consultation, maybe the FeedGAP program didn't have to 

totally disappear; maybe livestock cash advances could be at a 

different level than prime plus two; maybe the farm fuel rebate 

situation didn't have to be done the way that this government 

has brought in. 

 

This government can stand in this legislature and tell us that, 

yes, they're prepared to go into the insurance business in other 

jurisdictions in Canada with taxpayers' money.  Mr. Speaker, 

the insurance business . . . And this does relate to it, because 

this member has said that Saskatchewan agriculture is suffering 

a cash shortfall and that the federal government should live up 

to its commitments. 

 

And I'm saying it all comes to a matter of choices, Mr. Speaker.  

We have seen the cancellation of program after program after 

program.  Many farmers in this province say that the budget . . . 

A hog producer in my riding -- I think that you know very well, 

Mr. Speaker -- he says, $50,000 out of the pockets of he, his 

son-in-law, and his son.  Three families on one farm -- 50,000 

bucks gone, 450-sow operation very near the end of the line. 

 

Another rancher south of me -- fairly large rancher, 1,500 head 

enrolled under the livestock cash advance -- $50,000.  That 

ranch supports four families and a whole bunch of people in the 

surrounding community.  That ranch moves 1,500 head of 

calves through the Wheat Pool livestock yards in Assiniboia, 

Moose Jaw, supporting and employing people. 

 

My point is, Mr. Speaker, it comes down to a matter of choices.  

You say that you've got taxpayers' money to go off in the 

insurance business where you got burnt for 54 million bucks in 

the '70s because you didn't know what you were doing, and 

you're now going to do that rather than have private investors 

do it.  But you can't take a few million dollars selectively 

placed to support the families that work at Intercontinental 

Packers, the families that work at Moose Jaw Packers in Moose 

Jaw, or the five and a half million bucks that this government 

has seen fit to put into the packing plant in Moose Jaw. 

 

What are those people going to do now that the cattle aren't 

rolling through that plant to be slaughtered?  What 

are they going to do if the rancher at Spring Valley has to cut 

his herd in half, and instead of 1,500 head of calves going 

through that plant he's down to 750? 

 

And that's why I say to these members, before they are so quick 

to jump to their feet in this Assembly and lay blame at the feet 

of some other jurisdiction, that they also have the fortitude to 

stand on their feet and say to the Minister of Agriculture in this 

province:  Mr. Minister, I'm not going to stand on my feet and 

have you bring a piece of legislation in here that effectively 

says I sent a letter that I didn't.  I'm not going to help you 

institutionalize misleading of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that when the members of the 

government realize their obligation to Saskatchewan farmers, 

besides the obligations of other jurisdictions in this country of 

ours, then consumers, the very people that Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool is trying to influence with their ad campaign, will 

say, yes, we agree that everyone is doing their part to support 

agriculture in this province and indeed in this country.  

Everyone is pulling their fair share.  Then I think the 

consumers of this province and indeed Canada will go along 

with the members opposite when they stand on their feet and 

say, we have an emergency.  We've got to demand that the 

federal government stop this wrong-headed decision. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to give them an opportunity 

with this amendment to debate the issue, to stand on their feet, 

and tell the member from Rosetown-Elrose that he has 

embarked upon some wrong-headed decisions.  I move, Mr. 

Speaker, seconded by the member from Morse: 

 

 To add after the words "western farmers" the following: 

 

 And further that this Assembly urge the federal government 

to disallow the NDP provincial government's imposed 

changes to the national-provincial GRIP program as they are 

devastating Saskatchewan farmers; and further call upon the 

provincial government to accept its responsibilities for the 

agricultural industry by restoring the FeedGAP program, 

restoring the farm fuel tax exemptions, and honouring the 

promises of the NDP leader made to farmers in the provincial 

election of last October. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have read the amendment very 

carefully and I wish to draw to the attention of the member 

from Thunder Creek Beauchesne's, page 153, the 5th Edition, 

paragraph 426.  It says: 

 

 It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be 

relevant to the question on which the amendment is proposed. 

 

Secondly, I want to draw to the attention of the member 

paragraph 437: 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a 

matter which is foreign to the proposition involved in the 

main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 

 

I want to alert the members to the main motion.  The main 

motion deals specifically with the $500 million and nothing 

else.  And an amendment that is moved must pertain to the 

$500 million.  The amendment that you have moved, sir, does 

not.  It deals with everything but the $500 million and therefore 

I rule the amendment out of order. 

 

I recognize the member from Thunder Creek if he has a point 

of order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that in 

deference to you when the motion was put forward I took my 

seat as you made your ruling and that I'm quite prepared to 

continue on debate. 

 

The Speaker: -- My understanding from the member from 

Thunder Creek is that once a member speaks and makes a 

motion, an amendment, and that amendment is ruled on, he can 

no longer speak.  He has spoken and he loses his turn in 

speaking.  You have already spoken and you've moved an 

amendment.  Order. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of order as well, Mr. Speaker, if I 

could just speak to that.  The member from Thunder Creek did 

make an amendment and then sat down in deference for you to 

make that ruling whether that amendment was in order or not.  

He did not give up his place as far as speaking was concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, whether this is a separate point of order, I'm 

not sure, I'll let you determine that.  But I do know that in our 

rule 17, the amendment that was made by the NDP deleted 

everything after the word Assembly and then changed our 

motion completely.  And that's what we debated.  So I fail to 

see why we are in this legal hassle here. 

 

The Speaker: -- You're in the legal hassle because the 

amendment is out of order.  Beauchesne's is very clear on that.  

The amendment is out of order.  I will not argue with the 

member.  I declared this amendment out of order and that's it.  

The amendment is out of order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 

Assembly that I want to talk about this in the context of the 

motion, and some observations about the agriculture situation 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to indicate to the Assembly that the $500 million that 

the motion talks about is a significant cost to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers of Canada.  And I've always 

said that money spent on agriculture is not a subsidy or a gift.  

It's always, in my view, considered to be a matter of very 

important security for the agricultural situation in the province 

of Saskatchewan and Canada, and I consider it an investment 

not a subsidy. 

Mr. Speaker, the requirement for 500 million to come to the 

province of Saskatchewan is in my view extremely significant.  

It's significant in the fact that, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of 

people in the province of Saskatchewan who have indicated to 

me over and over and over again that the problems that we 

have occurring today deal with a number of things.  And I want 

to point them out to you today. 

 

I want to point them out in the context of debt, GRIP, NISA, 

taxes, income.  But I want to focus the attention on the part that 

deals with the income of the agriculture community in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The income, Mr. Speaker, has gone down in the province of 

Saskatchewan significantly.  It's gone down and I want to point 

out to the members of this Assembly it's gone down relatively 

strongly since 1985 -- 1985 was a significant year in relation to 

agriculture.  1985 is a time or a period of time when the United 

States put in their first farm Bill.  What did that do to the 

economy of agriculture in the international scene? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gave, number one, export enhancement to trade 

of grain and grain products across the world.  And that income 

reduction at that point in time was significant.  And if you take 

a look at a graph of income during the period of time from 

1980 till 1990, you will see that income for agriculture was 

significantly reduced from 1985 and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did that do?  It created a shortfall.  It created 

a significant shortfall in relation to the economy of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It created a significant problem as 

it relates to income for farmers, in particular grain farmers, in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it impacted in Saskatchewan for a whole host of 

reasons.  And those reasons are, in my view, a significant part 

of what we're talking about here today. 

 

Why are they significant?  They are significant because, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan has almost 50 per cent of the arable 

land in Canada.  That's why it's significant.  It has enough land 

to almost include all of the agricultural land as a comparison in 

all of Canada.  Canada is a big country and Saskatchewan has 

the majority of that arable land -- 65 million acres of arable 

land that is used for agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 50 million of that is used in grain production.  

And grain production in this province is a significant 

relationship to the kinds of things that we're talking about here 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 50 million acres produce the income that had 

shortfall because of the 1985 U.S. farm Bill.  That farm Bill 

provided a number of things, and I want to point them out to 

the Assembly here today. 

 

It provided, Mr. Speaker, for what has become known as the 

export enhancement program.  Export enhancement in the 

United States contributed annually in the neighbourhood of 

$350 million to the economy of the United States farmers.  We 

had other things that provided an impact into the Canadian 

income for farmers, and that was that the U.S. farm Bill 

provided payments to people 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

who had farm land to take it out of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 50 million acres of land in the province 

of Saskatchewan providing income, and United States took out 

of production 71 million acres.  Mr. Speaker, the content of the 

Canadian farmer, and particularly the Saskatchewan farmer, is 

only significant in its relationship to the international trade.  

Mr. Speaker, it is not significant in international production. 

 

International production, for example, in Saskatchewan is 

about 25 million bushels of wheat.  And, Mr. Speaker, in the 

world trade, that only represents a very, very small portion. 

 

And the reason I bring this to the attention of this Assembly is 

because it reduces the income requiring the federal government 

to become involved in providing tax dollars to the province of 

Saskatchewan and particularly to the producers.  That's why it's 

important that all aspects of the economy be discussed as a 

relationship to this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the international scene directly impacts on a 

reduction in income, requiring the opportunity and the 

necessity for the federal government to become involved.  And 

did they become involved?  Yes, Mr. Speaker, they did on 

quite a number of occasions.  They became involved in western 

grain stabilization.  They became involved in many areas in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

I want to point some of them out to you where they have.  And 

the $500 million, as referred to by the member from 

Shaunavon, deals primarily with what has traditionally been 

called the third line of defence component. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a part of the strategy to deal with a third line 

defence, it became my responsibility to consult with the 

farmers of the province of Saskatchewan exactly what they 

would want to have.  And in dealing with that, on many, many 

occasions in the times that I was the minister responsible for 

the Department of Agriculture, I called on people from across 

the province to come together to see what in their minds was 

the best opportunity for us to present to the federal government.  

I consistently remember, Mr. Speaker, asking for $300 million 

that came to the province of Saskatchewan, that gave in 1990, 

$5.50 an acre, a cultivated acre, to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a direct relationship of the federal 

government providing their support to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The need, Mr. Speaker, is there.  The 

requirement to deal with the kinds of things that we have 

expressed in this motion and that we are talking about here 

today are the kinds of things that are a necessity for agriculture 

to succeed at this point in Canada. 

 

And how does that impact?  Mr. Speaker, 25 million bushels of 

grain . . . 25 million metric tons of grain in relation to the 

international production is a very, very small part of what the 

international production is.  We have in international 

production 570 million tonnes of grain produced and also sold.  

We have on hand, Mr. Speaker, 124 million tonnes of grain 

that is on storage. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is also a significant amount. 

 

What is even more significant about that number, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the majority of that surplus is in the European 

Community.  It is not in the United States nor is it in North 

America.  Therefore the income in the province of 

Saskatchewan, because we are largely grain and grain 

producing province, that has driven down the income showing 

to us that we need to ask the federal government for some 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we needed to do as a part of an agenda for 

this Assembly and for the Minister of Agriculture to do would 

be to set up a third line of defence that was predictable.  Mr. 

Speaker, it needs to be done.  It needs to be done for the people 

of this province; it needs to be done in the grain industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did we have happen in this last budget and 

through the last six months?  Mr. Speaker, we've actually had 

the very internal part of a stable agriculture, a reasonably stable 

agriculture torn apart by a number of program changes.  And I 

want to point some of them out, because they have reduced the 

income, and that's why the members opposite say, well we 

need a whole lot more money from Ottawa.  We need a whole 

lot more money from Ottawa. 

 

What did they in fact do, Mr. Speaker?  What did they in fact 

do?  They in fact left $200 million on the table that the federal 

government would have provided in a premium cost sharing as 

it relates to GRIP.  That's what they left on the table.  The 

members opposite left that on the table and now they're asking 

the federal government for another $500 million.  They don't 

understand their own math, Mr. Speaker, and that's a part of the 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third line of defence should be negotiated 

with the federal government.  It should deal with a type of a 

program that would consistently provide the farmers with the 

knowledge of what would happen if, number one, other foreign 

markets would interfere in their sales, whether foreign markets 

would interfere with subsidies, whether a social program in 

Germany or France or Japan would interfere with the kinds of 

things that were happening in Canada and particularly in 

Saskatchewan.  These kinds of third lines of defence are 

necessary for the people of the province of Saskatchewan to 

exist. 

 

And I want to point out that in the society that we live in, the 

province of Saskatchewan today, there are a whole lot of 

people in this province who have a guaranteed income.  There 

are a whole lot of people in this province who know what 

they're going to earn.  They even know what their retirement is 

going to be.  They know that beforehand. 

 

But what do people in agriculture have, Mr. Speaker?  They are 

completely at the mercy of the foreign markets, of foreign 

governments having social policies that relate to agriculture 

that causes an extreme problem to exist throughout the country 

of Canada and particularly in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have some suggestions of alternatives that need to be 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

provided to the people of Saskatchewan and this Assembly, 

and I want to point them out to you here today.  One of those 

things would have been not to change the FeedGAP program.  

Feed grain assistance program, as we noticed today in question 

period, the minister did not consult with the pork industry; he 

did not consult with the feeder industry.  And I have letters 

from the president of the Saskatchewan livestock feeders 

association where he said, we did not have an opportunity to 

talk to the minister about it. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Brian Perkins wrote a public letter to 

the people of Saskatchewan and to the Minister of Agriculture, 

asking him to respond to a number of very serious problems 

that are going to occur because of his policies that reflect 

negatively in relation to the things he's doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he is going to take money from the livestock cash 

advance, he's going to take money from the feed grain 

assistance program, and what's he going to do with that, Mr. 

Speaker?  He is going to take it away and thereby jeopardize 

the whole industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important for us to realize that the opportunity 

in agriculture has to deal with a stable and a stabilized income 

for agriculture.  And that can come from more than the 

taxpayers.  That can come from the market-place.  And maybe 

the member opposite doesn't realize that.  But the market-place 

is being eroded by people in other countries and in other 

provinces, providing incentives and initiatives to prevent the 

provinces like Saskatchewan from being able to produce in a 

competitive basis. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in 1974, '75, '76 probably 

was the toughest years in agriculture for the livestock industry.  

Mr. Speaker, why?  Because other countries were involved in 

this.  There was Australia and New Zealand were putting meat 

into Canada at an unprecedented rate, driving down the price of 

cattle.  We had an oversupply of cattle at the time in relation to 

consumption. 

 

What did the federal government do at that time, Mr. Speaker?  

They said, let's go and open the door for opportunity for these 

other countries.  They never protected the Saskatchewan 

producer; they never protected the Canadian producer.  It 

reduced the income.  And the requirement then later on, as a 

result of that, in 1985 and '86 the Government of Canada said, 

we have to restrict the Irish beef, the Danish beef, so that the 

producers in Canada have a capacity to deal with the social 

programs that are initiated through agriculture in other 

countries. 

 

That's why the necessity is for the federal government to 

become involved.  And that's why . . . and I think they should 

be involved in the kinds of things that we're talking about here 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the income reduction is what we're talking about 

here.  The requirement for the federal government to provide 

cash is because income has been reduced. 

And that is the reason why we're talking about this.  The 

income has been reduced not only by the federal government 

and the market-place, but it's also been reduced by the Minister 

of Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has taken away the opportunity for 

Saskatchewan producers to be competitive.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

did he ask anybody?  Did he ask the president of the 

Saskatchewan livestock feeders association?  He even has them 

on a committee, and he works for him in a committee that was 

set up to handle the beef stabilization.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly why he should have at least asked him. 

 

What has that done?  It's reduced the income so that the 

requirement is that the federal government has to pay the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And that's simply the way it is.  He's 

reduced it in the FeedGAP.  He's reduced it in the livestock 

cash advance.  He's increased the costs in a whole lot of places.  

And then he says, on the other hand, go get it from the federal 

government.  Go get it from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the assumption is that he has to carry some 

responsibility for this himself.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's what 

he's deliberately doing to the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

find it very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that a person like 

that who is responsible for the various areas of agriculture and 

is a farmer himself, would even think of those kinds of things 

in relation to the kinds of things he's done for the province of 

Saskatchewan, for the producers in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they came out in numbers, telling him and others 

that there was going to be changes to the GRIP program.  And 

what did he do?  He left $200 million on the table with the 

federal government.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is almost 

unpardonable.  The farmers in the province are going to find 

that very disgusting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he not only did that; he said, I will deem to have 

written a letter to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  

And he's going to ask the people in this Assembly to put that 

together for him.  He has deliberately said that he is going to 

ask this Assembly to talk about changes to the GRIP, where he 

left $200 million on the table with the federal government, in a 

way that was going to provide access for opportunity for 

farmers to access federal funding.  And that is what he 

deliberately did. 

 

And I don't understand why he would ask the members of his 

caucus to bring forward a motion like this when he himself is a 

part of the problem.  He has been a part of the problem ever 

since he got appointed to that position.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is the reason why we have to debate this here today, and why 

we have other things that we need to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that he is leaving $200 million 

on the table in agriculture as it relates to federal government.  

He's doing that and he's going to say to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan that he is going to provide amendments to the 

GRIP program that are going to be deemed to have been 

provided to farmers prior to March 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

15.  Now that, Mr. Speaker, in my view is not only degrading, 

it's disgusting.  He is bringing this legislature to the lowest 

level that I've ever seen it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a few more things that I think 

have to be brought to the attention of this Assembly and to the 

people of the province.  Mr. Speaker, this minister has said that 

income is a necessity for the people of the province.  He's also 

said that he's going to ask the federal government for more 

money.  He's going to ask the federal government to provide 

$500 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he had the opportunity to put $200 million more 

on the table at that time.  Mr. Speaker, he has asked the federal 

government to provide $500 million in the motion that he has 

provided for today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members of this Assembly 

that $200 million was left on the table.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly what was done.  It was done on a program that would 

provide predictability to the farmers, with no politics.  It would 

provide bankability with no politics.  It would provide security 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan in a way that 

they knew what was going to happen, in a way that was going 

to provide a definite benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what did the Minister of Agriculture do?  He took $200 

million away from the people of Saskatchewan that the federal 

government was going to provide.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

fact. 

 

I want to point out a number of other things that he could have 

done.  We had today a discussion and in the media about 

GATT being changed; GATT providing more income for 

farmers in Canada and North America.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is also going to have an impact.  My observations to the 

Minister of Agriculture would be, what did he do in providing 

some alternatives to the federal government on that vein.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is important for us to consider as a part of 

the $500 million that we're going to give to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I find most interesting with the Minister of 

Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan in asking his 

back-benchers to provide this information to this Assembly 

here today was the fact that he pushed his back-benchers into 

doing something that he should have been doing with the 

federal government himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in November, Mr. Speaker, in referring to the 

Minister of Agriculture, he said, come with me to Ottawa and 

we'll get some money.  Come to me to Ottawa to get some 

money . . . Come with me to Ottawa to get some money.  What 

happened, Mr. Speaker?  All that he did is brought home a bill 

of $140,000 -- $140,000 that he cost the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan.  That's what he cost the people. 

 

What did he do when he went to Edmonton to ask the people 

there for money?  He came back with nothing.  He's always 

come back with nothing. In fact, from my discussion with other 

ministers, he provides nothing at the meetings.  And that's the 

kind of Minister of Agriculture that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not the way to 

get money out of Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 10 years that we were government, we 

provided $13 billion to the farmers' agriculture in 

Saskatchewan.  That was what the total volume of money paid 

to producers.  And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 

received that money.  The member from Indian Head-Wolseley 

received that money.  The member from Nipawin received that 

money.  All of the rural members in this Assembly received 

that money as a part of a federal contribution to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did the federal government and the treasury 

in Ottawa and what did the treasury in Saskatchewan say?  Mr. 

Speaker, give us some predictability.  Give us some 

predictability about the volume of cash and the requirement for 

the people of Canada so that we can know, that the taxpayers 

can know, what it's going to cost us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we did have that.  Mr. Speaker, we had that 

in a program called GRIP.  And, Mr. Speaker, what did we 

have this minister do?  He deliberately gutted it.  He took it 

away and he is going to say that he is going to deem to have 

sent a letter out to the people of the province -- 60,000 

contractors are going to be told that he sent a letter when he 

didn't.  And I don't know how the minister in clear conscience 

can provide that letter to the people, the farmers, the contract 

holders in the province of Saskatchewan.  I don't think he has 

the right to do that.  I don't think this Assembly should take 

upon itself that freedom to do that.  Because that is a breach of 

contract with 60,000 producers  

_- 50,000 contract holders.  And I think that that is a serious 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province needs to have agriculture become a 

focus of attention in more ways than one.  It needs to not only 

have the focus of attention from the people in Ottawa, but it 

also has to have the focus of attention of this Minister of 

Agriculture, and I don't believe it has. 

 

What did he do with giving some benefits to interest rates and 

interest problems in the province of Saskatchewan?  He cuts 

the program.  Mr. Speaker, the grain producer . . . and I heard 

people all over this province stand up and complain about the 

fact that the grain producers were not given a cash advance on 

grain that was interest free.  I heard that from every part of this 

province. 

 

What did the federal government do?  They said, well we'll 

change that.  We'll make it back to the way it was.  Mr. 

Speaker, the interest rates went down to zero in the cash 

advance on grain.  And, Mr. Speaker, what did the federal 

government do?  They said, we will provide that cash advance 

to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  We'll provide 

that cash advance to the people of Canada. 

 

What did the province do in relation to that, Mr. Speaker?  

They said, it is important for us to consider a cash advance, 

interest free, to the livestock producer.  So what did that do?  

That, Mr. Speaker, provided an opportunity for the livestock 

producer to become competitive with the Alberta livestock 

producer.  Mr. Speaker, that was a 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

very important part of the competitiveness of our pork industry 

and the competitiveness of our feeding industry in the beef. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the letter that I was sent from Mr. Perkins, it 

said this:  The Alberta people are being given an opportunity to 

have 8 per cent of their volume being met by tax dollars 

supporting the industry. 

 

What have we got in Saskatchewan?  With the reduction that 

we've had in the province of Saskatchewan, that reduction is 

going to cost and lower that from 8 per cent in Saskatchewan . . 

. which is in Alberta, 8 per cent in Alberta -- it was five and a 

half in Saskatchewan -- it's going to reduce that to half a per 

cent in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province in dealing with 

the livestock industry need that, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point 

out to the people of this Assembly that the highest priced 

livestock was not in 1991, the highest priced livestock was not 

in 1992, the highest priced livestock was in 1979, Mr. Speaker.  

That's when the highest return to the livestock industry 

occurred. 

 

(1215) 

 

What have we had in the pork industry?  Mr. Speaker, we've 

had incomes decline in the pork industry.  Mr. Speaker, we 

have had incomes in the hog industry decline.  We've had 

incomes in the beef industry decline.  What has made the total 

volume of dollars improve or increase?  And the total volume 

of dollars has increased. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker?  It's because of the productivity of the 

people of this province.  The efficiencies that the hog industry 

took, the efficiencies that the beef industry took have provided 

the opportunity for them to continue to exist. 

 

What did this minister do?  He raised the rent on pastures.  He 

raises the price of the breeding stock in the community 

pastures.  He raises the prices on everything that he's got 

control of and cuts everything else out.  And what does that do 

to our competitiveness in Canada?  Well, Mr. Speaker, it just 

moves it all over into Alberta.  And I'm not sure whether that's 

his motive, and I would hope it wasn't. 

 

Then I want to talk a little bit about what that does to the 

packing industry.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic 

Development provided about a five and a half or $6 million 

loan to the Mitchell family to build and to buy into the Canada 

Packers plant in Moose Jaw.  What did we have happen there?  

Now he's going to reduce the volume of stock available to the 

people of Moose Jaw.  And what's he going to do to the 

packing industry in the province?  Mr. Speaker, it is in serious, 

serious . . . in a serious position. 

 

I have visited with these packing plants, the people from the 

packing plants.  They are on very, very slim margins.  And if 

they have to transport that livestock from Alberta into 

Saskatchewan, you know what Mr. Perkins says.  And I believe 

he's absolutely right -- the feeding industry moved from 

Manitoba to Alberta. 

The feeding industry, because of these reductions, is going to 

move from Saskatchewan into Alberta.  And what are we going 

to have with secondary industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Nothing.  Because they won't be able to price 

them back out to be competitive, to bring them back and to kill 

them in Saskatoon and in Moose Jaw. 

 

That's what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and that's why it's 

important for us to talk about what makes . . . what is the 

reason why this minister would give us this kind of a time 

when we need the money, we need the money in agriculture, 

we need the opportunity to deliver a better diversified 

agriculture, and what's he done?  He has just gutted it all out. 

 

What did he do in GRIP, Mr. Speaker?  He made it so that 

people don't want to seed lentils.  He made it so that they don't 

want to seed sunflowers.  He made it so that they don't want to 

seed any speciality crop that there is.  He just deliberately did 

it. 

 

And what is going to be shown in the statistics I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, is that wheat production will be up, seeded acres in 

wheat will be up.  That is, Mr. Speaker, what I find the most 

disgusting about this. 

 

The Europeans announced today that they're going to cut 

production in wheat, and what do we do?  We increase it.  We 

don't go into the speciality crops that have an opportunity to be 

sold in Saskatchewan and in Canada and then go market them, 

build up a base of volume that is in a position where other 

countries will want to buy. 

 

No, we go and say, well, we'll quit with this diversification in 

the livestock industry, we'll quit with diversification in the 

grain business, and then we'll let it all go to Alberta, we'll let it 

all go to Manitoba, or we'll let it go south of the border. 

 

Just recently, Mr. Speaker, there was an article in the Leader-

Post that talked about livestock sales moving to United States 

being up.  What does that mean, Mr. Speaker?  That means that 

secondary industry in grain production, secondary industry in 

the livestock business is slowly and slowly eroding from the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What's that going to do?  Mr. Speaker, we are going to be again 

back in the position where we'll only be primary producers.  

And that's what's wrong with the way this minister has 

responded to the federal government.  Everything he has done 

he has done to irritate them, to totally disregard them because 

he doesn't want to have, number one, the things that were done 

in the province of Saskatchewan under our administration ever 

to have any success.  That's number one. 

 

Number two, he's going to make sure that everything that he 

does contradicts the federal government, and that's because 

they're not the same stripe as he is.  That is exactly what his 

agenda is.  It's exactly what the agenda of the Premier's is.  And 

that's what causes us a concern, when we deal with these kinds 

of issues. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I find this kind of a 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

motion by the back-benchers in the NDP a little bit sad, I 

would say, because they have not even been able to initiate the 

kind of responses that they ought to have had in their own 

caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did we have as it relates to the 500 million 

as it relates to leaving $200 million on the table with GRIP that 

the Minister of Agriculture here did?  Does he want to have an 

industry in agriculture and research?  Well what has their 

administration ever done for agriculture in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan 

were asked to contribute what was equivalent to $4 a cultivated 

acre in this province -- $4 a cultivated acre.  That's what the 

taxpayer was asked to contribute.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we as a government at the time asked the taxpayers to 

contribute. 

 

What have we contributed in education, Mr. Speaker, on the 

basis of a cultivated acre?  Mr. Speaker, health costs the people 

of Saskatchewan $32 a cultivated acre.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a 

significant amount of money.  And, Mr. Speaker, I agree with 

that tax, with that money being spent there. But let's get some 

relationship to the kinds of things that that impacts on, and 

what does agriculture impact on? 

 

Agriculture has 60,000 producers with an extended base of 

about 180,000 people.  Those are the people who are directly 

involved in agriculture.  Who else is directly involved in 

agriculture?  Half the people of Regina's work-force are 

involved in providing the benefit because of agriculture.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is an important part of why I believe that we 

should be looking for as much money from Ottawa as we can. 

 

However, we have to make sure that we have an industry base 

that is going to be strong enough to support that.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, as I have watched this Minister of Agriculture talk 

about the kinds of things that he has been doing, I don't see any 

support for agriculture at all.  In fact I see an erosion of 

agriculture. 

 

What did he do with our gas tax?  Well, Mr. Speaker, he said, 

well that's not significant; it's not significant to agriculture.  

But, Mr. Speaker, in my mind it is.  He said, well the people 

are ripping off the system.  Well you know, Mr. Speaker, there 

is about a billion dollars income to farming from off the farm -- 

a billion dollars a year in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's 

what accrues to agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if farmers were making enough money off the 

farm they would provide that opportunity back to the people of 

Saskatchewan so that we could have more people working. 

 

But what have we got here?  We've got a government that is 

bent on reducing the competitiveness in the province of 

Saskatchewan on our agricultural base.  And I think that that's 

wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he's done it in many cases.  He did it in providing 

a reduction in the benefits to 

municipalities.  The Minister of Education did it in reducing 

the benefits to the school boards.  The minister responsible for 

SaskPower did it in relation to more increases in power rates. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it's been brought to my attention, and I'm 

going to investigate this further, at least two people that I know 

of are not going to irrigate this year because of the increased 

power rates.  And I know that that's going to be something that 

people are going to start to talk about. 

 

And if they haven't got a contract with SaskPower to buy 

power, I'm sure that there's going to be many others who are 

going to be doing exactly that.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because 

they can't afford to pay the increased rates.  That's what's there, 

and that's what's going to happen across this province. 

 

What's going to happen with farmers and their insurance costs 

on their vehicles?  They're going up.  What's going to happen 

with the cost of telephones?  Mr. Speaker, that's going to go up.  

It's going up all over the province.  And what does that also do, 

Mr. Speaker?  It impacts on small business in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a very good friend of mine works for National 

Cash Register and did the 8 per cent change . . . or the interest 

change on the . . . or the percentage change on the E&H 

(education and health) tax as it relates to the increase.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, what happened when he went around and did the 

changes in the E&H tax?  Well, Mr. Speaker, he said there are 

some very, very angry people out there.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is going to reduce the effectiveness of the small 

business in that community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what's it going to do to the cost to 

agriculture?  It's going to increase the cost.  Who pays for that?  

Mr. Speaker, who's buying that service?  And, Mr. Speaker, if 

we would have had harmonization in the first place, the farmers 

of this province would have benefitted.  They would have 

benefitted a whole lot, Mr. Speaker.  And that is an important 

part for the people of this province to consider. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other areas that I think need 

to be addressed.  What did we do . . . what did these people do 

with the natural gas in the province of Saskatchewan?  That is a 

part of what we have to consider.  Mr. Speaker, all of these 

things are part of why this government brings forward this kind 

of a motion, asking the government for $500 million more. 

 

What did they do?  They didn't support agriculture in their 

budget.  They have never supported agriculture in this 

province.  In fact I know that a minister of Agriculture from 

that party that was here for years and years, was minister 

responsible for Rural Development, he said: my 1946 pick-up 

can still haul all my wheat.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly 

the mentality they have -- 1946 and they haven't graduated past 

1950.  But today, Mr. Speaker, there are more and more 

requirements by agriculture in this province to be competitive.  

That, Mr. Speaker, is very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it almost hypocritical to have the members 

opposite bring forward this motion.  I've tried to 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

point out why and the reason is because they have not provided 

a reasoned approach to asking the federal government for more 

money.  They haven't.  They have cut their own programs, 

they've deducted many, many times the ability for people and 

the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to compete.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is a part of the problem. 

 

Now I'm going to be taking my seat, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 

going to be asking for this Assembly to consider the points that 

I've made in relation to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment, seconded by the 

member from Moosomin, that the following be part of it: 

 

 That insert before the words "demand that the federal" the 

following: 

 

 Recognizing the worsening crisis in agriculture caused by the 

provincial NDP's destructive changes to GRIP, 

acknowledging the failure of the provincial government to 

accept any responsibility for agriculture, and voice that if the 

federal government does not act to counterbalance the 

irresponsible actions of the provincial NDP 

 

And continue on with the rest of the motion.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is moved by myself, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I enter 

this debate, I do so somewhat reluctantly and yet I also enter 

the debate in support of agriculture producers across the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Not just across the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but certainly men and women who 

over the years have given and devoted their time to agriculture 

production in this province and across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have indicated today the motion 

that has been brought forward by the government of this 

House, certainly is a motion that we really don't have a big, 

major problem with. 

 

And I want to indicate to you as well that yesterday upon 

hearing of the intentions of the federal government to try and 

recoup the overpayment in the western grain stabilization plan, 

I took the time to call my local federal MP (Member of 

Parliament) and indicate to him that I didn't believe it was a 

very wise move on his part and that he should indeed speak out 

and talk to his colleagues and certainly the colleague . . . his 

colleague, Mr. McKnight, and indicate that this isn't a wise 

move. 

 

And I would have to ask if indeed the cabinet of the day, as 

was indicated in a recent editorial in this province, if the 

cabinet of the day federally wasn't taken in by the cabinet of 

the day provincially when they dismantled the Pension Plan by 

their employees and certainly by the bureaucrats within the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all realize that farmers in Saskatchewan 

are facing a crisis.  But we all realize that agriculture producers 

across this province -- and not just the producers who are 

directly involved but certainly people who are indirectly 

involved in agriculture in this province -- have been affected by 

the crisis in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the idea of the amendment is to bring to this 

House the . . . remind people, not only in this House but people 

across the province of Saskatchewan, that I believe and we 

believe the people of Saskatchewan certainly have been let 

down by the government of the day. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would have to ask: why do we need the 

motion that is being presented today?  Why would a motion of 

this type be brought forward?  It would appear to me that the 

motion again is just another way or another form of deflecting 

public criticism that is mounting on the government at this time 

for the actions they have taken, Mr. Speaker. Actions which 

have not only hurt men and women across the province, 

women specifically through the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan or men and women because of the 

elimination of support in the health system and increasing the 

payments, the direct payments through the health drug 

program, Mr. Speaker, but also it would appear to me that the 

government of the day are trying to deflect the criticism that is 

mounting up on them for their lack of showing leadership for 

agriculture producers in this province who are facing a crisis. 

 

And the amendment we brought forward had indicated that it's 

a growing crisis and in many cases brought on directly because 

of the government's lack of ability or willingness to show some 

support to the agricultural sector. 

 

And when I speak agricultural sector, I don't speak, Mr. 

Speaker, directly of the producers out there putting the crop in 

the ground, but I also want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that -- as 

my colleague from Morse indicated -- agriculture production 

and people on the farm directly affect . . . the income off the 

farm directly affects men and women right across this 

province.  I believe it was just on the news recently, or not on 

the news but in an advertisement, the indication that some 

28,000 jobs, I believe, if not more than that, in this province are 

directly or indirectly affected by problems on the farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've seen over the past number of weeks this 

government fail to live up to its responsibilities.  Certainly it's 

fine for us to condemn the federal government for their lack of, 

if you would, leadership, or the indication by the Minister of 

Agriculture in this government that the federal government has 

a responsibility and as opposition members we indicate that as 

well. 

 

Yes, the federal government does have a responsibility to 

agriculture producers across this great nation.  But we must 

also indicate to people in Saskatchewan and to the agricultural 

community that the provincial government has a responsibility 

as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the former government introduced the 

FeedGAP program . . . why did the former government 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

take a look at the FeedGAP program?  Mr. Speaker, we took a 

serious look at trying to help the packing industry in our 

province because of the fact that numerous millions of dollars 

had been placed into the packing industry prior to 1982; and 

since that time, Mr. Speaker, because of support programs in 

other parts of Canada -- certainly in Alberta and in Manitoba 

and then across the line, Mr. Speaker -- we were seeing a 

greater number of the livestock produced in this province being 

shipped out of the province to be marketed in other areas of not 

only Canada but the United States, which in turn was affecting 

the jobs of people working in the province of Saskatchewan, 

people working in the packing industry in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the FeedGAP program was a program introduced 

to give the farmers and the feeders and the feedlot operators 

and the hog producers in this province a level playing-field 

within which they could work to be competitive with their 

counterparts in other parts of Canada. 

 

And not only do we need to create a level playing-field for 

producers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but we're all aware of 

the ongoing discussion that is taking place federally at the 

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to bring a fair and 

even playing-field into the international market-place so that, 

Mr. Speaker, our producers would not be held at ransom or be 

put in jeopardy by decisions made in London or being made in 

Paris or being made in Brussels or even for that matter, Mr. 

Speaker, in Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia). 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk of the FeedGAP program, the 

FeedGAP program was a way of creating that level 

playing-field.  And I would have to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture and the government of the day, why did they pull 

out from under the feedlot operators and the meat producers of 

this province a tool with which they created . . . a more 

equitable playing-field was created for the producers of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the livestock cash advance?  If that 

wasn't the way of helping producers, helping men and women 

in the feeding industry, men and women in the cow-calf 

industry in Saskatchewan through the crisis that they were 

involved in, through the worsening crisis that they are facing, 

then I don't know what was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the grain producers had a way of drawing on 

some cash so that they could pay the bills until they were able 

to move their product to market.  And they had a cash advance 

put in place, Mr. Speaker, where they can borrow up to 

$50,000 at no interest and repay it as they market their product. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the livestock cash advance was put in place 

for that purpose as well, to give producers an avenue of 

drawing on some revenue so that they could pay their bills 

while they were waiting in turn to market their product, and 

derive the income to not only pay the light bill and the fuel bill 

and the feeding bill, but certainly give them money to operate 

on. 

 

And this cash advance was based on a limited dollar per head, 

per animal, and no interest on pay-back, Mr. 

Speaker.  And certainly it's become a roll-over program as well 

as the grain cash advance has been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the cash advance . . . and I 

know that there are many people in my area who have been 

voicing concern over the last number of days as well over the 

elimination of the cash advance on livestock.  First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that the government has pulled this out from 

under their feet as well without . . . We would have to ask what 

kind of consultation would appear with very little consultation 

with the feeding industry, with the packing industry, with the 

stock growers, with the Pork Producers Marketing Board, or 

even producers in general across the province? 

 

It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the government was 

indeed going to live up to their commitment in the throne 

speech of being consultative, that they would have taken the 

time to sit down with the industry in order to lay out a plan and 

to look at what they were proposing so that they wouldn't be so 

disruptive to an industry that was facing such great difficulty at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just have to look outside.  Certainly in the last 

few days and through the spring there's an area of the province 

that has seen substantial rainfall and it certainly is setting with 

a good growing situation, Mr. Speaker.  But there are other 

areas of this province where farmers are becoming desperate.  

They're beginning to wonder whether they're going to be able 

to see this fall, whether they're going to be able to see 

themselves getting through the fall or even getting to the point 

of being able to market product, for the simple reason that 

moisture conditions are not as favourable in the south-west. 

 

And in fact in today's paper I also noticed not only are they 

facing a problem trying to grow a crop or germination on their 

crop, but the major problem facing many people in the 

south-west is drought in the agricultural area, in the dry-land 

area and the pasture areas of this province. 

 

And so I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the crisis that these 

farmers are facing, not only are they facing the fact that they 

may have to downgrade their herds because they don't have the 

pasture, but they're also facing a problem of having to be now 

asked to repay cash advances which they had used to create an 

ongoing rolling-over of revenue in order that they could meet 

their commitments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is this government has pulled 

the rug out from under producers in this province, rather than 

going to the federal government and asking the federal 

government for assistance and indicating to the federal 

government, as we have joined with them on numerous 

occasions, to indicate the federal government does have a 

responsibility to protect agriculture in this province.  But I 

would also suggest to you, sir, that the provincial government 

has a responsibility to indicate their support for agriculture in 

this province as well. 

 

So why did they do away with the FeedGAP?  Why are they 

putting a high interest rate charge now on the livestock cash 

advance, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, is that to continually put 

blame at the feet of someone else?  Are 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

they just pulling programs so they can blame someone else for 

their ineptitude, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the grain stabilization program, 

and you will find there are many people across this province as 

well who felt that the grain stabilization program was indeed a 

good program.  And as one of the members indicated today, the 

feeling last fall was that there would be some form of pay-out 

due to the fact that grain prices had dropped in the crop year of 

1990-91. 

 

In the start of the year the initial prices had dropped for that 

year compared to the '91-92 crop year, and the indication 

would have been that there should have been a pay-out under 

the grain stabilization program.  And I would also have to 

indicate that that was the information that I had and felt there 

would be. 

 

(1245) 

 

And I was very disappointed last fall, Mr. Speaker, when the 

federal government indeed took the funds that should have 

been available and indeed rolled them into the shortfall in the 

pool.  Because the grain pool was allowed . . . or the delivery 

of grain under the '90-91 crop year was allowed to proceed 

three weeks into the new crop year which indeed created a 

shortfall in the pool.  And at that time then the federal 

government then decided that well they'll take what's left to pay 

producers to balance the pool off. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have to suggest to the federal 

government certainly that, in my opinion, that was not the right 

thing to do.  But I was also informed, Mr. Speaker, that the 

federal government also were facing a possibility of asking 

producers to repay an overpayment.  Because it's very simple 

when you're dealing with a lot of dollars, and when you don't 

have all the numbers and figures in, it's very simple sometimes 

to make a mistake and not have all the numbers accurately 

before you. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it can be simple.  And we've seen it over 

the years, of making an overpayment, and how do you go back 

to somebody when they're in a crisis, when they're facing a 

price squeeze and ask them for a repayment? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you, and certainly our 

members of this Assembly would be indicating to the federal 

government that we don't feel that at this time or at any time 

should they be coming back to producers asking for an 

overpayment of a mistake that they have created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other areas where we believe the 

provincial government must exercise its responsibility.  Mr. 

Speaker, the former government brought in a program called 

the lease-to-own program.  The idea behind the lease-to-own 

program was to give men and women and young people across 

this province an opportunity to invest in the land that they were 

farming that they had been leasing from the government for a 

number of years.  To give them the opportunity to continue the 

lease with the idea of over a period of time turning that lease 

fee into a payment on that land, and then by that, Mr. Speaker, 

being able to eventually have title to that property. 

I believe people across Canada, people in this province, men 

and women who came and settled . . . our forefathers who came 

and settled this land, that settled this great country, came and 

settled here because they desired to have the ability to own and 

to put their name on their own property. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask, where is the lease-to-own 

program?  And many people across my constituency have 

asked that.  Here again I believe, Mr. Speaker, is another 

indication of where the provincial government is not showing 

its responsibility as well. 

 

It's certainly easy to always look at the federal government or 

to look at other governments and put blame at their feet, but we 

all have to accept the fact that we have a responsibility.  The 

provincial government must show some leadership, not only in 

agriculture but in the area of health, in the area of education, 

Mr. Speaker, and certainly in the area of caring for those less 

fortunate than we are. 

 

So I would suggest, and I would ask the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Rural Development to put their 

heads together and re-visit that lease-to-own program, and 

continue to give agriculture producers and young men and 

women who desire to own their land or would like to take over 

the land -- their family farm from their parents -- that they look 

at that program, and that they indeed give producers that 

option, and extend that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about the vendor mortgage program, Mr. Speaker?  I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I'm not sure -- we haven't 

heard a lot lately -- but I would suggest that the minister send . 

. . or get more information out and encourage men and women 

across the province to take a serious look at the vendor 

mortgage program. 

 

One of the biggest problems we have in agriculture in our 

province, and one of the crises facing men and women and 

young people in particular across this province in trying to 

attain the farming operation or the farm base that they would 

like to become involved in, is the fact of high debt and high 

interest and high payments.  And, Mr. Speaker, certainly the 

vendor mortgage program was a way of allowing men and 

women, young people, to get involved in the family farm and 

allowing parents to pass on to the younger generation without 

having to carry the full load of carrying the mortgage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how did that program work?  That program 

worked on the basis of coming to an agreement of sale between 

your parents, devising a down payment that you would agree 

to, and then carrying . . . going to Agricultural Credit and 

Agricultural Credit would guarantee the principal. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, gave a young person, a young farmer, a 

young farm couple, the opportunity of entering into an 

agreement which would give them the ability to own their own 

land and continue on the farming operation, and in many cases 

the family farm.  And, Mr. Speaker, we have in this province a 

number . . . over the past number of years in my area alone, we 

have farms that have been in the 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1992 

family name for over 100 years and there's another one coming 

up this spring.  So I think, Mr. Speaker, the vendor mortgage 

program is an excellent program, and I would ask the 

government to seriously take a look at expanding on the 

program and making sure people are more well informed 

because of the problems we face in agriculture.  It's a way of 

helping people to become involved in the farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the government as well to leave the 

impression that the federal government has shirked its 

responsibility is not really fair.  I believe when we look over 

the past nine years, Mr. Speaker, there hasn't been a federal 

government, over the years, that has put more into 

Saskatchewan, not just in the area of agriculture, but has 

certainly given Saskatchewan an opportunity to become 

involved in programs like the Atomic Energy of Canada 

agreement -- a program that would give people in 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to become involved in high tech, 

in the science field, and certainly would create jobs for the 

young people of this province. 

 

But let's look at agriculture.  This motion put forward by the 

member from Shaunavon suggests the federal government 

owes this province some money.  Well, Mr. Speaker, over the 

past number of years, when we look at the billions of dollars 

that have come into the hands of producers across this 

province, I don't think anyone could argue that the federal 

government hasn't endeavoured over the past number of years 

to support agriculture, to support this province, to support 

producers across this province. 

 

And we can all argue that, yes, they owe more.  They owe 

Saskatchewan producers more.  They owe Saskatchewan, 

whether it's farmers, whether it's business people -- whomever 

in this province; whether it's transfer payments to health and 

education, Mr. Speaker, we can always look at somebody else.  

But I believe we must accept our responsibility here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the . . . what kind of support has the 

province shown agriculture as well in the area of GRIP 

payments?  What have they done with the GRIP program, Mr. 

Speaker?  And we've had a fair bit of discussion on this 

program over the past number of weeks.  Certainly we've seen 

farmers gather across this province in great numbers to voice 

their opinions; in fact, in some cases vent their frustrations as 

to what the provincial government has done with a program 

that was equitable, with a program that they certainly could sit 

down with, and as one producer indicated to me the other day, 

he said he didn't mind the premium.  And certainly I think 

we've all heard of the fact that the premium was an area that a 

lot of people were concerned about.  But he said, when I 

looked at that premium, yes, it seemed that the premium was 

high, but he said, I also knew what the bottom line was in the 

fall.  I knew what I was . . . I was paying a fairly good premium 

but I also knew what my bottom line would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the provincial government has done with the 

GRIP program right now has left farmers without a bottom 

line.  They don't know, they really don't know today, what 

they're going to have tomorrow.  They have the crop insurance 

component, but that, to many producers, Mr. Speaker, really 

doesn't address the total 

problem that is out there. 

 

And the question that has been raised by the motion as well 

regarding another pay-out to producers, I believe in some of the 

ongoing negotiations that were entered into with regards to the 

federal government, Mr. Speaker, and the third line of defence, 

the federal government indicated at the time that they would be 

more than willing to put in place a third line of defence.  

However, we must work out a program and a format that would 

give producers the option and the opportunity for them to 

choose how they could stabilize their incomes. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we entered into a program called GRIP.  

And we entered into a program called NISA.  And then came 

the third line of defence if it was necessary.  Mr. Speaker, there 

is an onus on each and every one of us, not just the federal 

government, not just the provincial government, but even on us 

as producers to show to the taxpayers and the labourers across 

this country and across this province that we are willing to do 

something to help ourselves as well. 

 

And I think if you talk to a lot of people across the province, 

men and women in business and the young people who are 

employed across the province, they would indicate that maybe 

there's . . . they've become a little annoyed with some of the 

farm community.  But the fact that the farm community would 

step out and try to protect themselves is something that they 

appreciate. 

 

So what have we seen?  What has the provincial government 

done to support the agriculture community in this crisis?  

They've again pulled the rug out from under them by changing 

a program in mid-stream, by taking away the ability to know 

what the bottom line is, and by doing it without following the 

consultative process that was laid out under the original 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by deciding that . . . and we're waiting to see 

whether the provincial government will even go as far as to 

bring in the legislation that they said they would in light of the 

recent court . . . the decision made by the court regarding the 

fact that farmers were to be informed and have the information 

in front of them in writing prior to March 15 of the crop year, 

so that they could make a well-informed decision regarding 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we've discussed over the past number of 

weeks, what we have asked of this government is that they give 

the producers . . . if they're so adamant that the '92 program is 

so much better than the '91 program, then give the producers 

the option to choose.  Mr. Speaker, I believe many producers 

across this province are just asking for that.  They're not saying, 

go back totally to '91 GRIP, Mr. Speaker, because they know 

that there was some problems with the '91 program. 

 

But if we gave people the opportunity to choose between '91 

and '92, Mr. Speaker, it certainly would create a better 

atmosphere in the province of Saskatchewan that probably 

would create a feeling of greater comfort and knowledge in 

knowing that they had at least the ability to choose what they 

felt would be best suited to their farm, and be able to carry the 

insurance that they felt they needed. 



May 22, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

Mr. Speaker, we also can look at other areas that the provincial 

government has shirked their responsibilities.  They've placed a 

greater burden on agriculture producers in this province in this 

time when the grain prices are low and when we're just nicely 

getting into cropping rotation, and when people are facing 

lenders on their back, Mr. Speaker, by asking them to pay 

higher power rates and higher telephone rates and higher 

insurance rates, and then to top it off, Mr. Speaker, placing an 

added burden by putting higher taxes on their fuel costs, Mr. 

Speaker, and turning around and suggesting that they won't be 

able to get the fuel costs or the taxes taken off at the source, as 

we had in place prior to this, Mr. Speaker, but indeed turning 

around and asking producers to go back to a rebate program, to 

a rebate form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is something over the years, Mr. Speaker, that many 

people -- not just farmers but consumers alike . . . rebate 

programs are something that people detest, Mr. Speaker.  And 

for me it would indicate that the provincial government has 

again shirked their responsibility of protecting agriculture in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, yes we can put blame at the feet 

of the federal government.  But I believe we must also sit down 

and realize the federal government has made a real 

commitment to this province.  They've made a commitment to 

agriculture.  They've made a commitment in many areas that 

affect the people of this province by putting tens . . . billions of 

dollars into the hands of people across this province.  And 

certainly a number of members in this House have had the 

advantage, Mr. Speaker, of the benefit that the federal 

government has placed and given to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's why we have added the words to the 

motion, because we recognize that there is a worsening crisis in 

agriculture, because we believe the provincial government has 

a responsibility as well to people across this province, to 

agriculture producers in this province.  We do not believe that 

the provincial government can continually turn around and 

blame somebody else for their ineptitude, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe, as I've indicated earlier, this motion that has 

been brought forward by the member from Shaunavon 

certainly was a way of trying to deflect criticism from this 

government for their failure to live up to the promises and to 

the commitments they made to the people of Saskatchewan 

prior to the fall election, Mr. Speaker, in which they said: well 

we'll be able to do so much better because we're going to 

eliminate . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being . . . Order.  It now being 

1 o'clock, this House pursuant to an order of the legislature 

stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


